1|1|IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God
1|2|Praise belongs to God, the Lord of the worlds
1|3|the merciful, the compassionate
1|4|the ruler of the day of judgment
1|5|Thee we serve and Thee we ask for aid
1|6|Guide us in the right path
1|7|the path of those Thou art gracious to; not of those Thou art wroth with; nor of those who err
2|1|ALIF LAM MIM
2|2|That is the book! there is no doubt therein; a guide to the pious
2|3|who believe in the unseen, and are steadfast in prayer, and of what we have given them expend in alms
2|4|who believe in what is revealed to thee, and what was revealed before thee, and of the hereafter they are sure
2|5|These are in guidance from their Lord, and these are the prosperous
2|6|Verily, those who misbelieve, it is the same to them if ye warn them or if ye warn them not, they will not believe
2|7|God has set a seal upon their hearts and on their hearing; and on their eyes is dimness, and for them is grievous woe
2|8|And there are those among men who say, 'We believe in God and in the last day;' but they do not believe
2|9|They would deceive God and those who do believe; but they deceive only themselves and they do not perceive
2|10|In their hearts is a sickness, and God has made them still more sick, and for them is grievous woe because they lied
2|11|And when it is said to them, 'Do not evil in the earth,' they say, 'We do but what is right
2|12|Are not they the evildoers? and yet they do not perceive
2|13|And when it is said to them, 'Believe as other men believe,' they say, 'Shall we believe as fools believe?' Are not they themselves the fools? and yet they do not know
2|14|And when they meet those who believe, they say, 'We do believe;' but when they go aside with their devils, they say, 'We are with you; we were but mocking
2|15|God shall mock at them and let them go on in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
2|16|Those who buy error for guidance, their traffic profits not, and they are not guided
2|17|Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindles a fire; and when it lights up all around, God goes off with their light, and leaves them in darkness that they cannot see
2|18|Deafness, dumbness, blindness, and they shall not return
2|19|Or like a storm-cloud from the sky, wherein is darkness and thunder and lightning; they put their fingers in their ears at the thunder-clap, for fear of death, for God encompasses the misbelievers
2|20|The lightning well-nigh snatches off their sight, whenever it shines for them they walk therein; but when it is dark for them they halt; and if God willed He would go off with their hearing and their sight; verily, God is mighty over all
2|21|O ye folk! serve your Lord who created you and those before you; haply ye may fear
2|22|who made the earth for you a bed and the heaven a dome; and sent down from heaven water, and brought forth therewith fruits as a sustenance for you; so make no peers for God, the while ye know
2|23|And if ye are in doubt of what we have revealed unto our servant, then bring a chapter like it, and call your witnesses other than God if ye tell truth
2|24|But if ye do it not, and ye shall surely do it not, then fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for misbelievers
2|25|But bear the glad tidings to those who believe and work righteousness, that for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow; whenever they are provided with fruit therefrom they say, 'This is what we were provided with before,' and they shall be provided with the like; and there are pure wives for them therein, and they shall dwell therein for aye
2|26|Why, God is not ashamed to set forth a parable of a gnat, or anything beyond; and as for those who believe, they know that it is truth from the Lord; but as for those who disbelieve, they say, 'What is it that God means by this as a parable? He leads astray many and He guides many;' - but He leads astray only the evildoers
2|27|who break God's covenant after the fixing thereof, and cut asunder what God has ordered to be joined, and do evil in the earth;- these it is who lose
2|28|How can ye disbelieve in God, when ye were dead and He made you alive, and then He will kill you and then make you alive again, and then to Him will ye return
2|29|It is He who created for you all that is in the earth, then he made for the heavens and fashioned them seven heavens; and He knows all things
2|30|And when thy Lord said unto the angels, 'I am about to place a vicegerent in the earth,' they said, 'Wilt Thou place therein one who will do evil therein and shed blood? we celebrate Thy praise and hallow Thee.' Said (the Lord), 'I know what ye know not
2|31|And He taught Adam the names, all of them; then He propounded them to the angels and said, 'Declare to me the names of these, if ye are truthful
2|32|They said, 'Glory be to Thee! no knowledge is ours but what Thou thyself hast taught us, verily, Thou art the knowing, the wise
2|33|Said the Lord, 'O Adam declare to them their names;' and when he had declared to them their names He said, Did I not say to you, I know the secrets of the heavens and of the earth, and I know what ye show and what ye were hiding
2|34|And when we said to the angels, 'Adore Adam,' they adored him save only Iblis, who refused and was too proud and became one of the misbelievers
2|35|And we said, 'O Adam dwell, thou and thy wife, in Paradise, and eat therefrom amply as you wish; but do not draw near this tree or ye will be of the transgressors
2|36|And Satan made them backslide therefrom and drove them out from what they were in, and we said, 'Go down, one of you the enemy of the other, and in the earth there is an abode and a provision for a time
2|37|And Adam caught certain words from his Lord, and He turned towards him, for He is the compassionate one easily turned
2|38|We said, 'Go down therefrom altogether and haply there may come from me a guidance, and whoso follows my guidance, no fear is theirs, nor shall they grieve
2|39|But those who misbelieve, and call our signs lies, they are the fellows of the Fire, they shall dwell therein for aye
2|40|O ye children of Israel! remember my favours which I have favoured you with; fulfil my covenant and I will fulfil your covenant; me therefore dread
2|41|Believe in what I have revealed, verifying what ye have got, and be not the first to disbelieve in it, and do not barter my signs for a little price, and me do ye fear
2|42|Clothe not truth with vanity, nor hide the truth the while ye know
2|43|Be steadfast in prayer, give the alms, and bow down with those who bow
2|44|Will ye order men to do piety and forget yourselves? ye read the Book, do ye not then understand
2|45|Seek aid with patience and prayer, though it is a hard thing save for the humble
2|46|who think that they will meet their Lord, and that to Him will they return
2|47|O ye children of Israel! remember my favours which I have favoured you with, and that I have preferred you above the worlds
2|48|Fear the day wherein no soul shall pay any recompense for another soul, nor shall intercession be accepted for it, nor shall compensation be taken from it, nor shall they be helped
2|49|When we saved you from Pharaohs people who sought to wreak you evil and woe, slaughtering your sons and letting your women live; in that was a great trial for you from your Lord
2|50|When we divided for you the sea and saved you and drowned Pharaohs people while ye looked on
2|51|When we treated with Moses forty nights, then ye took the calf after he had gone and ye did wrong
2|52|Yet then we forgave you after that; perhaps ye may be grateful
2|53|And when we gave Moses the Scriptures and the Discrimination; perhaps ye will be guided
2|54|When Moses said to his people, 'O my people! Ye have wronged yourselves in taking this calf; repent unto your Creator and kill each other; that will be better for you in your Creators eyes; and He turned unto you, for He is the compassionate one easily turned
2|55|And when ye said to Moses, 'O Moses! we will not believe in thee until we see God manifestly,' and the thunderbolt caught you while ye yet looked on
2|56|Then we raised you up after your death; perhaps ye may be grateful
2|57|And we overshadowed you with the cloud, and sent down the manna and the quails; 'Eat of the good things we have given you.' They did not wrong us, but it was themselves they were wronging
2|58|And when we said, 'Enter this city and eat therefrom as plentifully as ye wish; and enter the gate worshipping and say 'hittatun. So will we pardon you your sins and give increase unto those who do well
2|59|But those who did wrong changed it for another word than that which was said to them: and we sent down upon those who did wrong, wrath from heaven for that they had so sinned
2|60|When Moses, too, asked drink for his people and we said, 'Strike with thy staff the rock,' and from it burst forth twelve springs; each man among them knew his drinking place. 'Eat and drink of what God has provided, and transgress not on the earth as evildoers
2|61|And when they said, 'O Moses, we cannot always bear one kind of food; pray then thy Lord to bring forth for us of what the earth grows, its green herbs, its cucumbers, its garlic, its lentils, and its onions.' Said he, 'Do ye ask what is meaner instead of what is best? Go down to Egypt,- there is what ye ask.' Then were they smitten with abasement and poverty, and met with wrath from God. That was because they had misbelieved in God's signs and killed the prophets undeservedly; that was for that they were rebellious and had transgressed
2|62|Verily, whether it be of those who believe, or those who are Jews or Christians or Sabaeans, whosoever believe in God and the last day and act aright, they have their reward at their Lords hand, and there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve
2|63|And when we took a covenant with you and held the mountain over you; ' Accept what we have brought you with strong will, and bear in mind what is therein, haply ye yet may fear
2|64|Then did ye turn aside after this, and were it not for God's grace towards you and His mercy, ye would have been of those who lose
2|65|Ye know too of those among you who transgressed upon the Sabbath, and we said, 'Become ye apes, despised and spurned
2|66|Thus we made them an example unto those who stood before them, and those who should come after them, and a warning unto those who fear
2|67|And when Moses said to his people, 'God bids you slaughter a cow,' they said, 'Art thou making a jest of us?' Said he, 'I seek refuge with God from being one of the unwise
2|68|They said, 'Then pray thy Lord for us to show us what she is to be.' He answered, 'He saith it is a cow, nor old, nor young, of middle age between the two; so do as ye are bid
2|69|They said, 'Pray now thy Lord to show us what her colour is to be.' He answered, 'He saith it is a dun cow, intensely dun, her colour delighting those who look upon her
2|70|Again they said, 'Pray thy Lord to show us what she is to be; for cows appear the same to us; then we, if God will, shall be guided
2|71|He answered, 'He saith, it is a cow, not broken in to plough the earth or irrigate the tilth, a sound one with no blemish on her.' They said, 'Now hast thou brought the truth.' And they slaughtered her, though they came near leaving it undone
2|72|When too ye slew a soul and disputed thereupon, and God brought forth that which ye had hidden
2|73|then we said, 'Strike him with part of her.' Thus God brings the dead to life and shows you His signs, that haply ye may understand
2|74|Yet were your hearts hardened even after that, till they were as stones or harder still, for verily of stones are some from which streams burst forth, and of them there are some that burst asunder and the water issues out, and of them there are some that fall down for fear of God; but God is never careless of what ye do
2|75|Do ye crave that they should believe you when already a sect of them have heard the word of God and then perverted it after they had understood it, though they knew
2|76|And when they meet those who believe they say, 'We believe,' but when one goes aside with another they say, 'Will ye talk to them of what God has opened up to you, that they may argue with you upon it before your Lord? Do ye not therefore understand
2|77|Do they not then know that God knoweth what they keep secret and what they make known abroad
2|78|And some of them there are, illiterate folk, that know not the Book, but only idle tales; for they do but fancy
2|79|But woe to those who write out the Book with their hands and say 'this is from God;' to buy therewith a little price! and woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they gain
2|80|And then they say, 'Hell fire shall not touch us save for a number of days.' Say, 'Have ye taken a covenant with God?' but God breaks not His covenant. Or do ye say of God that which ye do not know
2|81|Yea! whoso gains an evil gain, and is encompassed by his sins, those are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye
2|82|But such as act aright, those are the fellows of Paradise, and they shall dwell therein for aye
2|83|And when we took from the children of Israel a covenant, saying, 'Serve ye none but God, and to your two parents show kindness, and to your kindred and the orphans and the poor, and speak to men kindly, and be steadfast in prayer, and give alms;' and then ye turned back, save a few of you, and swerved aside
2|84|And when we took covenant from you, 'shed ye not your kinsmans blood, nor turn your kinsmen out of their homes:' then did ye confirm it and were witnesses thereto
2|85|Yet ye were those who slay your kinsmen and turn a party out of their homes, and back each other up against them with sin and enmity. But if they come to you as captives ye ransom them!- and yet it is as unlawful for you to turn them out. Do ye then believe in part of the Book and disbelieve in part? But the reward of such among you as do that shall be nought else but disgrace in this worldly life, and on the day of the resurrection shall they be driven to the most grievous torment, for God is not unmindful of what ye do
2|86|Those who have bought this worldly life with the Future, the torment shall not be lightened from them nor shall they be helped
2|87|We gave Moses the Book and we followed him up with other apostles, and we gave Jesus the son of Mary manifest signs and aided him with the Holy Spirit. Do ye then, every time an apostle comes to you with what your souls love not, proudly scorn him, and charge a part with lying and slay a part
2|88|They say, 'Our hearts are uncircumcised;' nay, God has cursed them in their unbelief, and few it is who do believe
2|89|And when a book came down from God confirming what they had with them, though they had before prayed for victory over those who misbelieve, yet when that came to them which they knew, then they disbelieved it,- God's curse be on the misbelievers
2|90|For a bad bargain have they sold their souls, not to believe in what God has revealed, grudging because God sends down of His grace on whomsoever of His servants He will; and they have brought on themselves wrath after wrath and for the misbelievers is there shameful woe
2|91|And when they are told to believe in what God has revealed, they say, 'We believe in what has been revealed to us;' but they disbelieve in all beside, although it is the truth confirming what they have. Say, 'Wherefore did ye kill God's prophets of yore if ye were true believers
2|92|Moses came to you with manifest signs, then ye took up with the calf when he had gone and did so wrong
2|93|And when we took a covenant with you and raised the mountain over you, 'Take what we have given you with resolution and hear;' they said, 'We hear but disobey;' and they were made to drink the calf down into their hearts for their unbelief. Say, 'An evil thing is it which your belief bids you do, if ye be true believers
2|94|Say, 'If the abode of the future with God is yours alone and not mankinds: long for death then if ye speak the truth
2|95|But they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent on before; but God is knowing as to the wrong doers
2|96|Why, thou wilt find them the greediest of men for life; and of those who associate others with God one would fain live for a thousand years,- but he will not be reprieved from punishment by being let live, for God seeth what they do
2|97|Say, 'Who is an enemy to Gabriel?' for he hath revealed to thy heart, with God's permission, confirmation of what had been before, and a guidance and glad tidings to believers
2|98|Who is an enemy to God and His angels and His apostles and Gabriel and Michael?- Verily, God is an enemy to the unbelievers
2|99|We have sent down to thee conspicuous signs, and none will disbelieve therein except the evildoers
2|100|Or every time they make a covenant, will a part of them repudiate it? Nay, most of them do not believe
2|101|And when there comes to them an apostle confirming what they have, a part of those who have received the Book repudiate God's book, casting it behind their backs as though they did not know
2|102|And they follow that which the devils recited against Solomons kingdom;- it was not Solomon who misbelieved, but the devils who misbelieved, teaching men sorcery,- and what has been revealed to the two angels at Babylon, Harut and Marut; yet these taught no one until they said, 'We are but a temptation, so do not misbelieve.' Men learn from them only that by which they may part man and wife; but they can harm no one therewith, unless with the permission of God, and they learn what hurts them and profits them not. And yet they knew that he who purchased it would have no portion in the future; but sad is the price at which they have sold their souls, had they but known
2|103|But had they believed and feared, a reward from God were better, had they but known
2|104|O ye who believe! say not 'ra'hina,' but say 'unthurna,' and hearken; for unto misbelievers shall be grievous woe
2|105|They who misbelieve, whether of those who have the Book or of the idolaters, would fain that no good were sent down to you from your Lord; but God specially favours with His mercy whom He will, for God is Lord of mighty grace
2|106|Whatever verse we may annul or cause thee to forget, we will bring a better one than it, or one like it; dost thou not know that God is mighty over all
2|107|Dost thou not know that God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth? nor have ye besides God a patron or a help
2|108|Do ye wish to question your apostle as Moses was questioned aforetime? but whoso takes misbelief in exchange for faith has erred from the level road
2|109|Many of those who have the Book would fain turn you back into misbelievers after ye have once believed, through envy from themselves, after the truth has been made manifest to them; but pardon and shun them till God brings His command; verily, God is mighty over all
2|110|Be ye steadfast in prayer, and give alms; and whatsoever good ye send before for your own souls, ye shall find it with God, for God in all ye do doth see
2|111|They say, 'None shall enter Paradise save such as be Jews or Christians;' that is their faith. Say thou, 'Bring your proofs, if ye be speaking truth
2|112|Aye, he who resigns his face to God, and who is kind, he shall have his reward from his Lord, and no fear shall be on them, and they shall not grieve
2|113|The Jews say, 'The Christians rest on nought;' and the Christians say, 'The Jews rest on nought;' and yet they read the Book. So, too, say those who know not, like to what these say; but God shall judge between them on the resurrection day concerning that whereon they do dispute
2|114|But who is more unjust than he who prohibits God's mosques, that His name should not be mentioned there, and who strives to ruin them? 'Tis not for such to enter into them except in fear, for them is disgrace in this world, and in the future mighty woe
2|115|God's is the east and the west, and wherever ye turn there is God's face; verily, God comprehends and knows
2|116|They say, 'God takes unto Himself a son.' Celebrated be His praise! Nay, His is what is in the heavens and the earth, and Him all things obey
2|117|The Originator of the heavens and the earth, when He decrees a matter He doth but say unto it, 'BE,' and it is
2|118|And those who do not know (the Scriptures) say, 'Unless God speak to us, or there comes a sign.' So spake those before them like unto their speech. Their hearts are all alike. We have made manifest the signs unto a people that are sure
2|119|We have sent thee with the truth, a bearer of good tidings and of warning, and thou shalt not be questioned as to the fellows of hell
2|120|The Jews will not be satisfied with thee, nor yet the Christians, until thou followest their creed. Say, 'God's guidance is the guidance;' and if thou followest their lusts after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou hast not then from God a patron or a help
2|121|They to whom we have brought the Book and who read it as it should be read, believe therein; and whoso disbelieve therein, 'tis they who lose thereby
2|122|O children of Israel! remember my favours with which I favoured you, and that I have preferred you over the worlds
2|123|And fear the day when no soul shall pay a recompense for a soul, nor shall an equivalent be received therefrom, nor any intercession avail; and they shall not be helped
2|124|And when his Lord tried Abraham with words, and he fulfilled them, He said, 'Verily, I will set thee as a high priest for men.' Said he, ' And of my seed?' God said, 'My covenant touches not the evildoers
2|125|And when we made the House a place of resort unto men, and a sanctuary, and (said) take the station of Abraham for a place of prayer; and covenanted with Abraham and Ishmael, saying, 'Do ye two cleanse my house for those who make the circuit, for those who pay devotions there, for those who bow down, and for those too who adore
2|126|When Abraham said, 'Lord, make this a town of safety, and provide the dwellers there with fruits, such as believe in God and the last day!' (God) said, ' And he who misbelieves, I will give him but little to enjoy, then will drive him to the torment of the fire, an evil journey will it be
2|127|And when Abraham raised up the foundations of the House with Ishmael, 'Lord! receive it from us, verily, thou art hearing and dost know
2|128|Lord! and make us too resigned unto Thee, and of our seed also a nation resigned unto Thee, and show us our rites, and turn towards us, verily, Thou art easy to be turned and merciful
2|129|Lord! and send them an apostle from amongst themselves, to read to them Thy signs and teach them the Book and wisdom, and to purify them; verily, Thou art the mighty and the wise
2|130|Who is averse from the faith of Abraham save one who is foolish of soul? for we have chosen him in this world, and in the future he is surely of the righteous
2|131|When his Lord said to him, 'Be resigned,' he said, 'I am resigned unto the Lord of the worlds
2|132|And Abraham instructed his sons therein, and Jacob (saying), 'O my sons! verily, God has chosen for you a religion, do not therefore die unless ye be resigned
2|133|Were ye then witnesses when Jacob was facing death, when he said to his sons, 'What will ye serve when I am gone?' They said, 'We will serve thy God, the God of thy fathers Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, one God; and we are unto Him resigned
2|134|That is a nation that has passed away, theirs is what they gained; and yours shall be what ye have gained; ye shall not be questioned as to that which they have done
2|135|They say, 'Be ye Jews or Christians so shall ye of Abraham be guided.' Say, 'Not so! but the faith of Abraham the 'Hanif, be was not of the idolaters
2|136|Say ye, 'We believe in God, and what has been revealed to us, and what has been revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Tribes, and what was brought to Moses and Jesus, and what was brought unto the Prophets from their Lord; we will not distinguish between any one of them, and unto Him are we resigned
2|137|If they believe in that in which ye believe, then are they guided; but if they turn back, then are they only in a schism, and God will suffice thee against them, for He both hears and knows
2|138|The dye of God! and who is better than God at dyeing? and we are worshippers of Him
2|139|Say, 'Do ye dispute with us concerning God, and He is our Lord and your Lord? Ye have your works and we have ours, and unto Him are we sincere
2|140|Do ye say that Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, 'Are ye more knowing than God? Who is more unjust than one who conceals a testimony that he has from God?' But God is not careless of what ye do
2|141|That is a nation that has passed away; theirs is what they gained, and yours shall be what ye have gained; ye shall not be questioned as to that which they have done
2|142|The fools among men will say, 'What has turned them from their qiblah, on which they were agreed?' Say, 'God's is the east and the west, He guides whom He will unto the right path
2|143|Thus have we made you a middle nation, to be witnesses against men, and that the Apostle may be a witness against you. We have not appointed the qiblah on which thou wert agreed, save that we might know who follows the Apostle from him who turns upon his heels although it is a great thing save to those whom God doth guide. But God will not waste your faith, for verily, God with men is kind and merciful
2|144|We see thee often turn about thy face in the heavens, but we will surely turn thee to a qiblah thou shalt like. Turn then thy face towards the Sacred Mosque; wherever ye be, turn your faces towards it; for verily, those who have the Book know that it is the truth from their Lord;- God is not careless of that which ye do
2|145|And if thou shouldst bring to those who have been given the Book every sign, they would not follow your qiblah; and thou art not to follow their qiblah; nor do some of them follow the qiblah of the others: and if thou followest their lusts after the knowledge that has come to thee then art thou of the evildoers
2|146|Those whom we have given the Book know him as they know their sons, although a sect of them do surely hide the truth, the while they know
2|147|The truth (is) from thy Lord; be not therefore one of those who doubt thereof
2|148|Every sect has some one side to which they turn (in prayer); but do ye hasten onwards to good works; wherever ye are God will bring you all together; verily, God is mighty over all
2|149|From whencesoever thou comest forth, there turn thy face towards the Sacred Mosque, for it is surely truth from thy Lord; God is not careless about what ye do
2|150|And from whencesoever thou comest forth, there turn thy face towards the Sacred Mosque, and wheresoever ye are, turn your faces towards it, that men may have no argument against you, save only those of them who are unjust; and fear them not, but fear me and I will fulfil my favours to you, perchance ye may be guided yet
2|151|Thus have we sent amongst you an apostle of yourselves, to recite to you our signs, to purify you and teach you the Book and wisdom, and to teach you what ye did not know
2|152|remember me, then, and I will remember you; thank me, and do not misbelieve
2|153|O ye who do believe! seek aid from patience and from prayer, verily, God is with the patient
2|154|And say not of those who are slain in God's way (that they are) dead, but rather living; but ye do not perceive
2|155|We will try you with something of fear, and hunger and loss of wealth, and souls and fruit; but give good tidings to the patient
2|156|who when there falls on them a calamity say, 'Verily, we are God's and, verily, to Him do we return
2|157|These, on them are blessings from their Lord and mercy, and they it is who are guided
2|158|Verily, Zafa and Merwah are of the beacons of God, and he who makes the pilgrimage unto the House, or visits it, it is no crime for him to compass them both about; and he who obeys his own impulse to a good work,- God is grateful and doth know
2|159|Verily, those who hide what we have revealed of manifest signs and of guidance after we have manifested it to men in the Book, them God shall curse, and those who curse shall curse them too
2|160|Save those who turn and do right and make (the signs) manifest; these will I turn to again, for I am easy to be turned and merciful
2|161|Verily, those who misbelieve and die while still in misbelief, on them is the curse of God, and of the angels, and of mankind altogether
2|162|to dwell therein for aye; the torment shall not be lightened for them, nor shall they be looked upon
2|163|Your God is one God; there is no God but He, the merciful, the compassionate
2|164|Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of night and day, and in the ship that runneth in the sea with that which profits man, and in what water God sends down from heaven and quickens therewith the earth after its death, and spreads abroad therein all kinds of cattle, and in the shifting of the winds, and in the clouds that are pressed into service betwixt heaven and earth, are signs to people who can understand
2|165|Yet are there some amongst mankind who take to themselves peers other than God; they love them as they should love God while those who believe love God more. O that those who are unjust could only see, when they see the torment, that power is altogether God's! Verily, God is keen to torment
2|166|When those who are followed clear themselves of those who followed them, and see the torment, and the cords are cut asunder
2|167|those who followed shall say, 'Had we but another turn, then would we clear ourselves of them as they have cleared themselves of us.' So will God show them their works; for them are sighs, and they shall not come forth from out the fire
2|168|O ye folk! eat of what is in the earth, things lawful and things good, and follow not the footsteps of Satan, verily, to you he is an open foe
2|169|He does but bid you evil and sin, and that ye should speak against God what ye do not know
2|170|When it is said to them, 'Follow what God has revealed,' they say, 'Nay, we will follow what we found our fathers agreed upon.' What! and though their fathers had no sense at all or guidance
2|171|The likeness of those who misbelieve is as the likeness of him who shouts to that which hears him not, save only a call and a cry; deafness, dumbness, blindness, and they shall not understand
2|172|O ye who do believe! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you, and give thanks unto God if it be Him ye serve
2|173|He has only forbidden for you what is dead, and blood, and flesh of swine, and whatsoever has been consecrated to other than God; but he who is forced, neither revolting nor transgressing, it is in no sin for him; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
2|174|Verily, those who hide what God has revealed of the Book, and sell it for a little price, they shall eat nothing in their bellies save fire; and God will not speak to them on the day of resurrection, nor will He purify them, but for them is grievous woe
2|175|They who sell guidance for error, and pardon for torment, how patient must they be of fire
2|176|That (is), because God has revealed the Book with truth, and verily those who disagree about the Book are in a wide schism
2|177|Righteousness is not that ye turn your faces towards the east or the west, but righteousness is, one who believes in God, and the last day, and the angels, and the Book, and the prophets, and who gives wealth for His love to kindred, and orphans, and the poor, and the son of the road, beggars, and those in captivity; and who is steadfast in prayer, and gives alms; and those who are sure of their covenant when they make a covenant; and the patient in poverty, and distress, and in time of violence; these are they who are true, and these are those who fear
2|178|O ye who believe! Retaliation is prescribed for you for the slain: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, the female for the female; yet he who is pardoned at all by his brother, must be prosecuted in reason, and made to pay with kindness. That is an alleviation from your Lord, and a mercy; and he who transgresses after that for him is grievous woe
2|179|For you in retaliation is there life, O ye possessors of minds! it may be ye will fear
2|180|It is prescribed for you that when one of you is face to face with death, if he leave (any) goods, the legacy is to his parents, and to his kinsmen, in reason. A duty this upon all those that fear
2|181|But he who alters it after that he has heard it, the sin thereof is only upon those who alter it; verily, God doth hear and know
2|182|And he who fears from the testator a wrong intention, or a crime, and doth make up the matter between the parties, it is no sin to him; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
2|183|O ye who believe! There is prescribed for you the fast as it was prescribed for those before you; haply ye may fear
2|184|A certain number of days, but he amongst you who is ill or on a journey, then (let him fast) another number of days. And those who are fit to fast may redeem it by feeding a poor man; but he who follows an impulse to a good work it is better for him; and if ye fast it is better for you, if ye did but know
2|185|The month of Ramadhan, wherein was revealed the Koran, for a guidance to men, and for manifestations of guidance, and for a Discrimination. And he amongst you who beholds this month then let him fast it; but he who is sick or on a journey, then another number of days;- God desires for you what is easy, and desires not for you what is difficult,- that ye may complete the number, and say, 'Great is God,' for that He has guided you; haply ye may give thanks
2|186|When my servants ask thee concerning me, then, verily, I am near; I answer the prayers prayer whenever he prays to me. So let them ask me for an answer, and let them believe in me; haply they may be directed aright
2|187|Lawful for you on the night of the fast is commerce with your wives; they are a garment unto you, and ye a garment unto them. God knows that ye did defraud yourselves, wherefore He has turned towards you and forgiven you; so now go in unto them and crave what God has prescribed for you, and eat and drink until a white thread can be distinguished by you from a black one at the dawn. Then fulfil the fast until the night, and go not in unto them, and ye at your devotions in the mosques the while. These are the bounds that God has set, so draw not near thereto. Thus does God make manifest His signs to men, that haply they may fear
2|188|Devour not your wealth among yourselves vainly, nor present it to the judges that ye may devour a part of the wealth of men sinfully, the while ye know
2|189|They will ask thee about the phases of the moon; say, 'They are indications of time for men and for the pilgrimage.' And it is not righteousness that ye should enter into your houses from behind them, but righteousness is he who fears; so enter into your houses by the doors thereof and fear God; haply ye may prosper yet
2|190|Fight in God's way with those who fight with you, but transgress not; verily, God loves not those who do transgress
2|191|Kill them wherever ye find them, and drive them out from whence they drive you out; for sedition is worse than slaughter; but fight them not by the Sacred Mosque until they fight you there; then kill them, for such is the recompense of those that misbelieve
2|192|But if they desist, then, verily, God is forgiving and merciful
2|193|But fight them that there be no sedition and that the religion may be God's; but, if they desist, then let there be no hostility save against the unjust
2|194|The sacred month for the sacred month; for all sacred things demand retaliation; and whoso transgresses against you, transgress against him like as he transgressed against you; but fear ye God, and know that God is with those who fear
2|195|Expend in alms in God's way and be not cast by your own hands into perdition; but do good, for God loves those who do good
2|196|And fulfil the pilgrimage and the visitation to God; but if ye be besieged, then what is easiest for you by way of gift. But shave not your heads until your gift shall reach its destination; and he amongst you who is sick or has a hurt upon his head, then the redemption is by fasting or by alms or by an offering. But when ye are safe again, then let him who would enjoy the visitation until the pilgrimage (bring) what is easiest as a gift. And he who cannot find (anything to bring), then let him fast three days on the pilgrimage and seven when ye return; these make ten days complete. That is, for him whose family are not present in the Sacred Mosque; and fear God and know that God is keen to punish
2|197|The pilgrimage is (in) well-known months: whosoever then makes it incumbent on himself (let him have neither) commerce with women, nor fornication, nor a quarrel on the pilgrimage; and whatsoever of good ye do, God knoweth it; then provide yourself for your journey; but the best provision is piety. Fear ye me ye who possess minds
2|198|It is no crime to you that ye seek good from your Lord; but when ye pour forth from 'Arafat, remember God by the sacred beacon. Remember Him how He guided you, although ye were surely before of those who err
2|199|Then pour ye forth from whence men do pour forth and ask pardon of God; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
2|200|And when ye have performed your rites, remember God as ye remember your fathers, or with a keener memory still. There is among men such as says, 'Our Lord! give us in this world;' but of the future life no portion shall he have
2|201|And some there be who say, 'Our Lord! give us in this world good and in the future good; and keep us from the torment of the fire
2|202|These,- they have their portion from what they have earned; for God is swift at reckoning up
2|203|Remember God for a certain number of days; but whoso hastens off in two days, it is no sin to him, and he who lingers on it is no sin to him,- for him who fears. So fear ye God and know that unto Him shall ye be gathered
2|204|There is among men one whose speech about the life of this world pleases thee, and he calls on God to witness what is in his heart; yet is he most fierce in opposition unto thee
2|205|And when he turns away, he strives upon the earth to do evil therein, and to destroy the tilth and the stock; verily, God loves not evil doing
2|206|And when it is said to him, 'Fear God,' then pride takes hold upon him in sin; but hell is enough for him! surely an evil couch is that
2|207|And there is among men one who selleth his soul craving, those things that are pleasing unto God and God is kind unto His servants
2|208|O ye who believe! enter ye into the peace, one and all, and follow not the footsteps of Satan; verily, to you he is an open foe
2|209|And if ye slip after that the manifest signs have come to you, then know that God is the mighty, the wise
2|210|What can they expect but that God should come unto them in the shadow of a cloud, and the angels too? But the thing is decreed, and unto God do things return
2|211|Ask the children of Israel how many a manifest sign we gave to them; and whoso alters God's favours after that they have come to him, then God is keen at following up
2|212|Made fair to those who misbelieve is this worlds life; they jest at those who do believe. But those who fear shall be above them on the resurrection day. God gives provision unto whom He will without account
2|213|Men were one nation once, and God sent prophets with good tidings and with warnings, and sent down with them the Book in truth, to judge between men in that wherein they disagreed; but none did disagree therein save those who had been given it after that manifest signs had come to them, through greed amongst themselves; and God guided those who did believe to that truth concerning which they disagreed by His permission, for God guides whom He will unto the right path
2|214|Did ye count to enter Paradise, while there had nothing come to you like those who passed away before you; there touched them violence and harm, and they were made to quake, until the Apostle and those who believed with him said, 'When (comes) God's help? Is not God's help then surely nigh
2|215|They will ask thee what they are to expend in alms: say, 'Whatsoever good ye expend it should be for parents and kinsmen, and the orphan and the poor, and the son of the road; and whatsoever good ye do, verily, of it God knows
2|216|Prescribed for you is fighting, but it is hateful to you. Yet peradventure that ye hate a thing while it is good for you, and peradventure that ye love a thing while it is bad for you; God knows, and ye,- ye do not know
2|217|They will ask thee of the sacred month,- of fighting therein. Say, 'Fighting therein is a great sin; but turning folks off God's way, and misbelief in Him and in the Sacred Mosque, and turning His people out therefrom, is a greater in God's sight; and sedition is a greater sin than slaughter.' They will not cease from fighting you until they turn you from your religion if they can; but whosoever of you is turned from his religion and dies while still a misbeliever; these are those whose works are vain in this world and the next; they are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye
2|218|Verily, those who believe, and those who flee, and those who wage war in God's way; these may hope for God's mercy, for God is forgiving and merciful
2|219|They will ask thee about wine and el maisar, say, 'In them both is sin and profit to men; but the sin of both is greater than the profit of the same.' They will ask thee what they shall expend in alms: say, 'The surplus.' Thus does God manifest to you His signs; haply ye may reflect on this world and the next
2|220|They will ask thee about orphans: say, 'To do good to them is best.' But if ye interfere with them - they are your brethren, and God knows the evildoer from the well doer; and if God will He will surely trouble you. Verily, God is mighty, wise
2|221|Wed not with idolatrous women until they believe, for surely a believing handmaid is better than an idolatrous woman, even though she please you. And wed not to idolatrous men until they believe, for a believing slave is better than an idolater, even though he please you. Those invite you to the fire, but God invites you to paradise and pardon by His permission, and makes clear His signs to men; haply they may remember
2|222|They will ask thee about menstruation: say, 'It is a hurt.' So keep apart from women in their menstruation, and go not near them till they be cleansed; but when they are cleansed come in to them by where God has ordered you verily, God loves those who turn to Him, and those who keep themselves clean
2|223|Your women are your tilth, so come into your tillage how you choose; but do a previous good act for yourselves, and fear God, and know that ye are going to meet Him; and give good tidings unto those who do believe
2|224|Make not God the butt of your oaths, that ye will keep clear and fear and make peace amongst men, for God both hears and knows
2|225|He will not catch you up for a casual word in your oaths, but He will catch you up for what your hearts have earned; but God is forgiving and clement
2|226|Those who swear off from their women, they must wait four months; but if they break their vow God is forgiving and merciful
2|227|And if they intend to divorce them, verily, God hears and knows
2|228|Divorced women must wait for themselves three courses; and it is not lawful to them that they hide what God has created in their wombs, if they believe in God and in the last day. Their husbands will do better to take them back in that (case) if they wish for reconciliation; for, the same is due to them as from them; but the men should have precedence over them. God is mighty and wise
2|229|Divorce (may happen) twice; then keep them in reason, or let them go with kindness. It is not lawful for you to take from them anything of what you have given them, unless both fear that they cannot keep within God's bounds. So if ye fear that ye cannot keep within God's bounds there is no crime in you both about what she ransoms herself with. These are God's bounds, do not transgress them; and whoso transgresses God's bounds, they it is who are unjust
2|230|But if he divorce her (a third time) she shall not be lawful to him after that, until she marry another husband; but, if he divorce her too, it is no crime in them both to come together again, if they think that they can keep within God's bounds. These are God's bounds which He explains to a people who know
2|231|When ye divorce women, and they have reached the prescribed time, then keep them kindly, or let them go in reason, but do not keep them by force to transgress; for whoso does that, he is unjust to his own soul: and do not take God's signs in jest; and remember God's favours to you, and what He has sent down to you of the Book and wisdom, to admonish you thereby; and fear God, and know that God doth all things know
2|232|When ye divorce women, and they have reached their prescribed term, do not prevent them from marrying their (fresh) husbands, when they have agreed with each other reasonably. That is what he is admonished with who amongst you believes in God and in the last day. That is more pure for you and cleaner. But God knows, and ye know not
2|233|Mothers must suckle their children two whole years for one who wishes to complete the time of suckling; and on him to whom it is born its sustenance and clothing are incumbent; but in reason, for no soul shall be obliged beyond its capacity. A mother shall not be forced for her child; nor he to whom it is born for his child. And the same (is incumbent) on the heir (of the father). But if both parties wish to wean, by mutual consent and counsel, then it is no crime in them. And if ye wish to provide a wet-nurse for your children, it is no crime in you when you pay what you have promised her, in reason. Fear God, and know that God on what ye do doth look
2|234|Those of you who die and leave wives behind, let these wait by themselves for four months and ten days; and when they have reached their prescribed time, there is no crime in them for what they do with themselves in reason; for God of what ye do is well aware
2|235|Nor is there any crime in you for that ye make them an offer of marriage, or that ye keep it secret, in your minds. God knows that ye will remember them; but do not propose to them in secret, unless ye speak a reasonable speech; and resolve not on marriage tie until the Book shall reach its time; but know that God knows what is in your souls; so beware! and know that God is forgiving and clement
2|236|It is no crime in you if ye divorce your women ere you have yet touched them, or settled for them a settlement. But provide maintenance for them; the wealthy according to his power, and the straitened in circumstances according to his power, must provide, in reason;- a duty this upon the kind
2|237|And if ye divorce them before ye have touched them, but have already settled for them a settlement; the half of what ye have settled, unless they remit it, or he in whose hand is the marriage tie remits it; and that ye should remit is nearer to piety, and forget not liberality between you. Verily, God on what ye do doth look
2|238|Observe the prayers, and the middle prayer, and stand ye attent before God
2|239|And if ye fear, then afoot or on horseback; but when ye are in safety remember God, how He taught you while yet ye did not know
2|240|Those of you who die and leave wives, should bequeath to their wives maintenance for a year, without expulsion (from their home); but if they go out, there is no crime in you for what they do of themselves, in reason; but God is mighty and wise
2|241|And divorced women should have a maintenance in reason,- a duty this on those that fear
2|242|Thus does God explain to you His signs; haply ye may understand
2|243|Dost thou not look at those who left their homes by thousands, for fear of death; and God said to them 'Die,' and then He quickened them again? Verily God is Lord of grace to men, but most men give no thanks
2|244|Fight then in God's way, and know that God both hears and knows
2|245|Who is there that will lend to God a good loan? He will redouble it many a double; God closes His hand and holds it out, and unto Him shall ye return
2|246|Dost thou not look at the crowd of the children of Israel after Moses time, when they said to a prophet of theirs, 'Raise up for us a king, and we will fight in God's way?' He said, 'Will ye perhaps, if it be written down for you to fight, refuse to fight?' They said, ' And why should we not fight in God's way, now that we are dispossessed of our homes and sons?' But when it was written down for them to fight they turned back, save a few of them, and God knows who are evildoers
2|247|Then their prophet said to them, 'Verily, God has raised up for you Talut as a king;' they said, 'How can the kingdom be his over us; we have more right to the kingdom than he, for he has not an amplitude of wealth?' He said, 'Verily, God has chosen him over you, and has provided him with an extent of knowledge and of form. God gives the kingdom unto whom He will; God comprehends and knows
2|248|Then said to them their prophet, 'The sign of his kingdom is that there shall come to you the ark with the shechina in it from your Lord, and the relics of what the family of Moses and the family of Aaron left; the angels shall bear it.' In that is surely a sign to you if ye believe
2|249|And when Talut set out with his soldiery, he said, 'God will try you with a river, and he who drinks therefrom, he is not of mine; but whoso tastes it not, he is of mine, save he who laps it lapping with his hand.' And they drank from it save a few of them, and when he crossed it, he and those who believed with him, they said, 'We have no power this day against Galut and his soldiery,' those who thought that they should meet their Lord said, 'How many a small division of men have conquered a numerous division, by the permission of God, for God is with the patient
2|250|And when they went out against a Galut and his soldiery, they said, 'Lord, pour out patience over us, and make firm our steps, and help us against the misbelieving people
2|251|And they put them to flight by the permission of God, and David killed Galut, and God gave him the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him of what He willed. And were it not for God's repelling men one with another the earth would become spoiled; but God is Lord of grace over the worlds
2|252|These are the signs of God, we recite them to thee in truth, for, verily, thou art of those who are sent
2|253|These apostles have we preferred one of them above another. Of them is one to whom God spake; and we have raised some of them degrees; and we have given Jesus the son of Mary manifest signs, and strengthened him by the Holy Spirit. And, did God please, those who came after them would not have fought after there came to them manifest signs. But they did disagree, and of them are some who believe, and of them some who misbelieve, but, did God please, they would not have fought, for God does what He will
2|254|O ye who believe! expend in alms of what we have bestowed upon you, before the day comes in which is no barter, and no friendship, and no intercession; and the misbelievers, they are the unjust
2|255|God, there is no god but He, the living, the self-subsistent. Slumber takes Him not, nor sleep. His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Who is it that intercedes with Him save by His permission? He knows what is before them and what behind them, and they comprehend not aught of His knowledge but of what He pleases. His throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and it tires Him not to guard them both, for He is high and grand
2|256|There is no compulsion in religion; the right way has been distinguished from the wrong, and whoso disbelieves in Taghut and believes in God, he has got hold of the firm handle in which is no breaking off; but God both hears and knows
2|257|God is the patron of those who believe, He brings them forth from darkness into light. But those who misbelieve, their patrons are Taghut, these bring them forth from light to darkness,- fellows of the Fire, they dwell therein for aye
2|258|Do you not look at him who disputed with Abraham about his Lord, that God had given him the kingdom? When Abraham said, 'My Lord is He who giveth life and death,' he said, 'I give life and death.' Abraham said, 'But verily, God brings the sun from the east, do thou then bring it from the west?' And he who misbelieved was dumbfounded, for God does not guide unjust folk
2|259|Or like him who passed by a village, when it was desolate and turned over on its roofs, and said, 'How will God revive this after its death?' And God made him die for a hundred years, then He raised him, and said, 'How long hast thou tarried?' Said he, 'I have tarried a day, or some part of a day.' He said, 'Nay, thou hast tarried a hundred years; look at thy food and drink, they are not spoiled, and look at thine ass; for we will make thee a sign to men. And look at the bones how we scatter them and then clothe them with flesh.' And when it was made manifest to him, he said, 'I know that God is mighty over all
2|260|And when Abraham said, 'Lord, show me how thou wilt revive the dead,' He said, 'What, dost thou not yet believe?' Said he, 'Yea, but that my heart may be quieted.' He said, 'Then take four birds, and take them close to thyself; then put a part of them on every mountain; then call them, and they will come to thee in haste; and know that God is mighty, wise
2|261|The likeness of those who expend their wealth in God's way is as the likeness of a grain that grows to seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains, for God will double unto whom He pleases; for God both embraces and knows
2|262|Those who expend their wealth in God's way, then do not follow up what they expend by taunting with it and by annoyance, these have their hire with their Lord, and no fear is on them, neither shall they grieve
2|263|Kind speech and pardon are better than almsgiving followed by annoyance, and God is rich and clement
2|264|O ye who believe! make not your almsgiving vain by taunts and annoyance, like him who expends what he has for the sake of appearances before men, and believes not in God and the last day; for his likeness is as the likeness of a flint with soil upon it, and a heavy shower falls on it and leaves it bare rock; they can do nought with what they earn, for God guides not the misbelieving folk
2|265|But the likeness of those who expend their wealth craving the goodwill of God, and as an insurance for their souls, is as the likeness of a garden on a hill. A heavy shower falls on it, and it brings forth its eatables twofold; and if no heavy shower falls on it, the dew does; and God on what ye do doth look
2|266|Would one of you fain have a garden of palms and vines, with rivers flowing beneath it, in which is every fruit; and when old age shall reach him, have weak seed, and there fall on it a storm wind with fire therein, and it gets burnt? Thus does God manifest to you His signs, mayhap ye will reflect
2|267|O ye who believe! expend in alms of the good things that ye have earned, and of what we have brought forth for you out of the earth, and do not take the vile thereof to spend in alms,- what you would not take yourselves save by connivance at it; but know that God is rich and to be praised
2|268|The devil promises you poverty and bids you sin, but God promises you pardon from Him and grace, for God both embraces and knows
2|269|He bringeth wisdom unto whom He will, and he who is brought wisdom is brought much good; but none will remember save those endowed with minds
2|270|Whatever expense ye expend, or vow ye vow, God knows it; but the unjust have no helpers
2|271|If ye display your almsgiving, then well is it; but if ye hide it and bring it to the poor, then is it better for you, and will expiate for you your evil deeds; for God of what ye do is well aware
2|272|Thou art not bound to guide them; but God guides whom He will; and whatever good ye expend it is for yourselves, and do not expend save craving for God's face. And what ye expend of good, it shall be repaid you, and ye shall not be wronged
2|273|unto the poor who are straitened in God's way, and cannot knock about in the earth. The ignorant think them to be rich because of their modesty; you will know them by their mark, they do not beg from men importunately; but what ye spend of good God knows
2|274|Those who expend their wealth by night and day, secretly and openly, they shall have their hire with their Lord. No fear shall come on them, nor shall they grieve
2|275|Those who devour usury shall not rise again, save as he riseth whom Satan hath paralysed with a touch; and that is because they say 'selling is only like usury,' but God has made selling lawful and usury unlawful; and he to whom the admonition from his Lord has come, if he desists, what has gone before is his: his matter is in God's hands. But whosoever returns (to usury) these are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye
2|276|God shall blot out usury, but shall make almsgiving profitable, for God loves not any sinful misbeliever
2|277|Verily, those who believe, and act righteously, and are steadfast in prayer, and give alms, theirs is their hire with their Lord; there is no fear on them, nor shall they grieve
2|278|O ye who believe! fear God, and remit the balance of usury, if ye be believers
2|279|and if ye will not do it, then hearken to the proclamation of war from God and His Apostle; but if ye repent, your capital is yours. Ye shall not wrong, nor shall ye be wronged
2|280|And if it be one in difficulties, then wait for easy circumstances; but that ye remit it as alms is better for you, if ye did but know
2|281|Fear the day wherein ye shall return to God; then shall each soul be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
2|282|O ye who believe! if ye engage to one another in a debt for a stated time, then write it down, and let a scribe write it down between you faithfully; nor let a scribe refuse to write as God taught him, but let him write, and let him who owes dictate; but let him fear God his Lord, and not diminish therefrom aught; but if he who owes be a fool, or weak, or cannot dictate himself, then let his agent dictate faithfully, and let them call two witnesses out from amongst their men; or if there be not two men, then a man and two women, from those whom he chooses for witnesses, so that if one of the two should err, the second of the two may remind the other; and let not the witnesses refuse when they are summoned; and let them not tire of writing it, be it small or great, with its time of payment. That is more just in the sight of God, and more upright for testimony, and brings you nearer to not doubting. Unless, indeed, it be a ready-money transaction between you, which ye arrange between yourselves, then it is no crime against you that ye do not write it down; but bring witnesses to what ye sell one to another, and let not either scribe or witness come to harm, for if ye do it will be abomination in you; but fear God, for God teaches you, and God knows all things
2|283|But if ye be upon a journey, and ye cannot find a scribe, then let a pledge be taken. But if one of you trust another, then let him who is trusted surrender his trust, and let him fear God his Lord, and conceal not testimony, for he who conceals it, verily, sinful is his heart: God knows what ye do
2|284|God's is what is in heaven and in the earth, and if ye show what is in your souls, or hide it, God will call you to account; and He forgives whom He will, and punishes whom He will, for God is mighty over all
2|285|The Apostle believes in what is sent down to him from his Lord, and the believers all believe on God, and His angels, and His Books, and His apostles,- we make no difference between any of His apostles,- they say, 'We hear and obey, Thy pardon, O Lord! for to Thee our journey tends
2|286|God will not require of the soul save its capacity. It shall have what it has earned, and it shall owe what has been earned from it. Lord, catch us not up, if we forget or make mistake; Lord, load us not with a burden, as Thou hast loaded those who were before us. Lord, make us not to carry what we have not strength for, but forgive us, and pardon us, and have mercy on us. Thou art our Sovereign, then help us against the people who do not believe
3|1|ALIF LAM MIM
3|2|God, there is no god but He, the living, the self-subsistent
3|3|He has sent down to thee the Book, in truth, confirming what was before it, and has revealed the law, and the gospel
3|4|before for the guidance of men, and has revealed the Discrimination. Verily, those who disbelieve in the signs of God, for them is severe torment, for God is mighty and avenging
3|5|Verily, God, there is nothing hidden from Him in the earth, nor in the heaven
3|6|He it is who fashions you in the womb as He pleases. There is no God but He, the mighty, the wise
3|7|He it is who has revealed to thee the Book, of which there are some verses that are decisive, they are the mother of the Book; and others ambiguous; but as for those in whose hearts is perversity, they follow what is ambiguous, and do crave for sedition, craving for (their own) interpretation of it; but none know the interpretation of it except God. But those who are well grounded in knowledge say, 'We believe in it; it is all from our Lord; but none will remember save those who possess minds
3|8|O Lord! pervert not our hearts again when Thou hast guided them, and grant us mercy from Thee, for Thou art He who grants
3|9|O Lord! Thou shalt gather together men unto the day wherein is no doubt. Verily, God will not depart from His promise
3|10|Verily, those who misbelieve, their wealth shall not help them, nor their children, against God at all; and they it is who are the fuel of the fire
3|11|As was the wont of Pharaoh's people, and those before them, they said our signs were lies, and God caught them up in their sins, for God is severe to punish
3|12|Say to those who misbelieve, 'Ye shall be overcome and driven together to hell, an ill couch will it be
3|13|Ye have had a sign in the two parties who met; one party fighting in the way of God, the other misbelieving; these saw twice the same number as themselves to the eye-sight, for God aids with His help those whom He pleases.' Verily, in that is a lesson for those who have perception
3|14|Seemly unto men is a life of lusts, of women, and children, and hoarded talents of gold and silver, and of horses well-bred, and cattle, and tilth;- that is the provision for the life of this world; but God, with Him is the best resort
3|15|Say, 'But shall we tell you of a better thing than this?' For those who fear are gardens with their Lord, beneath which rivers flow; they shall dwell therein for aye, and pure wives and grace from God; the Lord looks on His servants
3|16|who say, 'Lord, we believe, pardon Thou our sins and keep us from the torment of the fire
3|17|the patient, the truthful, the devout, and those who ask for pardon at the dawn
3|18|God bears witness that there is no god but He, and the angels, and those possessed of knowledge standing up for justice. There is no God but He, the mighty, the wise
3|19|Verily, (the true) religion in God's sight is Islam, and those to whom the Book was given disagreed not until after that there was given to them knowledge, through mutual envy. But whoso disbelieves in God's signs, truly God is quick at reckoning up
3|20|And if they would dispute with thee, then say, 'I turn my face with resignation unto God, and whoso follows me.' And say to those who have been given the Book, unto the Gentiles, 'Are ye, too, resigned' and if they are resigned, then are they guided. But if they turn their backs, then thou hast only to preach, and God looks on his servants
3|21|Verily, those who disbelieve in God's signs, and kill the prophets without right, and kill those from among men, who bid what is just,- to them give the glad tidings of grievous woe
3|22|These are they whose works are void in this world and the next, and helpers have they none
3|23|Did ye not see those who have been given a portion of the Book? they were called unto the Book of God to decide between them; and then a sect of them turned their backs and turned away
3|24|that is because they say the fire shall not touch us save for a certain number of days. But that deceived them in their religion which they had invented
3|25|How will it be when we have gathered them together for a day whereof there is no doubt, when each soul shall be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
3|26|Say, 'O God, Lord of the kingdom! Thou givest the kingdom to whomsoever Thou pleasest, and strippest the kingdom from whomsoever Thou pleasest; Thou honourest whom Thou pleasest, and abasest whom Thou pleasest; in Thy hand is good. Verily, Thou art mighty over all
3|27|Thou dost turn night to day, and dost turn day to night, and dost bring forth the living from the dead, and dost provide for whom Thou pleasest without taking count
3|28|Those who believe shall not take misbelievers for their patrons, rather than believers, and he who does this has no part with God at all, unless, indeed, ye fear some danger from them. But God bids you beware of Himself, for unto Him your journey is
3|29|Say, 'If ye hide that which is in your breasts, or if ye show it, God knows it: He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, for God is mighty over all
3|30|The day that every soul shall find what it has done of good present before it; and what it has done of evil, it would fain that there were between itself and that a wide interval. 'God bids you beware of Himself, but God is gentle with His servants
3|31|Say, 'If ye would love God then follow me, and God will love you and forgive you your sins, for God is forgiving and merciful
3|32|Say, 'Obey God and the Apostle; but if ye turn your backs God loves not misbelievers
3|33|Verily, God has chosen Adam, and Noah, and Abraham's people, and Imran's people above the world
3|34|a seed, of which one succeeds the other, but God both hears and knows
3|35|When Imran's wife said, 'Lord! I have vowed to Thee what is within my womb, to be dedicated unto Thee, receive it then from me. Verily, Thou dost hear and know
3|36|And when she brought it forth she said, 'Verily, I have brought it forth a female' - but God knew best what she brought forth; and a male is not like a female - 'I have called her Mary, and I seek a refuge in Thee for her and for her seed from Satan the pelted
3|37|And her Lord received her with a good reception, and made her grow up with a good growth, and Zachariah took care of her. Whenever Zachariah entered the chamber to her he found beside her a provision, and said, 'O Mary, how hast thou this?' She said, 'It is from God, for God provides for whom He pleases without count
3|38|Therefore prayed Zachariah to his Lord, and said, 'Lord, grant me from Thee a good seed. Verily, Thou hearest prayer
3|39|And an angel cried out to him as he was standing praying in the chamber (and said) that 'God gives thee the glad tidings of John, to confirm the Word from God,- of a chief and a chaste one, and a prophet from amongst the righteous
3|40|He said, 'My Lord, how can there be to me a boy when old age has reached me, and my wife is barren?' Said he, 'Thus God does what He pleaseth
3|41|He said, 'My Lord, make for me a sign.' He said, 'Thy sign is that thou shalt not speak to men for three days, save by gesture; but remember thy Lord much, and celebrate His praises in the evening and the morning
3|42|And when the angels said, 'O Mary! verily, God has chosen thee, and has purified thee, and has chosen thee above the women of the world
3|43|O Mary! be devout unto thy Lord, and adore and bow down with those who bow
3|44|That is (one) of the declarations of the unseen world which we reveal to thee, though thou wert not by them when they threw their lots which of them should take care of Mary, nor were ye by them when they did dispute
3|45|When the angel said, 'O Mary! verily, God gives thee the glad tidings of a Word from Him; his name shall be the Messiah Jesus the son of Mary, regarded in this world and the next and of those whose place is nigh to God
3|46|And he shall speak to people in his cradle, and when grown up, and shall be among the righteous
3|47|She said, 'Lord! how can I have a son, when man has not yet touched me?' He said, 'Thus God creates what He pleaseth. When He decrees a matter He only says BE and it is
3|48|and He will teach him the Book, and wisdom, and the law, and the gospel
3|49|and he shall be a prophet to the people of Israel (saying), that I have come to you, with a sign from God, namely, that I will create for you out of clay as though it were the form of a bird, and I will blow thereon and it shall become a bird by God's permission; and I will heal the blind from birth, and lepers; and I will bring the dead to life by God's permission; and I will tell you what you eat and what ye store up in your houses. Verily, in that is a sign for you if ye be believers
3|50|And I will confirm what is before you of the law, and will surely make lawful for you some of that which was prohibited from you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, so fear God and follow me
3|51|for God is my Lord, and your Lord, so worship Him:- this is the right path
3|52|And when Jesus perceived their unbelief, He said, 'Who are my helpers for God?' Said the apostles, 'We are God's helpers. We believe in God, so bear witness that we are resigned
3|53|Lord, we have believed in what Thou hast revealed, and we have followed the Apostle, so write us down with those which bear witness
3|54|But they (the Jews) were crafty, and God was crafty, for God is the best of crafty ones
3|55|When God said, 'O Jesus! I will make Thee die and take Thee up again to me and will clear thee of those who misbelieve, and will make those who follow thee above those who misbelieve, at the day of judgment, then to me is your return. I will decide between you concerning that wherein ye disagree
3|56|And as for those who misbelieve, I will punish them with grievous punishment in this world and the next, and they shall have none to help them
3|57|But as for those who believe and do what is right, He will pay them their reward, for God loves not the unjust
3|58|That is what we recite to thee of the signs and of the wise reminder
3|59|Verily the likeness of Jesus with God is as the likeness of Adam. He created him from earth, then He said to him BE, and he was
3|60|the truth from thy Lord, so be thou not of those who are in doubt
3|61|And whoso disputeth with thee after what has come to thee of knowledge, say, 'Come, let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves: then we will imprecate and put God's curse on those who lie
3|62|Verily, those are the true stories, and there is no god but God, and, verily, God He is the mighty, the wise
3|63|but if they turn back, God knows the evildoers
3|64|Say, 'O ye people of the Book, come to a word laid down plainly between us and you, that we will not serve other than God, nor associate aught with him, nor take each other for lords rather than God.' But if they turn back then say, 'Bear witness that we are resigned
3|65|O people of the Book, why do ye dispute about Abraham, when the law and the gospel were not revealed until after him? What! do ye not understand
3|66|Here ye are, disputing about what ye have some knowledge of; why then do ye dispute about what ye have no knowledge of? God knows and ye know not
3|67|Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a Christian, but he was a `Hanif resigned, and not of the idolaters
3|68|Verily, the people most worthy of Abraham are those who follow him and his prophets, and those who believe;- God is the patron of the believers
3|69|A sect of the people of the Book would fain they could lead you astray, but they only lead themselves astray, and they do not perceive
3|70|O people of the Book! why do ye disbelieve in the signs of God, the while ye witness them
3|71|O people of the Book! why do ye clothe the truth with falsehood and hide the truth the while ye know
3|72|A sect of the people of the Book say, 'Believe in what was revealed to those who believed at the first appearance of the day, and disbelieve it at the end thereof,' - that (others) may perchance go back (from their faith)
3|73|do not believe save one who followeth your religion.' Say, 'Verily, the (true) guidance is the guidance of God, that one should be given like what ye are given.' Or would they dispute with you before your Lord, say, 'Grace is in the hand of God, He gives it to whom he pleases, for God both comprehends and knows
3|74|He specially favours with his mercy whom he pleases, for God is Lord of mighty grace
3|75|And of the people of the Book, there are some of them who, if thou entrust them with a talent give it back to you; and some of them, if thou entrust them with a dinar, he will not give it back to thee except so long as thou dost stand over him. That is because they say, We owe no duty to the Gentiles;' but they tell a lie against God, the while they know
3|76|Yea, whoso fulfils his covenant and fears,- verily, God loves those who fear
3|77|Those who sell God's covenant and their oaths for a little price, these have no portion in the future life. God will not speak to them, and will not look upon them on the resurrection day, and will not purify them; but for them is grievous woe
3|78|And, verily, amongst them is a sect who twist their tongues concerning the Book, that ye may reckon it to be from the Book, but it is not from the Book. They say, 'It is from God,' but it is not from God, and they tell a lie against God, the while they know
3|79|It is not right for a man that God should give him a Book, and judgment, and prophecy, and that then he should say to men, 'Be ye servants of mine rather than of God;' but be ye rather masters of teaching the Book and of what ye learn
3|80|He does not bid you take the angels and the prophets for your lords; shall He bid you misbelieve again when you are once resigned
3|81|And when God took the compact from the prophets '(this is) surely what we have given you of the Book and wisdom. Then shall come to you the Apostle confirming what is with you. Ye must believe in him and help him.' He said, moreover, 'Are ye resolved and have ye taken my compact on that (condition).' They say, 'We are resolved.' He said, 'Then bear witness, for I am witness with you
3|82|but he who turns back after that, these are sinners
3|83|What is it other than God's religion that they crave? when to Him is resigned whosoever is in the heavens and the earth, will he or nill he, and to him shall they return
3|84|Say, 'We believe in God, and what has been revealed to thee, and what was revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and what was given to Moses, and Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord,- we will make no distinction between any of them,- and we are unto Him resigned
3|85|Whosoever craves other than Islam for a religion, it shall surely not be accepted from him, and he shall, in the next world, be of those who lose
3|86|How shall God guide people who have disbelieved after believing and bearing witness that the Apostle is true, and after there come to them manifest signs? God guides the unjust folk
3|87|These, their reward is, that on them is the curse of God, and of the angels, and of men together
3|88|they shall dwell therein for aye - the torment shall not be alleviated from them, nor shall they be respited
3|89|save those who repent after that, and act aright, for verily, God is forgiving and merciful
3|90|Verily, those who misbelieve after believing, and then increase in misbelief, their repentance shall not be accepted; these are those who err
3|91|Verily, those who misbelieve and die in misbelief, there shall not be accepted from any one of them the earth-full of gold, though he should give it as a ransom. For them is grievous woe, and helpers have they none
3|92|Ye cannot attain to righteousness until ye expend in alms of what ye love. But what ye expend in alms, that God knows
3|93|All food was lawful to the children of Israel save what Israel made unlawful to himself before that the law was revealed. Say, 'Bring the law and recite it, if ye speak the truth
3|94|But whoso forges against God a lie, after that, they are the unjust
3|95|Say, 'God speaks the truth, then follow the faith of Abraham, a `hanif, who was not of the idolaters
3|96|Verily, the first House founded for men was surely that at Bekkah, for a blessing and a guidance to the worlds
3|97|Therein are manifest signs,- Abraham's station, and whosoever enters in is safe. There is due to God from man a pilgrimage unto the House, for whosoever can find his way there. But whoso misbelieves - God is independent of the worlds
3|98|Say, 'O people of the Book! why do ye misbelieve in God's signs, while God is witness of what ye do
3|99|Say, 'O people of the Book! why do ye turn from the way of God him who believes, craving to make it crooked, while ye are witnesses? But God is not careless of what ye do
3|100|O ye who believe! if ye obey the sect of those to whom the Book was brought, they will turn you, after your faith, to unbelievers again
3|101|How can ye misbelieve while unto you are recited the signs of God, and among you is His Apostle? But whoso takes tight hold on God, he is guided into the right way
3|102|O ye who believe! fear God with the fear that He deserves, and die not save ye be resigned
3|103|Take tight hold of God's rope altogether, and do not part in sects; but remember the favours of God towards you, when ye were enemies and He made friendship between your hearts, and on the morrow ye were, by His favour, brothers. Ye were on the edge of a pit of fire, but he rescued you therefrom. Thus does God show to you His signs, perchance ye may be guided
3|104|and that there may be of you a nation who shall invite to good, and bid what is reasonable, and forbid what is wrong; these are the prosperous
3|105|Be not like those who parted in sects and disagreed after there came to them manifest signs; for them is mighty woe
3|106|on the day when faces shall be whitened and faces shall be blackened. As for those whose faces are blackened,- 'Did ye misbelieve after your faith, then taste the torment for your misbelief
3|107|But as for those whose faces are whitened, they are in God's mercy, and they shall dwell therein for aye
3|108|These are the signs of God. We recite them to you in truth, for God desires not wrong unto the worlds
3|109|God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and unto God affairs return
3|110|Ye were the best of nations brought forth unto man. Ye bid what is reasonable, and forbid what is wrong, believing in God. Had the people of the Book believed, it would have been better for them. There are believers among them, though most of them are sinners
3|111|They shall surely not harm you save a hurt; and if they fight you, they shall show you their backs, then they shall not be helped
3|112|They are smitten with abasement wherever they be found, save for the rope of God and the rope of man; and they draw on themselves wrath from God. They are smitten, too, with poverty; that is because they did disbelieve in God's signs, and kill the prophets undeservedly. That is because they did rebel and did transgress
3|113|They are not all alike. Of the people of the Book there is a nation upright, reciting God's signs throughout the night, as they adore the while
3|114|They believe in God, and in the last day, and bid what is reasonable, and forbid what is wrong, and vie in charity; these are among the righteous
3|115|What ye do of good surely God will not deny, for God knows those who fear
3|116|Verily, those who misbelieve, their wealth is of no service to them, nor their children either, against God; they are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye
3|117|The likeness of what they expend in this life of the world, is as the likeness of wind wherein is a cold blast that falls upon a people's tilth who have wronged themselves and destroys it. It is not God who wrongs them, but it is themselves they wrong
3|118|O ye who believe! take not to intimacy with others than yourselves; they will not fail to spoil you; they would fain ye came to trouble,- hatred is shown by their mouths; but what their breasts conceal is greater still. We have made manifest to you our signs, did ye but understand
3|119|Ye it is who love them, but they love not you; and ye believe in the Book, all of it. But when they meet you they say, 'We believe;' and when they go aside they bite their finger tips at you through rage. Say, 'Die in your rage, for God doth know the nature of men's breasts
3|120|If good luck touch you it is bad for them, but if bad luck befall you they rejoice therein; yet if ye are patient and fear, their tricks shall not harm you, for what they do God comprehends
3|121|When thou didst set forth early from thy people to settle for the believers a camp to fight;- but God both hears and knows
3|122|when two companies of you were on the point of showing cowardice; but God was their guardian, for on God surely the believers do rely
3|123|Why! God gave you victory at Bedr when ye were in a poor way; fear God, then, haply ye may give thanks
3|124|When thou didst say unto the believers, 'Is it not enough for you that your Lord assists you with three thousand of the angels sent down from on high
3|125|Yea, if ye are patient and fear God, and they come upon you on a sudden, now, your Lord will assist you with five thousand of His angels, (angels) of mark
3|126|God only made this as glad tidings for you to comfort your hearts withal,- for victory is but from God, the mighty, the wise
3|127|to cut off the flank of those who misbelieve, or make them downcast, that they may retire disappointed
3|128|Thou hast nothing to do with the affair at all, whether He turn towards them again or punish them; for, verily, they are unjust
3|129|God's is what is in the heavens and in the earth. He forgives whom He pleases, and punishes whom He pleases; for God is forgiving and merciful
3|130|O ye who believe! devour not usury doubly doubled, but fear God, perchance ye may be prosperous
3|131|fear the fire which is prepared for the unbelievers
3|132|and obey God and His Apostle, perchance ye may get mercy
3|133|And vie with one another for pardon from your Lord, and for Paradise, the breadth of which is as the heaven and the earth, prepared for those who fear
3|134|for those who expend in alms, in prosperity and adversity, for those who repress their rage, and those who pardon men; God loves the kind
3|135|Those who when they do a crime, or wrong themselves, remember God, and ask forgiveness for their sins,- and who forgives sins save God?- and do not persevere in what they did, the while they know
3|136|these have their reward:- pardon from their Lord, and gardens beneath which rivers flow, dwelling therein for aye; for pleasant is the hire of those who act like this
3|137|Incidents have passed before your time, go on then in the earth, and see what was the end of those who called (the prophets) liars
3|138|This is an explanation unto men, and a guidance and a warning unto those who fear
3|139|Do not give way nor grieve, for ye shall have the upper hand if ye but be believers
3|140|If a sore touch you, a sore like it has touched people: these are days which we make to alternate amongst mankind that God may know who it is that believe, and may take from you witnesses, for God loves not the unjust
3|141|and that God may assay those who believe, and blot out the misbelievers
3|142|Do ye think that ye can enter Paradise and God not know those of you who have fought well, or know the patient
3|143|Why, ye longed for death before ye met it! Now ye have looked upon it and ye halt
3|144|Mohammed is but an apostle; apostles have passed away before his time; what if he die or is killed, will ye retreat upon your heels? He who retreats upon his heels does no harm to God at all; but God will recompense the thankful
3|145|It is not for any soul to die, save by God's permission written down for an appointed time; but he who wishes for the reward of this world we will give him of it, and he who wishes for the reward of the future we will give him of it, and we will recompense the grateful
3|146|How many prophets have myriads fought against! yet they did not give way at what befel them in God's way Nor were they weak, nor did they demean themselves:- God loves the patient
3|147|And their word was only to say, 'Lord, forgive us our sins and our extravagance in our affairs; and make firm our footing, and help us against the misbelieving folk
3|148|and God gave them the reward of this world, and good reward for the future too, for God doth love the kind
3|149|O ye who believe! if ye obey those who misbelieve, they will turn you back upon your heels, and ye will retreat the losers
3|150|Nay, God is your Lord, He is the best of helpers
3|151|We will throw dread into the hearts of those who misbelieve, for that they associate that with God which He has sent down no power for; but their resort is fire, and evil is the resort of the unjust
3|152|God has truly kept His promise, when ye knocked them senseless by His permission, until ye showed cowardice, and wrangled, and rebelled, after he had shown you what ye loved. Amongst you are those who love this world, and amongst you are those who love the next. Then He turned you away from them to try you; but He has pardoned you, for God is Lord of grace unto believers
3|153|when ye went up and looked not round upon any one, although the Apostle was calling you from your rear. Therefore did God reward you with trouble on trouble that ye should not grieve after what ye had missed, nor for what befel you, for God is well aware of what ye do
3|154|Then He sent down upon you after trouble safety,- drowsiness creeping over one company of you, and one company of you getting anxious about themselves, suspecting about God other than the truth, with the suspicion of the ignorant, and saying, 'Have we any chance in the affair?' Say, 'Verily, the affair is God's.' They conceal in themselves what they will not show to thee, and say, 'If we had any chance in the affair we should not be killed here.' Say, 'If ye were in your houses, surely those against whom slaughter was written down, would have gone forth to fight even to where they are lying now; that God may try what is in your breasts and assay what is in your hearts, for God doth know the nature of men's breasts
3|155|Verily, those of you who turned your backs on that day when the two armies met, it was but Satan who made them slip for something they had earned. But God has now pardoned them; verily, God is forgiving and clement
3|156|O ye who believe! be not like those who misbelieve, and say unto their brethren when they knock about in the earth, or are upon a raid, 'Had they but been at home, they had not died and had not been killed.' It was that God might make a sighing in their hearts, for God gives life and death; and God on what ye do doth look
3|157|And if, indeed, ye be killed in God's way or die, surely forgiveness from God and mercy is better than what ye gather
3|158|and if ye die or be killed it is to God ye shall be assembled
3|159|It was by a sort of mercy from God thou didst deal gently with them, for hadst thou been rough and rude of heart they had dispersed from around thee. But pardon them, and ask forgiveness for them, and take counsel with them in the affair. As for what thou hast resolved, rely upon God; verily, God loves those who do rely
3|160|If God help you, there is none can overcome you; but if He leave you in the lurch, who is there can help you after Him? Upon God then let believers rely
3|161|It is not for the prophet to cheat; and he who cheats shall bring what he has cheated on the resurrection day. Then shall each soul be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
3|162|Is he who follows the pleasure of God, like him who has drawn on himself anger from God, whose resort is hell? An evil journey shall it be
3|163|These are degrees with God, and God sees what ye do
3|164|God was surely very gracious to the believers, when He sent amongst them an apostle from themselves, to recite to them His signs, and purify them, and teach them the Book and wisdom, although they surely were before his time in manifest error
3|165|Or when an accident befals you, and ye have fallen on twice as much, ye say, 'How is this?' Say, 'It is from yourselves. Verily, God is mighty over all
3|166|And what befell you the day when the two armies met, it was by God's permission; that He might know the believers
3|167|and might know those who behaved hypocritically; for it was said to them, 'Come, fight in God's way,' or 'repel (the foe);' they said, 'If we knew how to fight we would surely follow you.' They were that day far nigher unto misbelief than they were to faith. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts, but God doth know best what they hid
3|168|Those who said of their brethren, whilst they themselves stayed at home, 'Had they obeyed us they would not have been killed.' Say, 'Ward off from yourselves death, if ye do speak the truth
3|169|Count not those who are killed in the way of God as dead, but living with their Lord;- provided for
3|170|rejoicing in what God has brought them of His grace, and being glad for those who have not reached them yet,- those left behind them; there is no fear for them, and they shall not be grieved
3|171|glad at favour from God and grace, and that God wasteth not the hire of the believers
3|172|Whoso answered to the call of God and of His prophet after sorrow had befallen them, for those, if they do good and fear God, is a mighty hire
3|173|To whom when men said, 'Verily, men have gathered round you, fear then them,' it only increased their faith, and they said, 'God is enough for us, a good guardian is He
3|174|Then they retired in favour from God and grace; no evil touched them; they followed the pleasure of God, and God is Lord of mighty grace
3|175|It is only that Satan who frightens his friends. Do not ye fear them, but fear me, if ye be believers
3|176|Let them not grieve thee who vie with each other in misbelief. Verily, they cannot hurt God at all. God wills not to make for them a portion in the future life; but for them is mighty woe
3|177|Verily, those who purchase misbelief for faith, they do not hurt God at all, and for them is grievous woe
3|178|Let not those who misbelieve reckon that our letting them range is good for themselves. We only let them have their range that they may increase in sin. And for them is shameful woe
3|179|God would not leave believers in the state which ye are in, until He discerns the vile from the good. And God would not inform you of the unseen, but God chooses of His apostles whom He pleases. Wherefore believe ye in God and His Apostle; and if ye believe and fear, for you is mighty hire
3|180|And let not those who are niggard of what God has given them of His grace, count that it is best for them;- nay, it is worse for them. What they have been niggard of shall be a collar round their necks upon the resurrection day. And God's is the heritage of the heavens and the earth, and God of what ye do is well aware
3|181|God heard the speech of those who said, 'Verily, God is poor and we are rich.' We will write down what they said, and how they killed the prophets undeservedly, and say, 'Taste ye the torment of burning
3|182|this shall they suffer for what their hands have sent on before;- for, verily, God is no unjust one to His servants
3|183|who say, 'Verily, God has covenanted with us that we should not believe in an apostle until he gives us a sacrifice which fire devours.' Say, 'There have come to you apostles before me with manifest signs, and with what ye talk about; why then did ye kill them, if ye speak the truth
3|184|And if they did call thee a liar, apostles before thee have been called liars too, who came with manifest signs, and with scriptures, and with the illuminating Book
3|185|Every soul must taste of death; and ye shall only be paid your hire upon the resurrection day. But he who is forced away from the fire and brought into Paradise is indeed happy; but the life of this world is but a possession of deceit
3|186|Ye shall surely be tried in your wealth, and in your persons, and ye shall surely hear from those who have had the Book brought them before you, and from those who associate others with God, much harm. But if ye be patient and fear,- verily, that is one of the determined affairs
3|187|When God took the compact from those who have had the Book brought them that 'Ye shall of a surety manifest it unto men, and not hide it,' they cast it behind their backs, and bought therewith a little price,- but evil is what they buy
3|188|Count not that those who rejoice in what they have produced, and love to be praised for what they have not done,- think not that they are in safety from woe,- for them is grievous woe
3|189|God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and God is mighty over all
3|190|Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the succession of night and day, are signs to those possessed of minds
3|191|who remember God standing and sitting or lying on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth. 'O Lord! thou hast not created this in vain. We celebrate Thy praise; then keep us from the torment of the fire
3|192|Lord! verily, whomsoever Thou hast made to enter the fire, Thou hast disgraced him; and the unjust shall have none to help them
3|193|Lord! verily, we heard a crier calling to the faith, "Believe in your Lord," and we did believe. Lord! forgive us our sins and cover our offences, and let us die with the righteous
3|194|Lord! and bring us what Thou hast promised us by Thy apostles, and disgrace us not upon the resurrection day; for, verily, Thou dost not break Thy promises
3|195|And the Lord shall answer them, 'I waste not the works of a worker amongst you, be it male or female,- one of you is from the other. 'Those who fled, and were turned out of their houses, and were harmed in my way, and who fought and were killed, I will cover their offences, and I will make them enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow.' A reward from God; for God, with Him are the best of rewards
3|196|Let it not deceive you that those who misbelieve go to and fro in the earth
3|197|It is a slight possession, and then their resort is Hell; an evil couch shall it be
3|198|But those who fear their Lord, for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall dwell therein for aye,- an entertainment from God; and that which is with God is best for the righteous
3|199|Verily, of the people of the Book are some who do believe in God, and in what has been revealed to you, and what was revealed to them, humbling themselves before God, and selling not the signs of God for a little price. These shall have their reward with their Lord; verily, God is quick at reckoning up
3|200|O ye who believe! be patient and vie in being patient, and be on the alert, and fear God, that haply ye may prosper
4|1|O ye folk! fear your Lord, who created you from one soul, and created therefrom its mate, and diffused from them twain many men and women. And fear God, in whose name ye beg of one another, and the wombs; verily, God over you doth watch
4|2|And give unto the orphans their property, and give them not the vile in exchange for the good, and devour not their property to your own property; verily, that were a great sin
4|3|But if ye fear that ye cannot do justice between orphans, then marry what seems good to you of women, by twos, or threes, or fours; and if ye fear that ye cannot be equitable, then only one, or what your right hands possess. That keeps you nearer to not being partial
4|4|And give women their dowries freely; and if they are good enough to remit any of it of themselves, then devour it with good digestion and appetite
4|5|But do not give up to fools their property which God has made you to stand by; but maintain them from it, and clothe them, and speak to them with a reasonable speech
4|6|Prove orphans until they reach a marriageable age, and if ye perceive in them right management, then hand over to them their property, and do not devour it extravagantly in anticipation of their growing up. And he who is rich, let him abstain; but he who is poor, let him devour in reason, and when ye hand over to them their property, then take witnesses against them; but God sufficeth for taking account
4|7|Men should have a portion of what their parents and kindred leave, and women should have a portion of what their parents and kindred leave, whether it be little or much, a determined portion
4|8|And when the next of kin and the orphans and the poor are present at the division, then maintain them out of it, and speak to them a reasonable speech
4|9|And let these fear lest they leave behind them a weak seed, for whom they would be afraid; and let them fear God, and speak a straightforward speech
4|10|Verily, those who devour the property of orphans unjustly, only devour into their bellies fire, and they shall broil in flames
4|11|God instructs you concerning your children; for a male the like of the portion of two females, and if there be women above two, then let them have two-thirds of what (the deceased) leaves; and if there be but one, then let her have a half; and as to the parents, to each of them a sixth of what he leaves, if he has a son; but if he have no son, and his parents inherit, then let his mother have a third, and if he have brethren, let his mother have a sixth after payment of the bequest he bequeaths and of his debt. Your parents or your children, ye know not which of them is nearest to you in usefulness: - an ordinance this from God; verily, God is knowing and wise
4|12|And ye shall have half of what your wives leave, if they have no son; but if they have a son, then ye shall have a fourth of what they leave, after payment of the bequests they bequeath or of their debts. And they shall have a fourth of what ye leave, if ye have no son; but if ye have a son, then let them have an eighth of what ye leave, after payment of the bequest ye bequeath and of your debts. And if the man's or the woman's (property) be inherited by a kinsman who is neither parent nor child, and he have a brother or sister, then let each of these two have a sixth; but if they are more than that, let them share in a third after payment of the bequest he bequeaths and of his debts, without prejudice, - an ordinance this from God, and God is knowing and clement
4|13|These be God's bounds, and whoso obeys God and the Apostle He will make him enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall dwell therein for aye;- that is the mighty happiness
4|14|But whoso rebels against God and His Apostle, and transgresses His bounds, He will make him enter into fire, and dwell therein for aye; and for him is shameful woe
4|15|Against those of your women who commit adultery, call witnesses four in number from among yourselves; and if these bear witness, then keep the women in houses until death release them, or God shall make for them a way
4|16|And if two of you commit it, then hurt them both; but if they turn again and amend, leave them alone, verily, God is easily turned, compassionate
4|17|God is only bound to turn again towards those who do evil through ignorance and then turn again. Surely, these will God turn again to, for God is knowing, wise
4|18|His turning again is not for those who do evil, until, when death comes before one of them, he says, 'Now I turn again;' nor yet forth those who die in misbelief. For such as these have we prepared a grievous woe
4|19|O ye who believe! it is not lawful for you to inherit women's estates against their will; nor to hinder them, that ye may go off with part of what ye brought them, unless they commit fornication manifestly; but associate with them in reason, for if ye are averse from them, it may be that ye are averse from something wherein God has put much good for you
4|20|But if ye wish to exchange one wife for another, and have given one of them a talent, then take not from it anything. What! would you take it for a calumny and a manifest crime
4|21|How care ye take it when one of you has gone in unto the other, and they have taken from you a rigid compact
4|22|And do not marry women your fathers married,- except bygones,- for it is abominable and hateful, and an evil way
4|23|unlawful for you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters, and your paternal aunts and maternal aunts, and your brother's daughters, and your sister's daughters, and your foster mothers, and your foster sisters, and your wives' mothers, and your step daughters who are your wards, born of your wives to whom ye have gone in; but if ye have not gone in unto them, then it is no crime in you; and the lawful spouses of your sons from your own loins, and that ye form a connexion between two sisters,- except bygones,- verily, God is forgiving, merciful
4|24|and married women, save such as your right hands possess,- God's Book against you! - but lawful for you is all besides this, for you to seek them with your wealth, marrying them and not fornicating; but such of them as ye have enjoyed, give them their hire as a lawful due; for there is no crime in you about what ye agree between you after such lawful due, verily, God is knowing and wise
4|25|But whosoever of you cannot go the length of marrying marriageable women who believe, then take of what your right hands possess, of your maidens who believe;- though God knows best about your faith. Ye come one from the other; then marry them with the permission of their people, and give them their hire in reason, they being chaste and not fornicating, and not receivers of paramours. But when they are married, if they commit fornication, then inflict upon them half the penalty for married women; that is for whomsoever of you fears wrong; but that ye should have patience is better for you, and God is forgiving and merciful
4|26|God wishes to explain to you and to guide you into the ordinances of those who were before you, and to turn towards you, for God is knowing, wise
4|27|God wishes to turn towards you, but those who follow their lusts wish that ye should swerve with a mighty swerving
4|28|God wishes to make it light for you, for man was created weak
4|29|O ye who believe! devour not your property amongst yourselves vainly, unless it be a merchandise by mutual consent. And do not kill yourselves; verily, God is compassionate unto you
4|30|But whoso does that maliciously and unjustly, we will broil him with fire; for that is easy with God
4|31|If ye avoid great sins from which ye are forbidden, we will cover your offences and make you enter with a noble entrance
4|32|And do not covet that by which God has preferred one of you over another. The men shall have a portion of what they earn, and the women a portion of what they earn; ask God for His grace, verily, God knows all
4|33|To every one have we appointed kinsfolk as heirs of what parents and relatives and those with whom ye have joined right hands leave; so give them their portion, for, verily, God is over all a witness
4|34|Men stand superior to women in that God hath preferred some of them over others, and in that they expend of their wealth: and the virtuous women, devoted, careful (in their husbands') absence, as God has cared for them. But those whose perverseness ye fear, admonish them and remove them into bed-chambers and beat them; but if they submit to you, then do not seek a way against them; verily, God is high and great
4|35|And if ye fear a breach between the two, then send a judge from his people and a judge from her people. If they wish for reconciliation, God will arrange between them; verily, God is knowing and aware
4|36|And serve God, and do not associate aught with Him; and to your parents show kindness, and to kindred, and orphans, and the poor, and the neighbour who is akin, and the neighbour who is a stranger, and the companion who is strange, and the son of the road, and what your right hands possess, verily, God loves not him who is proud and boastful
4|37|who are miserly and bid men be miserly too, and who hide what God has given them of His grace;- but we have prepared for the misbelievers shameful woe
4|38|And those who expend their wealth in alms for appearance sake before men, and who believe not in God nor in the last day; - but whosoever has Satan for his mate, an evil mate has he
4|39|What harm would it do them if they believed in God and in the last day, and expended in alms of what God has provided them with? but God knows about them
4|40|Verily, God would not wrong by the weight of an atom; and if it's a good work, He will double it and bring from Himself a mighty hire
4|41|How then when we bring from every nation a witness, and bring thee as a witness against these
4|42|on the day when those who misbelieve and rebel against the Apostle would fain that the earth were levelled with them? but they cannot hide the news from God
4|43|O ye who believe! approach not prayer while ye are drunk, until ye well know what ye say; nor yet while polluted,- unless ye be passing by the way,- until ye have washed yourselves. But if ye are sick, or on a journey, or one of you come from the privy, or if ye have touched a woman, and ye cannot find water, then use good surface sand and wipe your faces and your hands therewith; verily, God pardons and forgives
4|44|Do ye not see those who have been given a portion of the Book? they buy error, and they wish that ye may err from the way
4|45|But God knows best who your enemies are, and God suffices as a patron, and sufficient is God as a help
4|46|And those who are Jews, and those who pervert the words from their places, and say, 'We hear but we rebel, and do thou listen without hearing,' and (who say) 'rahina,' distorting it with their tongues and taunting about religion., But had they said, 'We hear and we obey, so listen and look upon us,' it would have been better for them and more upright; - but may God curse them in their misbelief, for they will not believe except a few
4|47|O ye who have been given the Book! believe in what we have revealed, confirming what ye had before; ere we deface your faces and turn them into hinder parts, or curse you as we cursed the fellows of the Sabbath when God's command was done
4|48|Verily, God pardons not associating aught with Him, but He pardons anything short of that to whomsoever He pleases; but he who associates aught with God, he hath devised a mighty sin
4|49|Do ye not see those who purify themselves? nay, God purifies whom He will, and they shall not be wronged a straw
4|50|Behold, how they devise against God a lie, and that is manifest sin enough
4|51|Do ye not see those to whom a portion of the Book has been given? They believe in Gibt and Taghut, and they say of those who misbelieve, 'These are better guided in the way than those who believe
4|52|These are those whom God has cursed, and whom God has cursed no helper shall he find
4|53|Shall they have a portion of the kingdom? Why even then they would not give to men a jot
4|54|Do they envy man for what God has given of His grace? We have given to Abraham's people the Book and wisdom, and we have given them a mighty kingdom
4|55|And of them are some who believe therein, and of them are some who turn from it, but Hell is flaming enough for them
4|56|Verily, those who disbelieve in our signs, we will broil them with fire; whenever their skins are well done, then we will change them for other skins, that they may taste the torment. Verily, God is glorious and wise
4|57|But those who believe and do aright, we will make them enter gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall dwell therein for ever and aye, for them therein are pure wives, and we will make them enter into a shady shade
4|58|Verily, God bids you pay your trusts to their owners, and when ye judge between men to judge with justice. Verily, God, excellent is what He admonishes you with; verily, God both hears and sees
4|59|O ye who believe! obey God, and obey the Apostle and those in authority amongst you; and if ye quarrel about anything, refer to God and the Apostle, if ye believe in God and the last day; that is better and fairer as a settlement
4|60|Do ye not see those who pretend that they believe in what has been revealed to them, and what was revealed before thee; they wish to refer their judgment to Taghut, but they are bidden to disbelieve therein, and Satan wishes to lead them into a remote error
4|61|And when it is said to them, 'Come round to what God has sent down and unto the Apostle,' thou seest the hypocrites turning from thee, turning away
4|62|How then when there befalls them a mischance through what their hands have sent on before? then will they come to you, and swear by God, 'We meant naught but good and concord
4|63|These, God knows what is in their hearts. Turn thou away from them and admonish them, and speak to them into their souls with a searching word
4|64|We have never sent an apostle save that he should be obeyed by the permission of God; and if they, when they have wronged themselves, come to thee and ask pardon of God, and the Apostle asks pardon for them, then they will find God easy to be turned, compassionate
4|65|But no! by thy Lord! they will not believe, until they have made thee judge of what they differ on; then they will not find in themselves aught to hinder what thou hast decreed, and they will submit with submission
4|66|But had we prescribed for them, 'Kill yourselves, or go ye forth out of your houses,' they would not have done it, save only a few of them; but had they done what they are admonished, then it would have been better for them, and a more firm assurance
4|67|And then we would surely have brought them from ourselves a mighty hire
4|68|and would have guided them into a right path
4|69|Whoso obeys God and the Apostle, these are with those God has been pleased with, of prophets and confessors and martyrs and the righteous; - a fair company are they
4|70|That is grace from God, and God knows well enough
4|71|O ye who believe! take your precautions and sally in detachments or altogether
4|72|Verily, there is of you who tarries behind, and, if a mischance befalls you, says, 'God has been gracious to me, since I am not with them a martyr
4|73|But if there befalls you grace from God, he would say - as though there were no friendship between you and him - 'O would that I had been with thee to attain this mighty happiness
4|74|Let those then fight in God's way who sell this life of the world for the next; and whoso fights in God's way, then, be he killed or be he victorious, we will give him a mighty hire
4|75|What ails you that ye do not fight in God's way, and for the weak men and women and children, who say, 'Lord, bring us out of this town of oppressive folk, and make for us from Thee a patron, and make for us from Thee a help
4|76|Those who believe fight in the way of God; and those who disbelieve fight in the way of Taghut; fight ye then against the friends of Satan, verily, Satan's tricks are weak
4|77|Do ye not see those to whom it is said, 'Restrain your hands, and be steadfast in prayer and give alms;' and when it is prescribed for them to fight then a band of them fear men, as though it were the fear of God or a still stronger fear, and they say, 'O our Lord! why hast thou prescribed for us to fight, couldst thou not let us abide till our near appointed time?' Say, 'The enjoyment of this world is but slight, and the next is better for him who fears:- but they shall not be wronged a straw
4|78|Wheresoe'er ye be death will overtake you, though ye were in lofty towers. And if a good thing befall them, they say, 'This is from God,' but if a bad thing, they say, 'This is from thee.' Say, 'It is all from God.' What ails these people? they can hardly understand a tale
4|79|What befalls thee of good it is from God; and what befalls thee of bad it is from thyself. We have sent thee to mankind as an apostle, and God sufficeth for a witness
4|80|Whoso obeys the prophet he has obeyed God; and he who turns back - we have not sent thee to watch over them
4|81|They say, 'Obedience!' but when they sally forth from you, a company of them brood by night over something else than that which thou hast said; but God writes down that over which they brood. Turn then from them and rely on God, for God sufficeth for a guardian
4|82|Do they not meditate on the Qur'ran? if it were from other than God they would find in it many a discrepancy
4|83|And when there comes to them a matter of security or fear they publish it; but if they were to report it to the Apostle and to those in authority amongst them, then those of them who would elicit it from them would know it; but were it not for God's grace upon you and His mercy ye had followed Satan, save a few
4|84|Fight, then, in the way of God; impose not aught on any but thyself, and urge on the believers; it may be that God will restrain the violence of those who misbelieve, for God is more violent and more severe to punish
4|85|Whoso intercedes with a good intercession shall have a portion therefrom; but he who intercedes with a bad intercession shall have the like thereof, for God keeps watch over all things
4|86|And when ye are saluted with a salutation, salute with a better than it, or return it;- verily, God of all things takes account
4|87|God, there is no God but He! He will surely assemble you on the resurrection day, there is no doubt therein; who is truer than God in his discourse
4|88|Why are ye two parties about the hypocrites, when God hath overturned them for what they earned? Do ye wish to guide those whom God hath led astray? Whoso God hath led astray ye shall not surely find for him a path
4|89|They would fain that ye misbelieve as they misbelieve, that ye might be alike; take ye not patrons from among them until they too flee in God's way; but if they turn their backs, then seize them and kill them wheresoever ye find them, and take from them neither patron nor help
4|90|save those who reach a people betwixt whom and you is an alliance - or who come to you while their bosoms prevent them from fighting you or fighting their own people. But had God pleased He would have given you dominion over them, and they would surely have fought you. But if they retire from you and do not fight you, and offer you peace,- then God hath given you no way against them
4|91|Ye will find others who seek for quarter from you, and quarter from their own people; whenever they return to sedition they shall be overturned therein: but if they retire not from you, nor offer you peace, nor restrain their hands, then seize them and kill them wheresoever ye find them;- over these we have made for you manifest power
4|92|It is not for a believer to kill a believer save by mistake; and whosoever kills a believer by mistake then let him free a believing neck; and the blood-money must be paid to his people save what they shall remit as alms. But if he be from a tribe hostile to you and yet a believer, then let him free a believing neck. And if it be a tribe betwixt whom and you there is an alliance, then let the blood-money be paid to his friends, and let him free a believing neck; but he who cannot find the means, then let him fast for two consecutive months - a penance this from God, for God is knowing, wise
4|93|And whoso kills a believer purposely, his reward is hell, to dwell therein for aye; and God will be wrath with him, and curse him, and prepare for him a mighty woe
4|94|O ye who believe! when ye are knocking about in the way of God be discerning, and do not say to him who offers you a salutation, 'Thou art no believer,' craving after the chances of this world's life, for with God are many spoils! So were ye aforetime, but God was gracious to you, be ye then discerning; verily, God of what ye do is well aware
4|95|Not alike are those of the believers who sit at home without harm, and those who are strenuous in God's way with their wealth and their persons. God hath preferred those who are strenuous with their wealth and their persons to those who sit still, by many degrees, and to each hath God promised good, but God hath preferred the strenuous for a mighty hire over those who sit still
4|96|degrees from him, and pardon and mercy, for God is forgiving and merciful
4|97|Verily, the angels when they took the souls of those who had wronged themselves, said, 'What state were ye in?' they say, 'We were but weak in the earth;' they said, 'Was not God's earth wide enough for you to flee away therein?' These are those whose resort is hell, and a bad journey shall it be
4|98|Save for the weak men, and women, and children, who could not compass any stratagem, and were not guided to a way
4|99|these it may be God will pardon, for God both pardons and forgives
4|100|Whosoever flees in the way of God shall find in the earth many a spacious refuge; and he who goes forth from his house, fleeing unto God and His prophet, and then death catches him up,- his hire devolves on God, and God is forgiving and merciful
4|101|And when ye knock about in the earth, it is no crime to you that ye come short in prayer, if ye fear that those who disbelieve will set upon you; verily, the misbelievers are your obvious foes
4|102|When thou art amongst them, and standest up to pray with them, then let a party of them stand up with thee, and let them take their arms; and when they adore, let them go behind you, and let another party who have not yet prayed come forward and pray with thee; and let them take their precautions and their arms. Fain would those who misbelieve that ye were careless of your arms and your baggage, that they might turn upon you with a single turning. And it is no crime to you if ye be annoyed with rain or be sick, that ye lay down your arms; but take your precautions,- verily, God has prepared for those who misbelieve a shameful woe
4|103|But when ye have fulfilled your prayer, remember God standing and sitting and lying on your sides; and when ye are in safety then be steadfast in prayer; verily, prayer is for the believers prescribed and timed
4|104|And do not give way in pursuit of the people; if ye suffer they shall surely suffer too, even as ye suffer; and ye hope from God, but they hope not! and God is knowing, wise
4|105|Verily, we have revealed to thee the Book in truth that thou mayest judge between men of what God has shown thee; so be not with the treacherous a disputant
4|106|but ask God's pardon: verily, God is forgiving, merciful
4|107|And wrangle not for those who defraud themselves; for God loves not him who is a fraudulent sinner
4|108|They hide themselves from men; but they cannot hide themselves from God, for He is with them while they brood at night over speeches that please Him not;- but God doth compass what they do
4|109|Here are ye, wrangling for them about this world's life;- but who shall wrangle with God for them on the day of judgment, or who shall be a guardian over them
4|110|Yet whoso does evil and wrongs himself, and then asks pardon of God, shall find God forgiving and merciful
4|111|and whoso commits a crime, he only commits it against himself, for God is knowing, wise
4|112|And whoso commits a fault or a sin and throws it on the innocent, he hath to bear a calumny and a manifest sin
4|113|Were it not for God's grace upon thee, and His mercy, a party of them would have tried to lead thee astray; but they only lead themselves astray; they shall not hurt you in aught: for God hath sent down upon thee the Book and the wisdom, and taught thee what thou didst not know, for God's grace was mighty on thee
4|114|There is no good in most of what they talk in private; save in his who bids almsgiving, or kindness, or reconciliation between men; and whoso does this, craving the good pleasure of God, we will give to him a mighty hire
4|115|But he who severs himself from the prophet after that we have made manifest to him the guidance, and follows other than the way of the believers, we will turn our backs on him as he hath turned his back; and we will make him reach hell, and a bad journey shall it be
4|116|Verily, God forgives not associating aught with Him, but He pardons anything short of that, to whomsoever He will; but whoso associates aught with God, he hath erred a wide error
4|117|Verily, they call not beside Him on aught save females; and they do not call on aught save a rebellious devil
4|118|God curse him! for he said, 'I will take from thy servants a portion due to me
4|119|and I will lead them astray; and I will stir up vain desires within them; and I will order them and they shall surely crop the ears of cattle; and I will order them and they shall surely alter God's creation;' but he who takes the devil for his patron instead of God, he loses with a manifest loss
4|120|He promises them, and stirs up vain desires within them; but the devil promises only to deceive
4|121|These, their resort is hell; they shall not find an escape therefrom
4|122|But those who believe, and do what is right, we will make them enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye,- God's promise in truth; and who is truer than God in speech
4|123|Not for your vain desires, nor the vain desires of the people of the Book. He who doeth evil shall be recompensed therewith, and shall not find for him beside God a patron, or a help
4|124|But he who doeth good works,- be it male or female,- and believes, they shall enter into Paradise, and they shall not be wronged a jot
4|125|Who has a better religion than he who resigns his face to God, and does good, and follows the faith of Abraham, as a 'Hanif?- for God took Abraham as a friend
4|126|And God's is what is in the heavens and in the earth, and God encompasses all things
4|127|They will ask thee a decision about women; say, 'God decides for you about them, and that which is rehearsed to you in the Book; about orphan women to whom ye do not give what is prescribed for them, and whom ye are averse from marrying; and about weak children; and that ye stand fairly by orphans;- and what ye do of good, verily, that God knows
4|128|And if a woman fears from her husband perverseness or aversion, it is no crime in them both that they should be reconciled to each other, for reconciliation is best. For souls are prone to avarice; but if ye act kindly and fear God, of what ye do He is aware
4|129|Ye are not able, it may be, to act equitably to your wives, even though ye covet it; do not however be quite partial, and leave one as it were in suspense; but if ye be reconciled and fear, then God is forgiving and merciful
4|130|but if they separate, God can make both independent out of His abundance; for God is abundant, wise
4|131|God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth! We have ordained to those who have been given the Book before you, and to you too that ye fear God;- but if ye misbelieve, verily, God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and God is rich and to be praised
4|132|God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth! and God sufficeth for a guardian
4|133|If He will He can make ye pass away, O men! and can bring others ;- God is able to do all that
4|134|He who wishes for a reward in this world,- with God is the reward of this world and of the next, and God both hears and sees
4|135|O ye who believe! be ye steadfast in justice, witnessing before God though it be against yourselves, or your parents, or your kindred, be it rich or poor, for God is nearer akin than either. Follow not, then, lusts, so as to act partially; but if ye swerve or turn aside, God of what ye do is well aware
4|136|O ye who believe! believe in God and His apostles, and the Book which He hath revealed to His Apostle, and the Book which He sent down before; for whoso disbelieves in God, and His angels, and His Apostle, and the last day, has erred a wide error
4|137|Verily, those who believe and then misbelieve, and then believe and then misbelieve, and then increase in misbelief, God will never pardon them, nor will He guide them in the path
4|138|Give to the hypocrites the glad tidings that for them is grievous woe
4|139|Those who take the misbelievers for their patrons rather than believers,- do they crave honour from them? Verily, honour is altogether God's
4|140|He hath revealed this to you in the Book, that when ye hear the signs of God disbelieved in and mocked at, then sit ye not down with them until they plunge into another discourse, for verily, then ye would be like them. Verily, God will gather the hypocrites and misbelievers into hell together
4|141|Those who lie in wait for you, and if the victory be yours from God, say, 'Were we not with you?' and if the misbelievers have a chance, they say, 'Did we not get the mastery over you, and defend you from the believers?' But God shall judge between you on the resurrection day; for God will not give the misbelievers a way against believers
4|142|Verily, the hypocrites seek to deceive God, but He deceives them; and when they rise up to pray, they rise up lazily to be seen of men, and do not remember God, except a few
4|143|wavering between the two, neither to these nor yet to those! but whomsoever God doth lead astray thou shall not find for him a way
4|144|O ye who believe! take not misbelievers for patrons rather than believers; do ye wish to make for God a power against you
4|145|Verily, the hypocrites are in the lowest depths of hell-fire, and thou shalt not find for them a help
4|146|Save those who turn again, and do right, and take tight hold on God, and are sincere in religion to God; these are with the believers, and God will give to the believers mighty hire
4|147|Why should God punish you, if ye are grateful and believe? for God is grateful and knowing
4|148|God loves not publicity of evil speech, unless one has been wronged; for God both hears and knows
4|149|If ye display good or hide it, or pardon evil, verily, God is pardoning and powerful
4|150|Verily, those who disbelieve in God and His apostles desire to make a distinction between God and His apostles, and say, 'We believe in part and disbelieve in part, and desire to take a midway course between the two
4|151|these are the misbelievers, and we have prepared for misbelievers shameful woe
4|152|But those who believe in God and His apostles, and who do not make a distinction between any one of them,- to these we will give their hire, for God is forgiving and merciful
4|153|The people of the Book will ask thee to bring down for them a book from heaven; but they asked Moses a greater thing than that, for they said, 'Show us God openly;' but the thunderbolt caught them in their injustice. Then they took the calf, after what had come to them of manifest signs; but we pardoned that, and gave Moses obvious authority
4|154|And we held over them the mountain at their compact, and said to them, 'Enter ye the door adoring;' and we said to them, 'Transgress not on the Sabbath day,' and we took from them a rigid compact
4|155|But for that they broke their compact, and for their misbelief in God's signs, and for their killing the prophets undeservedly, and for their saying, 'Our hearts are uncircumcised,' - nay, God hath stamped on them their misbelief, so that they cannot believe except a few
4|156|and for their misbelief, and for their saying about Mary a mighty calumny
4|157|and for their saying, 'Verily, we have killed the Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary, the apostle of God'.... but they did not kill him, and they did not crucify him, but a similitude was made for them. And verily, those who differ about him are in doubt concerning him; they have no knowledge concerning him, but only follow an opinion. They did not kill him, for sure
4|158|nay, God raised him up unto Himself; for God is mighty and wise
4|159|And there shall not be one of the people of the Book but shall believe in him before his death; and on the day of judgment he shall be a witness against them
4|160|And for the injustice of those who are Jews have we forbidden them good things which we had made lawful for them, and for their obstructing so much the way of God
4|161|and for their taking usury when we had forbidden it, and for their devouring the wealth of people in vain,- but we have prepared for those of them who misbehave a grievous woe
4|162|But those amongst them who are firm in knowledge, and the believers who believe in what is revealed to thee, let what is revealed before thee, and the steadfast in prayer, and the givers of alms, and the believers in God and the last day,- unto these we will give a mighty hire
4|163|Verily, we have inspired thee as we inspired Noah and the prophets after him, and as we inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Jacob, and the tribes, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonas, and Aaron, and Solomon; and to David did we give Psalms
4|164|Of apostles we have already told thee of some before; and of apostles some we have not told thee of;- But Moses did God speak to, speaking
4|165|apostles giving glad tidings and warning, that men should have no argument against God, after the apostles, for God is mighty, wise
4|166|But God bears witness to what He has revealed to thee: He revealed it in His knowledge, and the angels bear witness too; though God is witness enough
4|167|Verily, those who misbelieve and obstruct the way of God, have erred a wide error
4|168|Verily those who misbelieve and are unjust, God will not pardon them, nor will He guide them on the road
4|169|save the road to hell, to dwell therein for aye;- that is easy enough to God
4|170|O ye folk! the Apostle has come to you with truth from your Lord: believe then, for it is better for you. But if ye misbelieve, then God's is what is in the heavens and the earth, and God is knowing, wise
4|171|O ye people of the Book! do not exceed in your religion, nor say against God aught save the truth. The Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary, is but the apostle of God and His Word, which He cast into Mary and a spirit from Him; believe then in God and His apostles, and say not 'Three.' Have done! it were better for you. God is only one God, celebrated be His praise that He should beget a Son! His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and God sufficeth for a guardian
4|172|The Messiah doth surely not disdain to be a servant of God, nor do the angels who are nigh to Him; and whosoever disdains His service and is too proud, He will gather them altogether to Himself
4|173|But as for those who believe and do what is right, He will pay their hire and will give increase to them of His grace. But as for those who disdain and are too proud, He will punish them with a grievous woe, and they shall not find for them other than God a patron or a help
4|174|O ye folk! proof has come to you from your Lord, and we have sent down to you manifest light
4|175|As for those who believe in God, and take tight hold of Him, He will make them enter into mercy from Him and grace; and He will guide them to Himself by a right way
4|176|They will ask thee for a decision; say, 'God will give you a decision concerning remote kinship.' If a man perish and have no child, but have a sister, let her have half of what he leaves; and he shall be her heir, if she have no son. But if there be two sisters, let them both have two thirds of what he leaves; and if there be brethren, both men and women, let the male have like the portion of two females. God makes this manifest to you lest ye err; for God all things doth know
5|1|O ye who believe! fulfill your compacts. - Lawful for you are brute beasts, save what is here recited to you, not allowing you the chase while ye are on pilgrimage; verily, God ordaineth what He will
5|2|O ye who believe! do not deem the monuments of God to be lawful, nor the sacred month, nor the offering, nor its neck garlands, nor those who sojourn at the sacred house, craving grace from their Lord and His pleasure. But when ye are in lawful state again, then chase; and let not ill-will against the people who turned you from the Sacred Mosque make you transgress; but help one another in righteousness and piety, and do not help one another to sin and enmity; but fear God, - verily, God is keen to punish
5|3|Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is devoted to other than God, and the strangled and the knocked down, and that which falls down, and the gored, and what wild beasts have eaten - except what ye slaughter in time - and what is sacrificed to idols, and dividing carcases by arrows. Today shall those who disbelieve in your religion despair; do ye not then fear them, but fear me - Today is perfected for you your religion, and fulfilled upon you is my favour, and I am pleased for you to have Islam for a religion. But he who is forced by hunger, not inclined willfully to sin, verily, God is forgiving, compassionate
5|4|They will ask thee what is lawful for them? say, 'Lawful for you are good things and what ye have taught beasts of prey (to catch), training them like dogs; - ye teach them as God taught you; - so eat of what they catch for you, and mention the name of God over it, and fear God, for verily, God is swift in reckoning up
5|5|Lawful for you today are good things, and the food of those to whom the Book has been given is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them; and chaste women of those who believe, and chaste women of those to whom the Book has been given before you, - when you have given them their hire, living chastely and not fornicating, and not taking paramours. But whoso disbelieves in the faith, of a truth his work is vain, and he shall be in the next life of those who lose
5|6|O ye who believe! when ye rise up to prayer wash your faces, and your hands as far as the elbows, and wipe - your heads, and your feet down to the ankles. And if ye are polluted, then purify yourselves. But if ye are sick, or on a journey, or if one of you comes from the privy, or if ye have touched women and cannot find water, then take fine surface sand and wipe your faces and your hands therewith. God does not wish to make any hindrance for you; but he wishes to purify you and to fulfill his favour upon you; haply ye may give thanks
5|7|Remember the favour of God to you and His covenant which He covenanted with, you, when ye said, 'We hear and we obey;' and fear God, verily, God knows the nature of men's breasts
5|8|O ye who believe! stand steadfast to God as witnesses with justice; and let not ill-will towards people make you sin by not acting with equity. Act with equity, that is nearer to piety, and fear God; for God is aware of what ye do
5|9|God has promised to those who believe and work righteousness, that for them is pardon and a mighty hire
5|10|But those who disbelieve and call our signs lies, these are the fellows of hell
5|11|O ye who believe! remember God's favour towards you, when a people intended to stretch their hands against you, but He withheld their hands from you; and upon God let believers rely
5|12|God did take a compact from the children of Israel, and raised up of them twelve wardens; and God said, 'Verily, I am with you, if ye be steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and believe in my apostles, and assist them, and lend to God a goodly loan; then will I cover your offences and make you enter gardens beneath which rivers flow: and whoso disbelieves after that, he hath erred from the level way
5|13|And for that they broke their compact, we cursed them, and placed in their hearts hardness, so that they perverted the words from their places, and forgot a portion of what they were reminded of. But thou wilt not cease to light upon treachery amongst them, save a few of them; but pardon them and shun them; verily, God loves the kind
5|14|And of those who say, 'Verily, we are Christians,' we have taken a compact; but they have forgotten a portion of what they were reminded of; wherefore have we excited amongst them enmity and hatred till the resurrection day; but God will tell them of what they have done
5|15|O ye people of the Book! our Apostle has come to you to explain to you much of what ye had hidden of the Book, and to pardon much. There has come to you from God a light, and a perspicuous Book
5|16|God guides thereby those who follow His pleasure to the way of peace, and brings them into a right way
5|17|They misbelieve who say, 'Verily, God is the Messiah the son of Mary;' say, 'Who has any hold on God, if he wished to destroy the Messiah the son of Mary, and his mother, and those who are on earth altogether?' God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is between the two; He createth what He will, for God is mighty over all
5|18|But the Jews and the Christians say, 'We are the sons of God and His beloved.' Say, 'Why then does He punish you for your sins? nay, ye are mortals of those whom He has created! He pardons whom He pleases, and punishes whom He pleases; for God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and what is between the two, and unto Him the journey is
5|19|O people of the Book! our Apostle has come to you, explaining to you the interval of apostles; lest ye say, 'There came not to us a herald of glad tidings nor a warner.' But there has come to you now a herald of glad tidings and a warner, and God is mighty over all
5|20|When Moses said to his people, 'O my people! remember the favour of God towards you when He made amongst you prophets, and made for you kings, and brought you what never was brought to anybody in the worlds
5|21|O my people! enter the Holy Land which God has prescribed for you; and be ye not thrust back upon your hinder parts and retreat losers
5|22|They said, ' O Moses! verily, therein is a people, giants; and we will surely not enter therein until they go out from thence; but if they go out then we will enter in
5|23|Then said two men of those who fear, - God had been gracious to them both, - 'Enter ye upon them by the door, and when ye have entered it, verily, ye shall be victorious; and upon God do ye rely if ye be believers
5|24|They said, 'O Moses! we shall never enter it so long as they are therein; so, go thou and thy Lord and fight ye twain; verily, we will sit down here
5|25|Said he, 'My Lord, verily, I can control only myself and my brother; therefore part us from these sinful people
5|26|He said, 'Then, verily, it is forbidden them; for forty years shall they wander about in the earth; so vex not thyself for the sinful people
5|27|Recite to them the story of the two sons of Adam; truly when they offered an offering and it was accepted from one of them, and was not accepted from the other, that one said, 'I will surely kill thee;' he said, 'God only accepts from those who fear
5|28|If thou dost stretch forth to me thine hand to kill me, I will not stretch forth mine hand to kill thee; verily, I fear God the Lord of the worlds
5|29|verily, I wish that thou mayest draw upon thee my sin and thy sin, and be of the fellows of the Fire, for that is the reward of the unjust
5|30|But his soul allowed him to slay his brother, and he slew him, and in the morning he was of those who lose
5|31|And God sent a crow to scratch in the earth and show him how he might hide his brother's shame, he said, ' Alas, for me! Am I too helpless to become like this crow and hide my brother's shame?' and in the morning he was of those who did repent
5|32|For this cause have we prescribed to the children of Israel that whoso kills a soul, unless it be for another soul or for violence in the land, it is as though he had killed men altogether; but whoso saves one, it is as though he saved men altogether. Our apostles came to them with manifest signs; then, verily, many of them did after that commit excesses in the earth
5|33|The reward of those who make war against God and His Apostle, and strive after violence in the earth, is only that they shall be slaughtered or crucified, or their hands cut off and their feet on alternate sides, or that they shall be banished from the land; - that is a disgrace for them in this world, and for them in the next is mighty woe
5|34|save for those who repent before ye have them in your power, for know ye that God is forgiving, merciful
5|35|O ye who believe! fear God and crave the means to approach Him, and be strenuous in His way, haply ye will prosper then
5|36|Verily, those who disbelieve, even though they had what is in the earth, all of it, and the like thereof with it, to offer as a ransom from the punishment of the resurrection day, it would not be accepted from them; but for them is grievous woe
5|37|They may wish to go forth from the Fire, but they shall not go forth therefrom, for them is lasting woe
5|38|The man thief and the woman thief, cut off the hands of both as a punishment, for that they have erred; - an example from God, for God is mighty, wise
5|39|But whoso turns again after his injustice and acts aright, verily, God will turn to him, for, verily, God is forgiving, merciful
5|40|Do ye not know that God, His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He punishes whom He pleases, and forgives whom He pleases, for God is mighty overall
5|41|O thou Apostle! let not those grieve thee who vie in misbelief; or those who say with their mouths 'We believe,' but their hearts do not believe; or of those who are Jews, listeners to a lie, - listeners to other people, but who come not to thee. They pervert the words from their places and say, ' If this is what ye are given, take it; but if ye are not given it, then beware!' but he whom God wishes to mislead, thou canst do nothing with God for him; these are those whose hearts God wishes not to purify, for them in this world is disgrace, and for them in the next is mighty woe
5|42|listeners to a lie, eaters of unlawful things! But if they come to thee, then judge between them or turn aside from them; but if thou turnest aside from them they shall not harm thee at all, but if thou judgest, then judge between them with justice, verily, God loves the just
5|43|But how should they make thee their judge, when they have the law wherein is God's judgment? Yet they turn back after that, for they do not believe
5|44|Verily, we have revealed the law in which is guidance and light; the prophets who we're resigned did judge thereby those who were Jews, as did the masters and doctors by what they remembered of the Book of God and by what they were witnesses of. Fear not men, but fear me, and sell not my signs for a little price; for whoso will not judge by what God has revealed, these be the misbelievers
5|45|We have prescribed for thee therein 'a life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose, and an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth, and for wounds retaliation;' but whoso remits it, it is an expiation for him, but he whoso will not judge by what God has revealed, these be the unjust
5|46|And we followed up the footsteps of these (prophets) with Jesus the son of Mary, confirming that which was before him and the law, and we brought him the gospel, wherein is guidance and light, verifying what was before it of the law, and a guidance and an admonition unto those who fear
5|47|Then let the people of the gospel judge by that which is revealed therein, for whoso will not judge by what God has revealed, these be the evildoers
5|48|We have revealed to thee the Book in truth verifying what was before it, and preserving it; judge then between them by what God has revealed, and follow not their lusts, turning away from what is given to thee of the truth. For each one of you have we made a law and a pathway; and had God pleased He would have made you one nation, but He will surely try you concerning that which He has brought you. Be ye therefore emulous in good deeds; to God is your return altogether, and He will let you know concerning that wherein ye do dispute
5|49|Wherefore judge thou between them by what God has revealed, and follow not their lusts; but beware lest they mislead thee from part of what God has revealed to thee; yet if they turn back, then know that God wishes to fall on them for some sins of theirs, - verily, many men are evildoers
5|50|Is it the judgment of the Ignorance they crave? but who is better than God to judge for people who are sure
5|51|O ye who believe! take not the Jews and Christians for your patrons : they are patrons of each other; but whoso amongst you takes them for patrons, verily, he is of them, and, verily, God guides not an unjust people
5|52|Thou wilt see those in whose hearts is a sickness vieing with them; they say, 'We fear lest there befall us a reverse.' It may be God will give the victory, or an order from Himself, and they may awake repenting of what they thought in secret to themselves
5|53|Those who believe say, 'Are these they who swore by God with their most strenuous oath that they were surely with you?' - their works are in vain and they shall wake the losers
5|54|O ye who believe! whoso is turned away from his religion - God will bring (instead) a people whom He loves and who love Him, lowly to believers, lofty to unbelievers, strenuous in the way of God, fearing not the blame of him who blames. That is God's grace! He gives it unto whom He pleases, for God both comprehends and knows
5|55|God only is your patron, and His Apostle and those who believe, who are steadfast in prayer and give alms, bowing down
5|56|Whoso taketh as patrons God and His apostles and those who believe; - verily, God's crew, they are victorious
5|57|O ye who believe! take not for patrons those who take your religion for a jest or a sport, from amongst those who have been given the Book before and the misbelievers; but fear God if ye be believers
5|58|Nor those who, when ye call to prayer, take it for a jest and a sport; that is because they are a people who do not understand
5|59|Say, 'O people of the Book! do ye disavow us, for aught but that we believe in God, and what was revealed to us before, and for that most of you are evildoers
5|60|Say, 'Can I declare unto you something worse than retribution from God?' Whomsoever God has cursed and been wroth with - and he has made of them apes and swine - and who worship Taghut, they are in a worse plight and are more erring from the level path
5|61|When they come to you they say, 'We believe;' but they entered in with unbelief, and they went out therewith, and God knows best what they did hide
5|62|Thou wilt see many of them vieing in sin and enmity, and in eating unlawful things, - evil is it that they have done
5|63|The masters and their doctors prohibit them from speaking sin and eating unlawful things, - evil is what they have performed
5|64|The Jews say, - 'God's hand is fettered;' their hands are fettered and they are cursed for what they said; nay! His hands are outspread, He expends how He pleases! and that which has been sent down to thee from thy Lord will surely increase many of them in their rebellion and misbelief, for we have cast amongst them enmity and hatred till the resurrection day. Whenever they light a fire for war, God puts it out; they strive for corruption in the earth, but God loves not the corrupt
5|65|But did the people of the Book believe and fear, we would cover their offences, and we would make them enter into gardens of pleasure
5|66|and were they steadfast in the law and the gospel, and what has been sent down to them from their Lord, they should eat from above them and below them. Amongst them are a nation who are moderate, but many of them - bad is what they do
5|67|O thou Apostle! preach what has been revealed to thee from thy Lord; if thou do it not thou hast not preached His message, and God will not hold thee free from men; for God guides not people who misbelieve
5|68|Say, 'O people of the Book! ye rest on naught until ye stand fast by the law and the gospel, and what is revealed to you from your Lord.' But what has been revealed to thee from thy Lord will of a surety increase many of them in rebellion and misbelief, vex not thyself then for a people who misbelieve
5|69|Verily, those who believe and those who are Jews, and the Sabaeans, and the Christians, whosoever believes in God and the last day, and does what is right, there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve
5|70|We took a compact of the children of Israel, and we sent to them apostles; every time there came to them an apostle with what their souls loved not, a part of them they did call liars and a part of them they slew
5|71|And they reckoned that there would be no disturbance; but they were blind and deaf! and then God turned again towards them: and then many amongst them were blind and deaf! but God saw what they did
5|72|They misbelieve who say, 'Verily, God is the Messiah the son of Mary;' but the Messiah said, 'O children of Israel! worship God, my Lord and your Lord;' verily, he who associates aught with God, God hath forbidden him Paradise, and his resort is the Fire, and the unjust shall have none to help them
5|73|They misbelieve who say, 'Verily, God is the third of three;' for there is no God but one, and if they do not desist from what they say, there shall touch those who misbelieve amongst them grievous woe
5|74|Will they not turn again towards God and ask pardon of Him? for God is forgiving and merciful
5|75|The Messiah the son of Mary is only a prophet: prophets before him have passed away; and his mother was a confessor; they used both to eat food. - See how we explain to them the signs, yet see how they turn aside
5|76|Say, 'Will ye serve, other than God, what can neither hurt you nor profit you?' but God, He both hears and knows
5|77|Say, 'O people of the Book! exceed not the truth in your religion, and follow not the lusts of a people who have erred before, and who lead many astray, and who go away from the level path
5|78|Those of the children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus the son of Mary; that is because they rebelled and did transgress
5|79|they would not desist from the wrong they did; evil is that which they did
5|80|Thou wilt see many of them taking those who disbelieve for their patrons; evil is that which their souls have sent before them, for God's wrath is on them, and in the torment shall they dwell for aye
5|81|But had they believed in God and the prophet, and what was revealed to him, they had not taken these for their patrons; but many of them are evildoers
5|82|Thou wilt surely find that the strongest in enmity against those who believe are the Jews and the idolaters; and thou wilt find the nearest in love to those who believe to be those who say, 'We are Christians;' that is because there are amongst them priests and monks, and because they are not proud
5|83|And when they hear what has been revealed to the prophet, you will see their eyes gush with tears at what they recognise as truth therein; and they will say, 'O our Lord! we believe, so write us down amongst the witnesses
5|84|Why should we not believe in God and the truth that is given to us, nor desire that our Lord should make us enter with the upright people
5|85|Therefore has God rewarded them, for what they said, with gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; that is the reward of those who do good
5|86|but those who disbelieve and say our signs are lies, they are the fellows of hell
5|87|O ye who believe! forbid not the good things which God has made lawful for you, nor transgress; verily, God loves not the transgressors
5|88|But eat of what God has provided you lawfully of good things; and fear God, in whom ye believe
5|89|God will not catch you up for a casual word in your oaths, but He will catch you up for having what ye make deliberate oaths about; and the expiation thereof is to feed ten poor men with the middling food ye feed your families withal, or to clothe them, or to free a neck; but he who has not the means, then let him fast three days. That is the expiation of your oaths, when ye have sworn to keep your oaths; thus does God explain to you His signs, - haply ye may be grateful
5|90|O ye who believe! verily, wine, and el maisar, and statues, and divining (arrows) are only an abomination of Satan's work; avoid them then that haply ye may prosper
5|91|Satan only desires to place enmity and hatred between you by wine and maisar, and to turn you from the remembrance of God and from prayer; but will ye not desist
5|92|and obey God, and obey the apostles, and beware, for if ye turn back then know that our Apostle has only his message to preach
5|93|There is no crime in those who believe and do right, for having tasted food, when they fear God, and believe, and do what is right, and then fear Him, and believe, and then fear, and do good, for God loves those who do good
5|94|O ye who believe! God will try you with something of the game that your hands and your lances take, that God may know who fears Him in secret; and whoso transgresses after that, for him is grievous woe
5|95|O ye who believe! kill not game while ye are on pilgrimage. But he amongst you who kills it purposely, his compensation is the like of that which he has killed, in sheep -- of which two equitable persons amongst you shall be judge -- an offering brought to the Kaabah; or as an expiation, the food of poor persons, or an equivalent thereof in fasting, that he may taste the evil result of his deed. God pardons bygones; but whoso returns, God will take vengeance on him, for God is mighty and the avenger
5|96|Lawful for you is the game of the sea, and to eat thereof; a provision for you and for travellers; but forbidden you is the game of the land while ye are on pilgrimage; so fear God to whom ye shall be gathered
5|97|God has made the Kaabah, the sacred House, to be a station for men, and the sacred month, and the offering and its neck garland; this is that ye may know that God knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and that God knows all things
5|98|Know that God is keen to punish, but that God is forgiving, merciful
5|99|The Apostle has only to preach his message, but God knows what ye show and what ye hide
5|100|Say, 'The vile shall not be deemed equal with the good, although the abundance of the vile please thee.' Fear God then, O ye who have minds! haply ye may prosper
5|101|O ye who believe! ask not about things which if they be shown to you will pain you; but if ye ask about them when the (whole) Qur'an is revealed, they shall be shown to you. God pardons that, for God is forgiving and clement
5|102|People before you have asked about that, yet on the morrow did they disbelieve therein
5|103|And God has not ordained any Ba'hirah or Saibah, nor Wazilah nor 'Hami, but those who misbelieve invent a lie against God, for most of them do not understand
5|104|And when it is said to them, 'Come round to what God has revealed unto His Apostle,' they say, 'Enough for us is what we found our fathers agreed upon.' What! though their fathers knew nothing and were not guided
5|105|O ye who believe! mind yourselves; he who errs can do you no hurt when ye are guided: unto God is your return altogether, and He will declare to you that which ye do not know
5|106|O ye who believe! let there be a testimony between you when any one of you is on the point of death - at the time he makes his will - two equitable persons from amongst you; or two others from some other folk, if ye be knocking about in the land, and the calamity of death befall you; ye shall shut them both up after prayer, and they shall both swear by God, if ye doubt them, (saying), 'We will not sell (our testimony) for a price, though it were to a relative, nor will we hide God's testimony, verily, then, we should be among sinners
5|107|But if it shall be lit upon that they too have deserved the imputation of sin, then let two others stand up in their place with those who think them deserving of the imputation, the nearest two in kin, and they shall both swear by God, 'Indeed, our testimony is truer than the testimony of those two, and we have not transgressed, for then we should surely be of the unjust
5|108|thus is it easier for men to bear testimony according to the purport thereof, else must they fear lest an oath be given to rebut their own oath; but let them fear God and listen, for God guides not the people who do ill
5|109|On the day when God shall assemble the apostles and shall say, 'How were ye answered?' they will say, 'We have no knowledge; verily, thou art He who knoweth the unseen
5|110|When God said, 'O Jesus, son of Mary! remember my favours towards thee and towards thy mother, when I aided thee with the Holy Ghost, till thou didst speak to men in the cradle and when grown up. ' And when I taught thee the Book and wisdom and the law and the gospel; when thou didst create of clay, as it were, the likeness of a bird, by my power, and didst blow thereon, it became a bird; and thou didst heal the blind from birth, and the leprous by my permission; and when thou didst bring forth the dead by my permission; and when I did ward off the children of Israel from thee, when thou didst come to them with manifest signs, and those who misbelieved amongst them said, "This is naught but obvious magic
5|111|And when I inspired the apostles that they should believe in him and in my Apostle, they said, "We believe; do thou bear witness that we are resigned
5|112|When the apostles said, 'O Jesus, son of Mary! is thy Lord able to send down to us a table from heaven?' he said, 'Fear God, if ye be believers
5|113|and they said, 'We desire to eat therefrom that our hearts may be at rest, and that we may know that what thou hast told us is the truth, and that we may be thereby amongst the witnesses
5|114|Said Jesus the son of Mary, 'O God, our Lord! send down to us a table from heaven to be to us as a festival, - to the first of us and to the last, and a sign from Thee, - and grant us provision, for Thou art the best of providers
5|115|God said, 'Verily, I am about to send it down to you; but whoso disbelieves amongst you after that, verily, I will torment him with the torment which I have not tormented any one with in all the worlds
5|116|And when God said, 'O Jesus, son of Mary! is it thou who didst say to men, take me and my mother for two gods, beside God?' He said, 'I celebrate Thy praise! what ails me that I should say what I have no right to? If I had said it, Thou wouldst have known it; Thou knowest what is in my soul, but I know not what is in Thy soul; verily, Thou art one who knoweth the unseen
5|117|I never told them save what Thou didst bid me, - "Worship God, my Lord and your Lord," and I was a witness against them so long as I was amongst them; but when Thou didst take me away to thyself Thou wert the watcher over them, for Thou art witness over all
5|118|If Thou shouldst punish them, verily, they are Thy servants; if Thou shouldst forgive them, verily, Thou art the mighty and the wise
5|119|God said, 'This is the day when their confession shall profit the, confessors, for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever and for aye.' God is well pleased with them, and they well pleased with Him; that is the mighty happiness
5|120|God's is the kingdom of the heavens, and the earth, and all that is therein, and He is mighty over all
6|1|Praise belongs to God who created the heavens and the earth, and brought into being the darkness and the light. Yet do those who misbelieve hold Him to have peers
6|2|He it is who created you from clay; then He decreed a term, a term ordained with Him. And yet ye doubt thereof
6|3|He is God in the heavens and the earth. He knows your secret conduct and your plain, and He knows what ye earn
6|4|There came not to them any sign of the signs of their Lord, but they turned away
6|5|and they have called the truth a lie now that it has come to them, but there shall come to them the message of that at which they mocked
6|6|Do not they see how many a generation we have destroyed before them, whom we had settled in the earth as we have not settled for you, and sent the rain of heaven upon them in copious showers, and made the waters flow beneath them? Then we destroyed them in their sins, and raised up other generations after them
6|7|Had we sent down to thee a book on paper, and they had touched it with their hands, still those who misbelieve would have said, 'This is naught but obvious magic
6|8|They say, 'Why has not an angel been sent down to him?' but if we had sent down an angel, the affair would have been decided, and then they would have had no respite
6|9|And had we made him an angel, we should have made him as a man too; and we would have made perplexing for them that which they deem perplexing now
6|10|There have been prophets before thee mocked at, but that encompassed them which the scoffers among them mocked at
6|11|Say, 'Go about in the earth, then wilt thou see how has been the end of those who called them liars
6|12|Say, 'Whose is what is in the heavens and the earth?' Say, 'God's, who has imposed mercy on himself.' He will surely gather you together for the resurrection day. There is no doubt in that, but those who waste their souls will not believe
6|13|His is whatsoever dwells in the night or in the day, He both hears and knows
6|14|Say, 'Other than God shall I take for a patron, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He feedeth men, but is not fed.' Say, 'I am bidden to be the first of those resigned;' and it was said to me, 'Be not thou of the idolaters
6|15|Say, 'I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the torment of the mighty day
6|16|Whomsoever it is averted from on that day, God will have had mercy on; and that is obvious happiness
6|17|And if God touch thee with harm, there is none to take it off but He; and if He touch thee with good, He is mighty over all
6|18|He is sovereign over His servants, He is the wise, the aware
6|19|Say, 'What is the greatest witness?' Say, 'God is witness between you and me.' This Qur'an was inspired to me to warn you and those it reaches. Do ye really bear witness that with God are other gods? Say, 'I bear not witness thereto:' say, 'He is but one God, and I am clear of your associating (gods with him)
6|20|Those to whom we have brought the Book know him as they know their sons;- those who lose their souls do not believe
6|21|Who is more unjust than he who forges against God a lie, or says His signs are lies? verily, the unjust shall not prosper
6|22|On the day when we shall gather them all together, then shall we say to those who have associated others with ourself, 'Where are your associates whom ye did pretend
6|23|Then they will have no excuse but to say, 'By God our Lord, we did not associate (others with thee)
6|24|See how they lie against themselves, and how what they did forge deserts them
6|25|And they are some who listen unto thee, but we have placed a veil upon their hearts lest they should understand it, and in their ears is dullness of hearing; and though they saw each sign they would not believe therein; until when they come to thee to wrangle with thee, the unbelievers say, 'These are but old folks' tales
6|26|They forbid it and they avoid it;- but they destroy none but themselves; yet they do not perceive
6|27|But couldst thou see when they are set over the fire and say, 'Would that we were sent back! we would not call our Lord's signs lies, but we would be of the believers
6|28|Nay! now is shown to them what they did hide before; and could they be sent back, they would return to that they were forbidden, for they are very liars
6|29|They say there is naught but this life of ours in the world and we shall not be raised
6|30|But couldst thou see when they are set before their Lord; he says, 'Is not this the truth?' They say, 'Yea, by our Lord !' he says, 'Then taste the torment, for that ye did misbelieve
6|31|Losers are they who disbelieved in meeting God, until when the hour comes suddenly upon them they say, 'Woe is us for our neglect thereof!' for they shall bear their burdens on their backs, evil is what they bear
6|32|The life of this world is nothing but a game and a sport, and surely the next abode were better for those who fear. What! do they not understand
6|33|Full well we know that verily that which they say grieves thee; but they do not call thee only a liar for the unjust gainsay the signs of God
6|34|Called liars too were apostles before thee; but they were patient of being called liars and of being hurt until our help came to them; for there is none to change the words of God - now has there come to thee the story of those He sent
6|35|And if their turning from thee be hard for thee, and if thou canst seek for a shaft down into the earth, or a ladder up into the sky, to bring them a sign - but if God pleased He would bring them all to guidance, be thou not then of the ignorant
6|36|He only answers the prayer of those who listen; but the dead will God raise up, then unto Him shall they return
6|37|They say, 'Unless there be sent down some sign from his Lord' - say, 'Verily, God is able to send down a sign, but most of them do not know
6|38|There is not a beast upon the earth nor a bird that flies with both its wings, but is a nation like to you; we have omitted nothing from the Book; then to their Lord shall they be gathered
6|39|Those who say our signs are lies - deafness, dumbness, in the dark! whom He pleases does God lead astray, and whom He pleases He places on the right way
6|40|Say, 'Look you now! if there should come God's torment, or there should come to you the hour, on other than God would ye call, if ye do tell the truth
6|41|Nay, it is on Him that ye would call, and He will avert that which ye call upon Him for if He but please; and ye shall forget that which ye did associate with Him
6|42|Ere this we sent unto nations before thee, and we caught them in distress and trouble that haply they might humble themselves
6|43|And do they not, when our violence falls upon them, humble themselves?- but their hearts were hard, and Satan made seemly to them that which they had done
6|44|And when they forgot what they were reminded of, we opened for them the gates of everything, until when they rejoiced at what they had, we caught them up suddenly, and lo! they were in despair
6|45|And the uttermost part of the people who did wrong were cut off; praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
6|46|Say, 'Look you now! if God should catch your hearing and your sight, and should set a seal upon your hearts - who is god but God to bring you it again
6|47|Say, 'Look you now! if God's torment should come upon you suddenly or openly, would any perish save the people who do wrong
6|48|We do not send our messengers save as heralds of glad tidings and of warning, and whoso believes and acts aright, there is no fear for them, and they shall not be grieved
6|49|but those who say our signs are lies, torment shall touch them, for that they have done so wrong
6|50|Say, 'I do not say to you, mine are the treasuries of God, nor that I know the unseen; I do not say to you, I am an angel - if I follow aught but what I am inspired with -:' say, 'Is the blind equal to him who sees?' what! do ye not reflect
6|51|Admonish therewith those who fear that they shall be gathered unto their Lord; there is no patron for them but Him, and no intercessor; haply they may fear
6|52|Repulse not those who call upon their Lord in the morning and in the evening, desiring His face; they have no reckoning against thee at all, and thou hast no reckoning against them at all;- repulse them and thou wilt be of the unjust
6|53|So have we tried some of them by others, that they may say, 'Are these those unto whom God has been gracious amongst ourselves?' Does not God know those who give thanks
6|54|And when those who believe in our signs come to thee, say, 'Peace be on you! God hath prescribed for Himself mercy; verily, he of you who does evil in ignorance, and then turns again and does right,- verily, He is forgiving and merciful
6|55|Thus do we detail our signs, that the way of the sinners may be made plain
6|56|Say, 'I am forbidden to worship those ye call upon beside God;' say, 'I will not follow your lusts, for then should I err and not be of the guided
6|57|Say, 'I stand on a manifestation from my Lord, which ye call a lie. I have not with me what ye fain would hasten on, ???MISSING
6|58|Missing??? that the matter might be settled between me and you; but God knows best who are the unjust
6|59|With Him are the keys of the unseen. None knows them save He; He knows what is in the land and in the sea; and there falls not a leaf save that He knows it; nor a grain in the darkness of the earth, nor aught that is moist, nor aught that is dry, save that is in His perspicuous Book
6|60|He it is who takes you to Himself at night, and knows what ye have gained in the day; then He raises you up again, that your appointed time may be fulfilled; then unto Him is your return, and then will He inform you of what ye have done
6|61|He triumphs over His servants; He sends to them guardian angels, until, when death comes to any one of you, our messengers take him away; they pass not over any one
6|62|and then are they returned to God, their true sovereign. Is not His the rule? but He is very quick at reckoning up
6|63|Say, 'Who rescues you from the darkness of the land and of the sea?' ye call upon Him in humility and in secret, 'Indeed, if He would rescue us from this, we will surely be of those who give Him thanks
6|64|Say, 'God rescues from the darkness thereof, and from every trouble, yet ye associate others with Him
6|65|Say, 'He is able to send torment on you from above you and from beneath your feet, and to confuse you in sects, and to make some of you taste the violence of others.' See how we turn about the signs, that haply they may discriminate
6|66|Thy people called it a lie, and yet it is the truth. Say, 'I have not charge over you
6|67|to every prophecy is a set time, and in the end ye shall know
6|68|When thou dost see those who plunge deeply into the discussion of our signs, turn from them until they plunge deeply into some other discourse; for it may be that Satan may make thee forget; but sit not, after thou hast remembered, with the unjust people
6|69|Those who fear are not bound to take account of them at all, but mind!- haply they may fear
6|70|Leave those who have taken their religion for a play and a sport, whom this world's life hath deceived, and remind them thereby that a soul shall be given up for what it has earned; nor has it, beside God, patron or intercessor; and though it should compensate with the fullest compensation, it would not be accepted. Those who are given up for what they have gained, for them is a drink of boiling water, and grievous woe for that they have misbelieved
6|71|Say, 'Shall we call on what neither profits us nor harms us, and be thrown back upon our heels after God has guided us, like him whom Satan hath led away bewildered in the earth, who has companions who call him to guidance, "Come to us?" ' Say, 'Verily, God's guidance is the guidance, and we are bidden to resign ourselves unto the Lord of the worlds
6|72|and be ye steadfast in prayer and fear Him, for He it is to whom we shall be gathered
6|73|He it is who has created the heavens and the earth in truth; and on the day when He says, 'BE,' then it is. His word is truth; to Him is the kingdom on the day when the trumpets shall be blown; the knower of the unseen and of the evident; He is wise and well aware
6|74|When Abraham said to his father Azar, 'Dost thou take idols for gods? verily, I see thee and thy people in obvious error
6|75|Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom of heaven and of the earth, that he should be of those who are sure
6|76|And when the night overshadowed him he saw a star and said, 'This is my Lord;' but when it set he said, 'I love not those that set
6|77|And when he saw the moon beginning to rise he said, 'This is my Lord;' but when it set he said, 'If God my Lord guides me not I shall surely be of the people who err
6|78|And when he saw the sun beginning to rise he said, 'This is my Lord, this is greatest of all;' but when it set he said, 'O my people! verily, I am clear of what ye associate with God
6|79|verily, I have turned my face to him who originated the heaven and the earth, as a 'Hanif, and I am not of the idolaters
6|80|And his people disputed with him;- he said, 'Do ye dispute with me concerning God, when He has guided me? but I fear not what ye associate with Him unless my Lord should wish for anything. My Lord doth comprehend all things in His knowledge, will ye not then remember
6|81|How should I fear what ye associate with Him, when ye yourselves fear not to associate with God what He has sent down to you no power to do? Which then of the two sects is worthier of belief, if indeed ye know
6|82|Those who believe and do not obscure their faith with wrong, they are those who shall have security, and they are guided
6|83|These are our arguments which we gave to Abraham against his people;- we raise the rank of whom we will; verily, thy Lord is wise and knowing
6|84|And we gave to him Isaac and Jacob, each did we guide. And Noah we guided before and all his seed,- David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron,- for thus do we reward those who do good
6|85|And Zachariah and John and Jesus and Elias, all righteous ones
6|86|and Ishmael and Elisha and Jonas and Lot, each one have we preferred above the worlds
6|87|and of their fathers and their seed and brethren; we have chosen them and guided them into a right way
6|88|That is God's guidance; He guides those whom He will of His servants; and if they associate aught with Him,- vain is that which they have worked
6|89|It is to these we give the Book and judgment and prophecy; and if these disbelieve therein we have given them in charge to a people who shall not disbelieve
6|90|It is these that God hath guided, and by their guidance be thou led. Say, 'I will not ask you for it a hire: it is naught save a reminder to the worlds
6|91|They do not prize God at His true worth when they say, 'God has never revealed to mortal anything.' Say, 'Who revealed the Book wherewith Moses came, a light and a guidance unto men? Ye put it on papers which ye show, though ye hide much; and ye are taught what ye knew not, neither you nor your fathers.' Say, 'God,' then leave them in their discussion to play
6|92|This is the Book which we have revealed, a blessing and a confirmation to those which were before it, and that the mother of cities may be warned, with those who are round about her. Those who believe in the last day believe therein, and they unto their prayers will keep
6|93|Who is more unjust than he who devises against God a lie, or says, 'I am inspired,' when he was not inspired at all? and who says, 'I will bring down the like of what God has sent down;' but didst thou see when the unjust are in the floods of death, and the angels stretch forth their hands, 'Give ye forth your souls; today shall ye be recompensed with the torment of disgrace, for that ye did say against God what was not true, and were too proud to hear His signs
6|94|And ye come now single-handed as we created you at first, and ye have left behind your backs that which we granted you; and we see not with you your intercessors whom ye pretended were partners amongst you; betwixt you have the ties been cut asunder; and strayed away from you is what ye did pretend
6|95|Verily, God it is who cleaves out the grain and the date-stone; He brings forth the living from the dead, and it is He who brings the dead from the living. There is God! how then can ye be beguiled
6|96|He it is who cleaves out the morning, and makes night a repose, and the sun and the moon two reckonings - that is the decree of the mighty, the wise
6|97|He it is who made for you stars that ye might be guided thereby in the darkness of the land and of the sea. Now have we detailed the signs unto a people who do know
6|98|He it is who made you spring from one soul, and gave you a settlement and a depository. Now have we detailed the signs unto a people who discern
6|99|He it is who sends down from the heavens water; and we bring forth therewith growths of everything; and we bring forth therefrom green things, where - from we bring forth grain in full ear; and the palm, from its spathe come clusters within reach; and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, alike and unlike;- behold its fruit when it fruits and ripens! verily, in that ye have a sign for the people who believe
6|100|Yet they made the ginn partners with God, though He created them! and they ascribed to Him sons and daughters, though they have no knowledge; celebrated be His praise! and exalted be He above what they attribute to Him
6|101|The inventor of the heavens and the earth! how can He have a son, when He has no female companion, and when He has created everything, and everything He knows
6|102|There is God for you,- your Lord! There is no god but He, the Creator of everything; then worship Him, for He o'er everything keeps guard
6|103|Sight perceives Him not, but He perceives men's sights; for He is the subtle, the aware
6|104|Now has an insight from your Lord come unto you, and he who looks therewith it is for himself; but he who is blind thereto, it is against his soul; and I am not your keeper
6|105|Thus do we turn about the signs, that they may say, 'Thou hast studied,' and that we may explain to those who know
6|106|Follow what is revealed to thee from thy Lord; there is no god but He, and shun the idolaters
6|107|But had God pleased, they would not have associated aught with Him; but we have not made thee a keeper over them, nor art thou for them a warder
6|108|Do not abuse those who call on other than God, for then they may abuse God openly in their ignorance. So do we make seemly to every nation their work, then unto their Lord is their return, and He will inform them of what they have done
6|109|They swore by God with their most strenuous oath, that if there come to them a sign they will indeed believe therein. Say, 'Signs are only in God's hands;- but what will make you understand that even when one has come, they will not believe
6|110|We will overturn their hearts and their eye-sights, even as they believed not at first; and we will leave them, in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
6|111|And had we sent down unto them the angels, or the dead had spoken to them, or we had gathered everything unto them in hosts, they would not have believed unless that God pleased - but most of them are ignorant
6|112|So have we made for every prophet an enemy,- devils of men and ginns; some of them inspire others with specious speech to lead astray; but had thy Lord pleased they would not have done it; so leave them with what they do devise
6|113|And let the hearts of those who believe not in the hereafter listen to it; and let them be well pleased with it; and let them gain what they may gain
6|114|Of other than God shall I crave a decree, when it is He who has sent down to you the Book in detail, and those to whom we gave the Book know that it is sent down from thy Lord, in truth? be thou not then of those who doubt
6|115|The words of thy Lord are fulfilled in truth and justice; there is none to change His words, for He both hears and knows
6|116|But if thou followest most of those who are in the land, they will lead thee astray from the path of God; they only follow suspicion and they only (rest on) conjecture
6|117|Thy Lord, He knows best who errs from His path, and He knows best the guided
6|118|Eat then of what God's name has been pronounced over, if ye believe in His signs
6|119|What ails you that ye do not eat from what God's name is pronounced over, when He has detailed to you what is unlawful for you? Save what ye are forced to; but, verily, many will lead you astray by their fancies, without knowledge. Verily, thy Lord knows best the transgressors
6|120|Leave alone the outside of sin and the inside thereof; verily, those who earn sin shall be recompensed for what they have gained
6|121|But eat not of what the name of God has not been pronounced over, for, verily, it is an abomination. Verily, the devils inspire their friends that they may wrangle with you; but if ye obey them, verily, ye are idolaters
6|122|Is he who was dead and we have quickened him, and made for him a light, that he might walk therein amongst men, like him whose likeness is in the darkness whence he cannot come forth? Thus is made seemly to the misbelievers what they have done
6|123|And thus have we placed in every town the great sinners thereof, that they may use craft therein; but they use not craft except against themselves, although they do not understand
6|124|And when there comes to them a sign, they say, 'We will not believe until we are brought like what the apostles were brought;' God knows best where to put His message. There shall befall those who sin, meanness in God's eyes, and grievous torment for the craft they used
6|125|Whomsoever God wishes to guide, He expands his breast to Islam; but whomsoever He wishes to lead astray, He makes his breast tight and straight, as though he would mount up into heaven; thus does God set His horror on those who do not believe
6|126|This is the way of thy Lord - straight. We have detailed the signs unto a mindful people
6|127|for them is an abode of peace; and their Lord, He is their patron for what they have done
6|128|And on the day when He shall gather them all together, 'O assembly of the ginns! ye have got much out of mankind.' And their clients from among mankind shall say, 'O our Lord! much advantage had we one from another;' but we reached our appointed time which thou hadst appointed for us. Says He, 'The fire is your resort, to dwell therein for aye! save what God pleases; verily, thy Lord is wise and knowing
6|129|Thus do we make some of the unjust patrons of the others, for that which they have earned
6|130|O assembly of ginns and men! did there not come to you apostles from among yourselves, relating to you our signs, and warning you of the meeting of this very day of yours? They say, 'We bear witness against ourselves.' The life of this world deceived them, and they bear witness against themselves that they were unbelievers
6|131|That is because thy Lord would never destroy towns unjustly while their people are careless
6|132|but for every one are degrees of what they have done and thy Lord is not careless of that which they do
6|133|Thy Lord is rich, merciful; if He pleases He will take you off, and will cause what He pleases to succeed you; even as He raised you up from the seed of other people
6|134|Verily, what ye are promised will surely come, nor can ye frustrate it
6|135|Say, 'O my people! act according to your power, verily, I am acting too; and soon shall ye know whose is the future of the abode!' verily, the unjust shall not prosper
6|136|They set apart for God, from what He raises of tilth and of cattle, a portion, and they say, 'This is God's;' - as they pretend - ' and this is for our associates;' but that which is for their associates reaches not to God, and that which was for God does reach to their associates;- evil is it what they judge
6|137|Thus too have their associates made seemly to many of the idolaters the killing of their children, to destroy them, and to obscure for them their religion; but had God pleased they would not have done it, leave them alone and that which they have forged
6|138|And they say, 'These cattle and tilth are inviolable; none shall taste thereof, save such as we please' - as they pretend - and there are cattle whose backs are prohibited, and cattle over whom God's name is not pronounced,- forging a lie against Him! He shall reward them for what they have forged
6|139|And they say, 'What is in the wombs of these cattle is unlawful for our wives, but if it be (born) dead, then are they partners therein.' He will reward them for their attribution; verily, He is wise and knowing
6|140|Losers are they who kill their children foolishly, without knowledge, and who prohibit what God has bestowed upon them, forging a lie against God; they have erred and are not guided
6|141|He it is who brought forth gardens with trailed and untrailed vines, and the palms and corn land, with various food, and olives, and pomegranates, alike and unlike. Eat from the fruit thereof whene'er it fruits, and bring the dues thereof on the day of harvest, and be not extravagant; verily, He loves not the extravagant
6|142|Of cattle are there some to ride on and to spread. Eat of what God has bestowed upon you, and follow not the footsteps of Satan; verily, he is to you an open foe
6|143|Eight pairs,- of sheep two, and of goats two; say, 'Are the two males unlawful, or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? inform me with knowledge if ye tell the truth
6|144|And of camels two, and cows two; say, 'Are the two males unlawful, or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Were ye witnesses when God ordained for you these?- Then who is more unjust than he who devises a lie against God, to lead men astray without knowledge? verily, God guides not the unjust people
6|145|Say, 'I cannot find in what I am inspired with anything unlawful for the taster to taste; unless it be dead (of itself), or blood that has been shed, or the flesh of swine,- for that is a horror - or an abomination that is consecrated to other than God. But he who is forced, not willfully nor transgressing,- then, verily, thy Lord is forgiving and merciful
6|146|To those who were Jews did we prohibit everything that hath a solid hoof; and of oxen and sheep did we prohibit to them the fat, save what the backs of both do bear, or the inwards, or what is mixed with bone; with that did we recompense them for their rebellion, for, verily, we are true
6|147|And if they give thee the lie, say, 'Your Lord is of ample mercy, nor shall His violence be turned back from the sinful people
6|148|Those who associate others with God will say, 'Had God pleased, we had not so associated, nor our fathers; nor should we have forbidden aught.' Thus did they give the lie to those who came before them, until they tasted of our violence! Say, 'Have ye any knowledge? if so, bring it forth to us: ye only follow suspicion, and ye do but conjecture
6|149|Say, 'God's is the searching argument; and had He pleased He would have guided you all
6|150|Say, 'Come on then with your witnesses, who bear witness that God has prohibited these!' but if they do bear witness, bear thou not witness with them; nor follow the lust of those who say our signs are lies, and those who do not believe in the last day, or those who for their Lord make peers
6|151|Say, 'Come! I will recite what your Lord has forbidden you, that ye may not associate aught with Him, and (may show) kindness to your parents, and not kill your children through poverty;- we will provide for you and them;- and draw not nigh to flagrant sins, either apparent or concealed, and kill not the soul, which God hath forbidden save by right; that is what God ordains you, haply ye may understand
6|152|And draw not nigh unto the wealth of the orphan, save so as to better it, until he reaches full age; and give weight and measure with justice. We do not compel the soul save what it can compass; and when ye pronounce, then be just, though it be in the case of a relative
6|153|And God's compact fulfill ye; that is what He ordained you, haply ye may be mindful. Verily, this is my right way; follow it then, and follow not various paths, to separate yourselves from His way; that is what He has ordained you, haply ye may fear
6|154|Then we gave Moses the Book, complete for him who acts aright, and a decision and a guidance and a mercy; haply in the meeting of their Lord they will believe
6|155|This is the Book which we have sent down; it is a blessing; follow it then and fear; haply ye may obtain mercy
6|156|Lest ye say, 'The Book was only sent down to two sects before us; verily, we, for what they read, care naught
6|157|Or, lest ye should say, 'Had we had a book revealed to us we should surely have been more guided than they;' but there is come to them a manifest sign from their Lord, and a guidance and a mercy; who then is more unjust than he who calls God's signs lies, and turns from them? we will reward those who turn from our signs with an evil punishment for that they turned away
6|158|What do they expect but that the angels should come for them, or that thy Lord should come, or that some signs of thy Lord should come? On the day when some signs do come, its faith shall profit no soul which did not believe before, unless it has earned some good by its faith. Say, 'Wait ye expectant, then we wait expectant too
6|159|Verily, those who divided their religion and became sects, thou hast not to do with them, their matter is in God's hands, He will yet inform them of that which they have done
6|160|He who brings a good work shall have ten like it; but he who brings a bad work shall be recompensed only with the like thereof, for they shall not be wronged
6|161|Say, 'As for me, my Lord has guided me to the right way, a right religion,- the faith of Abraham the 'Hanif, for he was not of the idolaters
6|162|Say, 'Verily, my prayers and my devotion and my life and my death belong to God, the Lord of the worlds
6|163|He has no partner; that is what I am bidden; for I am first of those who are resigned
6|164|Say, 'Other than God shall I crave for a Lord when He is Lord of all?' but no soul shall earn aught save against itself; nor shall one bearing a burden bear the burden of another; and then unto your Lord is your return, and He will inform you concerning that whereon ye do dispute
6|165|He it is who made you vicegerents, and raised some of you above others in degree, to try you by that which he has brought you;- verily, thy Lord is swift to punish, but, verily, He is forgiving and merciful
7|1|M. S
7|2|A book revealed to thee,- so let there be no straitness in thy breast, that thou mayest warn thereby,- and a reminder to the believers
7|3|Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord, and follow not beside Him patrons; little is it that ye mind
7|4|Yet how many a town have we destroyed, and our violence came upon it by night, or while they slept at noon; and their cry, when our violence came upon them
7|5|was only to say, 'Verily, we were unjust
7|6|But we will of a surety question those to whom the prophets were sent
7|7|and we will narrate to them with knowledge, for we were not absent
7|8|The balance on that day is true, and whosesoever scales are heavy, they are prosperous
7|9|but whosesoever scales are light, they it is who lose themselves, for that they did act unjustly by our signs
7|10|We have established you in the earth, and we have made for you therein livelihoods; little is it that ye thank
7|11|and we created you, then we fashioned you, then we said unto the angels, ' Adore Adam,' and they adored, save Iblis, who was not of those who did adore
7|12|Said He, 'What hinders thee from adoring when I order thee?' he said, 'I am better than he; Thou hast created me from fire, and him Thou hast created out of clay
7|13|Said He, 'Then go down therefrom; what ails thee that thou shouldst be big with pride therein? go forth! verily, thou art of the little ones
7|14|He said, 'Respite me until the day when they shall be raised
7|15|He said, 'Verily, thou art of the respited
7|16|said he, 'For that Thou hast led me into error, I will lie in wait for them in Thy straight path
7|17|then I will surely come to them, from before them and from behind them; and most of them Thou shalt not find thankful
7|18|He said, 'Go forth there-from, despised, expelled; whoso follows thee, I will surely fill hell with you altogether
7|19|But, O Adam, dwell thou and thy wife in Paradise and eat from whence ye will, but draw not nigh unto this tree or ye will be of the unjust
7|20|But Satan whispered to them to display to them what was kept back from them of their shame, and he said, 'Your Lord has only forbidden you this tree lest ye should be twain angels, or should become of the immortals
7|21|and he swore to them both, 'Verily, I am unto you a sincere adviser
7|22|and he beguiled them by deceit, and when they twain tasted of the tree, their shame was shown them, and they began to stitch upon themselves the leaves of the garden. And their Lord called unto them, 'Did I not forbid you from that tree there, and say to you, Verily, Satan is to you an open foe
7|23|They said, 'O our Lord! we have wronged ourselves - and if Thou dost not forgive us and have mercy on us, we shall surely be of those who are lost
7|24|He said, 'Go ye down, one of you to the other a foe; but for you in the earth there is an abode, and a provision for a season
7|25|He said, 'Therein shall ye live and therein shall ye die, from it shall ye be brought forth
7|26|O sons of Adam! we have sent down to you garments wherewith to cover your shame, and plumage; but the garment of piety, that is better. That is one of the signs of God, haply ye may remember
7|27|O sons of Adam! let not Satan infatuate you as he drove your parents out of Paradise, stripping from them their garments, and showing them their shame; verily, he sees you - he and his tribe, from whence ye cannot see them. Verily, we have made the devils patrons of those who do not believe
7|28|and when they commit an abomination they say, 'We found our fathers at this, and God bade us do it.' Say, 'God bids you not to do abomination; do ye say against God that which ye do not know
7|29|Say, 'My Lord bids only justice: - set steadfastly your faces at every mosque and pray to Him, being sincere in your religion. As He brought you forth in the beginning, shall ye return
7|30|A sect He guides, and for a sect of them was error due; verily, they did take the devils for their patrons instead of God, and they did count that they were guided
7|31|O sons of Adam! take your ornaments to every mosque; and eat and drink, but do not be extravagant, for He loves not the extravagant
7|32|Say, 'Who has prohibited the ornaments of God which He brought forth for His servants, and the good things of His providing?' say, 'On the day of judgment they shall only be for those who believed when in the life of this world.' Thus do we detail the signs unto a people that do know
7|33|Say, 'My Lord has rely prohibited abominable deeds, the apparent thereof and the concealed thereof, and sin, and greed for that which is not right, and associating with God what He has sent down no power for, and saying against God that which ye do not know
7|34|Every nation has its appointed time, and when their appointed time comes they cannot keep it back an hour, nor can they bring it on
7|35|O sons of Adam! verily, there will come to you apostles from amongst you, narrating unto you my signs; then whoso fears God and does what is right, there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve
7|36|But those who say my signs are lies, and who are too big with pride for them, these are the fellows of the Fire, they shall dwell therein for aye
7|37|Who is more unjust than he who devises against God a lie, or says His signs are lies? These, their portion of the Book shall reach them, until when our messengers come to take their souls away, and say, 'Where is what ye used to call upon instead of God?' they say, 'They have strayed away from us;' and they shall bear witness against themselves that they have been misbelievers
7|38|He will say, 'Enter ye - amongst the nations who have passed away before you, both of ginns and men - into the fire;' whenever a nation enters therein, it curses its mate; until, when they have all reached it, the last of them will say unto the first, 'O our Lord! these it was who led us astray, give them double torment of the fire!' He will say, 'To each of you double! but ye do not know
7|39|And the first of them will say unto the last, 'Ye have no preference over us, so taste ye the torment for that which ye have earned
7|40|Verily, those who say our signs are lies and are too big with pride for them; for these the doors of heaven shall not be opened, and they shall not enter into Paradise until a camel shall pass into a needle's eye
7|41|It is thus that we reward the sinners; for them is a couch of hell-fire, with an awning above them! thus do we reward the unjust
7|42|But those who believe and do what is right - we will not oblige a soul more than its capacity - they are the fellows of Paradise, they shall dwell therein for aye
7|43|We will strip away what ill feeling is in their breasts - there shall flow beneath them rivers, and they shall say, 'Praise belongs to God who guided us to this! for we should not have been guided had not God guided us! - the apostles of our Lord did come to us with truth!' And it shall be cried out to them, 'This is Paradise which ye have as an inheritance for that which ye have done
7|44|And the fellows of Paradise will call out to the fellows of the Fire, 'We have now found that what our Lord promised us is true; have ye found that what your Lord promised you is true?' They will say, 'Yea!' And a crier from amongst them will cry out, 'The curse of God is on the unjust
7|45|who turn from the way of God and crave to make it crooked, while in the hereafter they do disbelieve
7|46|And betwixt the two there is a veil, and on al Aaraf are men who know each by marks; and they shall cry out to the fellows of Paradise, 'Peace be upon you!' they cannot enter it although they so desire
7|47|But when their sight is turned towards the fellows of the Fire, they say, 'O our Lord! place us not with the unjust people
7|48|And the fellows on al Aaraf will cry out to the men whom they know by their marks, and say, 'Of no avail to you were your collections, and what ye were so big with pride about
7|49|are these those ye swore that God would not extend mercy to? Enter ye Paradise; there is no fear for you, nor shall ye be grieved
7|50|But the fellows of the Fire shall cry out to the fellows of Paradise, 'Pour out upon us water, or something of what God has provided you with.' They will say, 'God has prohibited them both to those who misbelieve
7|51|who took their religion for a sport and a play; whom the life of the world beguiled.' - Today do we forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day, and for that they did deny our signs
7|52|Now we have brought them a book explaining it in knowledge, a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe
7|53|Do they wait now for aught but its interpretation?- on the day when its interpretation shall come, those who forgot it before will say, There did come to us the apostles of our Lord in truth, have we intercessors to intercede for us? or, could we return, we would do otherwise than we did.' They have lost themselves, and that which they devised has strayed away from them
7|54|Verily, your Lord is God who created the heavens and the earth in six days; then He made for the Throne. He covers night with the day - it pursues it incessantly - and the sun and the moon and the stars are subject to His bidding. Aye!- His is the creation and the bidding,- blessed be God the Lord of the worlds
7|55|Call on your Lord humbly and secretly, verily, He loves not the transgressors
7|56|And do not evil in the earth after it has been righted; and call upon Him with fear and earnestness; verily, the mercy of God is nigh unto those who do well
7|57|He it is who sends forth the winds as heralds before His mercy; until when they lift the heavy cloud which we drive to a dead land, and send down thereon water, and bring forth therewith every kind of fruit; - thus do we brine, forth the dead; haply ye may remember
7|58|And the good land brings forth its vegetation by the permission of its Lord; and that which is vile brings forth naught but scarcity. Thus do we turn about our signs for a people who are grateful
7|59|We did send Noah unto his people, and he said, 'O my people! serve God, ye have no god but Him; verily, I fear for you the torment of the mighty day
7|60|Said the chiefs of his people, 'Verily, we do surely see you in obvious error
7|61|Said he, 'O my people! there is no error in me; but I am an apostle from the Lord of the worlds
7|62|I preach to you the messages of my Lord, and I give you sincere advice; and I know from God what ye know not
7|63|What! do ye wonder that there came to you a reminder from your Lord by a man from amongst yourselves, to warn you, and that ye may fear? but haply ye may receive mercy
7|64|But they called him a liar, and we rescued him and those who were with him in the ark; and we drowned those who said our signs were lies, verily, they were a blind people
7|65|And unto 'Ad (we sent) their brother Hud, who said, 'O my people! serve God, ye have no god save Him; what! will ye not then fear
7|66|Said the chiefs of those who misbelieved amongst his people, 'Verily, we see thee in folly, and, verily, we certainly think thou art of the liars
7|67|He said, 'O my people! there is no folly in me; but I am an apostle from the Lord of the worlds
7|68|I preach to you the messages of your Lord; and, verily, I am to you a faithful adviser
7|69|What! do ye then wonder that there comes to you a reminder from your Lord by a man from amongst yourselves, to warn you? remember when He made you vicegerents after Noah's people and increased you in length of stature; remember, then, the benefits of God,- haply ye may prosper
7|70|They said, 'Hast thou come to us that we may worship God alone, and leave what our fathers used to worship? then bring us what thou dost threaten us with, if thou art of those who tell the truth
7|71|He said, 'There shall fall upon you from your Lord horror and wrath; do ye wrangle with me about names, which ye and your fathers have named yourselves, for which God sent down no power; wait then expectant, and I with you will wait expectant too
7|72|But we rescued him and those with him, by mercy from ourselves, and we cut off the hindermost parts of those who said our signs were lies and who were not believers
7|73|Unto Thamud (we sent) their brother Zalih, who said, 'O my people! worship God; ye have no god but Him: there has come to you a manifest sign from your Lord. This she-camel of God's is a sign for you; leave her then to eat in the land of God, and touch her not with evil, or there will overtake you grievous woe
7|74|And remember how he made you vicegerents after 'Ad and established you in the earth, so that ye took for yourselves castles on its plains and hewed out mountains into houses; and remember the benefits of God, and waste not the land, despoiling it
7|75|Said the chiefs of those who were big with pride from amongst his people to those who were weak,- to those amongst them who believed, 'Do ye know that Zalih is sent from his Lord?' They said, 'We do believe in that with which he is sent
7|76|Said those who were big with pride, 'Verily, in what ye do believe we disbelieve
7|77|Then they did hamstring the camel, and rebelled against the bidding of their Lord and said, 'O Zalih! bring us what thou didst threaten us with, if thou art of those who are sent
7|78|Then the earthquake took them, and in the morning they lay prone in their dwellings
7|79|and he turned away from them and said, 'O my people! I did preach to you the message of my Lord, and I gave you good advice! but ye love not sincere advisers
7|80|And Lot, when he said to his people, 'Do ye approach an abomination which no one in all the world ever anticipated you in
7|81|verily, ye approach men with lust rather than women - nay, ye are a people who exceed
7|82|But his people's answer only was to say, 'Turn them out of your village, verily, they are a people who pretend to purity
7|83|But we saved him and his people, except his wife, who was of those who lingered
7|84|and we rained down upon them a rain; - see then how was the end of the sinners
7|85|And unto Midian did we send their brother Shohaib, who said, 'O my people! serve God, ye have no god save Him. There has come to you a manifest sign from your Lord; then give good weight and measure, and be not niggardly of your gifts to men, and do not evil in the earth after it has been righted. That is better for you if ye are believers
7|86|and sit not down in every path, threatening and turning from the path of God those who believe in Him, and craving to make it crooked. Remember when ye were few and He multiplied you; and see what was the end of the evildoers
7|87|And if there be a party of you who believe in what I am sent with, and a party who believe not, then wait patiently until God judges between us, for He is the best of judges
7|88|Said the crowd of those who were big with pride amongst His people, 'We will of a surety turn thee out, O Shohaib! and those who believe with thee, from our village; or else thou shalt return unto our faith.' Said he, 'What even if we be averse therefrom
7|89|We shall have devised a lie against God if we return unto your faith, after God has saved us from it; and what should ail us that we should return thereto, unless that God our Lord should please? our Lord embraces everything in His knowledge; - on God do we rely. O our Lord! open between us and between our people in truth, for Thou art the best of those who open
7|90|And the chiefs of those who disbelieved amongst his people said, 'If ye follow Shohaib, verily, ye shall be the losers
7|91|then there took them the earthquake, and in the morning they lay in their dwellings prone
7|92|Those who called Shohaib a liar, (were) as though they had not dwelt therein! - Those who called Shohaib a liar, they were the losers then
7|93|And he turned away from them and said, 'O my people! I preached to you the messages of my Lord, and I gave you good advice; how should I be vexed for a people who do misbelieve
7|94|We have not sent unto a city any prophet except we overtook the people thereof with trouble and distress, that haply they might humble themselves
7|95|and then did we give them, in exchange for evil, good, until they increased and said, 'Distress and joy both touched our fathers;' then we overtook them suddenly ere they could perceive
7|96|Had the people of the town but believed and feared, we would have opened up for them blessings from the heavens and from the earth; but they said it was a lie, so we overtook them for that which they had earned
7|97|Were the people of these cities then secure that our violence would not come on them by night, while they slept
7|98|were the people of these cities secure that our violence would not come on them in the morning whilst they played
7|99|were they secure from the craft of God? none feel secure from the craft of God except a people that shall lose
7|100|Is it not shown to those who inherit the earth after its (former) people, that, did we please, we would smite them in their sins, and would set a stamp upon their hearts, and then they should not hear
7|101|These cities, we do relate to thee their stories. There came to them our apostles with manifest signs; but they did not at all believe in what they called a lie before.- Thus doth God set a stamp upon the hearts of those who misbelieve
7|102|Nor did we find in most of them a covenant; but we did find most of them workers of abomination
7|103|Then we raised up after them Moses with our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs; but they dealt unjustly therewith, and see what was the end of the evildoers
7|104|Moses said, 'O Pharaoh! verily, I am an apostle from the Lord of the worlds
7|105|it is not right for me to speak against God aught but the truth. I have come to you with a manifest sign from my Lord; send then the children of Israel with me
7|106|Said he, 'If thou hast come with a sign, then bring it, if thou art of those who speak the truth
7|107|Then he threw his rod down, and lo! it was an obvious snake
7|108|and he drew out his hand, and lo! it was white to the beholders
7|109|Said the chiefs of Pharaoh's people, 'Verily, this is surely a knowing magician
7|110|he desires to turn you out of your land; - what is it then ye bid
7|111|They said, 'Give him and his brother some hope; and send into the cities to collect
7|112|and bring you every knowing magician
7|113|And the magician came to Pharaoh and said, 'Is there indeed a reward for us if we are conquerors
7|114|He said, 'Yea! and ye shall be of those who draw nigh unto me
7|115|They said, 'O Moses! wilt thou cast down (thy rod) or shall we be (first) to throw
7|116|Said he, 'Throw down;' and when they threw down, they did enchant the people's eyes, and made them dread, and brought a mighty magic
7|117|But we inspired Moses (saying), 'Throw down thy rod, and it will gulp down that which they devise
7|118|and the truth stood fast, and vain was that which they had done
7|119|and they were conquered there, and turned back feeling small
7|120|and the magicians threw themselves down adoring
7|121|Said they, 'We believe in the Lord of the worlds
7|122|the Lord of Moses and Aaron
7|123|Said Pharaoh, 'Do ye believe in him ere I give you leave? This is craft which ye have devised in the land, to turn its people out therefrom, but soon shall ye know
7|124|I will cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, then I will crucify you altogether
7|125|They said, 'Verily, we unto our Lord return
7|126|nor dost thou take vengeance on us, save for that we believe in the signs of our Lord, when they come to us. 'O our Lord! pour out upon us patience, and take us to Thyself resigned
7|127|And the chiefs of Pharaoh's people said, 'Will ye leave Moses and his people, to do evil in the land, and to leave thee and thy gods?' Said he, 'We will have their sons slain and their women we will let live, for, verily, we are triumphant over them
7|128|Said Moses unto his people, 'Ask for aid from God and be patient; verily, the earth is God's! He gives it for an inheritance to whom He pleases of His servants, and the future is for those who fear
7|129|They said, 'We have been hurt before thou didst come to us, and since thou hast come to us.' Said he, 'It may be that your Lord will destroy your foe, and will make you succeed him in the earth; and He will see how ye act
7|130|We had overtaken Pharaoh's people with the years (of dearth) and scarcity of fruits, that haply they might remember
7|131|but when there came to them a good thing they said, 'This is ours;' and if there befell them an evil, they took the augury from Moses and those with him; - is not their augury only in God's hands? - but most of them know not
7|132|And they said, 'Whatever thou dost bring us as a sign to enchant us therewith, yet will we not believe in thee
7|133|Then we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood, - signs detailed; but they were big with pride and were a people who did sin
7|134|And when there fell upon them the plague, they said, 'O Moses! call upon thy Lord for us, as He has covenanted with thee; verily, if thou dost remove the plague from us, we will believe in thee; and we will assuredly send with thee the children of Israel
7|135|But when we removed from them the plague until the appointed time which they should reach, lo! then they broke their promise
7|136|But we took vengeance on them, and we drowned them in the sea, for that they said our signs were lies and were careless thereof
7|137|And we gave as an inheritance unto the people who had been weak, the eastern quarters of the earth and the western quarters thereof, which we had blest; and the good word of thy Lord was fulfilled on the children of Israel, for that they were patient; and we destroyed that which Pharaoh and his people had made and that which they had piled
7|138|And with the children of Israel we passed across the sea; and they came unto a people devoted to their idols, and said, 'O Moses! make for us a god as they have gods.' Said he, 'Verily, ye are ignorant people
7|139|Verily, these - destroyed shall be that which they are given to; and vain is that which they have done
7|140|He said, 'Other than God then do ye crave for a god, when He has preferred you above the worlds
7|141|And when we saved you from Pharaoh's people who wrought you evil woe, killing your sons, and letting your women live; and in that was a mighty trial from your Lord
7|142|And we appointed for Moses thirty nights, and completed them with ten (more), so that the time appointed by his Lord was completed to forty nights. And Moses said unto his brother Aaron, 'Be thou my vicegerent amongst my people, and do what is right, and follow not the path of the evildoers
7|143|And when Moses came to our appointment, and his Lord spake unto him, he said, 'O my Lord! show me, - that I may look on thee!' He said, Thou canst not see me; but look upon the mountain, and if it remain steady in its place, thou shalt see me;' but when his Lord appeared unto the mountain He made it dust, and Moses fell down in a swoon! And when he came to himself, he said, 'Celebrated be thy praise! I turn repentant unto Thee, and I am the first of those who are resigned
7|144|He said, 'O Moses! verily, I have chosen thee over the people with my messages and my words, take then what I have brought thee, and be of those who thank
7|145|And we wrote for him upon tablets an admonition concerning everything, and a detailing of everything: 'Take them then with firmness, and bid thy people take them for what is best thereof. I will show you the abode of those who work abominations
7|146|I will turn from my signs those who are big with pride in the earth without right; and if they see every sign they shall not believe therein, and if they see the path of rectitude they shall not take it for a path; but if they see the path of error they shall take it for a path; - that is because they have said our signs are lies and have been careless of them
7|147|But those who say our signs and the meeting of the last day are lies,-- vain are their works: shall they be rewarded save for that which they have done
7|148|And Moses' people after him took to themselves of their ornaments a corporeal calf that lowed; did they not see that it could not speak with them, nor could it guide them in the path? They took it and they were unjust
7|149|but when they bit their hands with fruitless rage and saw that they had gone astray, they said,' Verily, if our Lord have not compassion on us and forgive us we shall surely be of those who lose
7|150|And when Moses returned unto his people angry and grieved, he said, 'Evil is it that ye have done after me! Would ye hasten on the bidding of your Lord?' and he threw down the tablets and took his brother by the head to drag him towards him, but he said, 'O son of my mother! verily, the people weakened me and well-nigh killed me; make not then mine enemies glad about me, and put me not with the unjust people
7|151|He said, 'O Lord! pardon me and my brother, and let us enter into Thy mercy; for Thou art the most merciful of the merciful
7|152|Verily, these have taken to themselves a calf; there shall reach them wrath from their Lord, and abasement in the life of this world; for thus do we reward those who forge a lie
7|153|But those who have done bad works, and then turn again after them and believe,- verily, thy Lord, after that, is forgiving and merciful
7|154|And when Moses' wrath calmed down he took the tables, in the inscription of which was guidance and mercy for those who dread their Lord
7|155|And Moses chose from his people seventy men for our appointment; and when the earthquake took them he said, 'O my Lord! hadst Thou willed, Thou hadst destroyed them before and me. Wilt Thou destroy us for what the fools amongst us have done? This is naught but Thy trial, wherewith Thou dost lead astray whom Thou pleasest and guidest whom Thou pleasest; Thou art our patron! forgive us and have mercy on us, for Thou art the best of those who do forgive
7|156|And write down for us in this world good, and in the future too; verily, we are guided unto Thee.' He said, 'My punishment - with it I fall on whom I will; and my mercy embraceth everything; and I will write it down for those who fear, and who give alms, and those who in our signs believe
7|157|who follow the Apostle - the illiterate prophet, whom they find written down with them in the law and the gospel, bidding them what is reasonable and forbidding them what is wrong, and making lawful for them what is good, and making unlawful evil things; and setting down for them their burdens and the yokes which were upon them; - to those who believe in him and aid him and help him and follow the law which has been sent down with him - they shall be the prosperous
7|158|Say, 'O ye folk! verily, I am the Apostle of God unto you all' -, of Him whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, there is no god but He! He quickens and He kills! believe then in God and His Apostle, the illiterate prophet,- who believes in God and in His words - then follow him that haply ye may be guided
7|159|Amongst Moses' people is a nation guided in truth, and thereby act they justly
7|160|And we cut them up into twelve tribes, each a nation; and we revealed unto Moses, when his people asked him for drink, 'Strike with thy staff the rock!' and there gushed forth from it twelve springs, each folk knew their drinking place. And we overshadowed them with the cloud; and sent down upon them the manna and the quails, 'Eat of the good things we have provided you with!' - Yet they did not wrong us, but it was themselves they wronged
7|161|And when it was said unto them, 'Dwell in this city and eat therefrom as ye will, and say 'hittatun and enter the gate adoring; so will we pardon you your sins; - we will increase those who do well
7|162|But those amongst them who did wrong changed it for another word than which was said to them; and we sent upon them a plague from heaven for that they were unjust
7|163|Ask them too about the city which stood by the sea, when they transgressed upon the Sabbath; when their fish came to them on the Sabbath day sailing straight up to them; but on the days when they kept not the Sabbath, they came not to them, thus did we try them for the abominations that they wrought
7|164|And when a nation from amongst them said, 'Why do ye warn a people whom God would destroy, or punish with severe torment?' they said, 'As an excuse to your Lord, that haply they may fear
7|165|But when they forgot what they had been reminded of, we saved those who forbade evil, but we overtook those who did wrong with punishment; - evil was the abomination that they did
7|166|but when they rebelled against what they were forbidden, we said to them, 'Become ye apes, despised and spurned
7|167|and then thy Lord proclaimed that He would surely send against them till the resurrection day, those who should wreak them evil torment; verily, thy Lord is quick at following up, but, verily, He is forgiving, merciful
7|168|We cut them up in the earth into nations. Of them are the righteous, and of them are the reverse of that; we have tried them with good things and with bad things; haply they may return
7|169|But there succeeded them successors who inherited the Book! They take the goods of this lower world and say, 'It will be forgiven us.' But if the like goods came to them they would take them too! Was there not taken from them a covenant by the Book, that they should not say against God aught but the truth? Yet they study therein! But the abode of the future life is better for those who fear - do ye not then understand
7|170|But those who hold fast by the Book and are steadfast in prayer - verily, we will not waste the hire of those who do right
7|171|And when we shook the mountain over them, as though it were a shadow, and they thought it would fall upon them (saying), 'Take ye what we have given you with firmness, and remember what is therein; haply ye may fear
7|172|And when thy Lord took from the children of Adam out of their loins their seed, and made them bear witness against themselves, ' Am I not your Lord?' They said, 'Yea! we do bear witness' - lest ye should say on the day of resurrection, 'Verily, for this we did not care
7|173|or say, 'Verily, our fathers associated others with God before us, and we were but their seed after them: wilt Thou then destroy us for what vaindoers did
7|174|Thus do we detail the signs; haply they may return
7|175|Read to them the declaration of him to whom we brought our signs, and who stepped away therefrom, and Satan followed him, and he was of those who were beguiled
7|176|Had we pleased we would have exalted him thereby, but lie crouched upon the earth and followed his lust, and his likeness was as the likeness of a dog, whom if thou shouldst attack he hangs out his tongue, or if thou should leave him, hangs out his tongue too. That is the likeness of the people who say our signs are lies. Tell them then these tales - haply they may reflect
7|177|Evil is the likeness of a people who say our signs are lies; themselves it is they wrong
7|178|Whoever Allah guides - he is the [rightly] guided; and whoever He sends astray - it is those who are the losers
7|179|We have created for hell many of the ginn and of mankind; they have hearts and they discern not therewith; they have eyes and they see not therewith; they have ears and they hear not therewith; they are like cattle, nay, they go more astray! these it is who care not
7|180|But God's are the good names; call on Him then thereby, and leave those who pervert His names; they shall be rewarded for that which they have done
7|181|And of those whom we have created is a nation who are guided in truth and thereby act with equity
7|182|but they who say our signs are lies, we will bring them down by degrees from whence they know not
7|183|I will let them range; - verily, my stratagem is efficacious
7|184|Do they not then reflect that their companion is not possessed? he is but an obvious warner
7|185|Do they not behold the kingdoms of the heavens and of the earth, and what things God has created, and (see that), it may be, their time is already drawing nigh? in what relation then will they believe
7|186|He whom God leads astray there is no guide for him! He leaves them in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
7|187|They will ask you about the Hour, for what time it is fixed? - say, 'The knowledge thereof is only with my Lord; none shall manifest it at its time but He; it is heavy in the heavens and the earth, it will not come to you save on a sudden.' They will ask as though thou wert privy to it, say, 'The knowledge thereof is only with God,' - but most folk do not know
7|188|Say, 'I cannot control profit or harm for myself, save what God will. If I knew the unseen I should surely have much that is good, nor would evil touch me; I am but a warner and a herald of good tidings unto a people who believe
7|189|He it is who created you from one soul, and made therefrom its mate to dwell therewith; and when he covered her she bore a light burden and went about therewith; but when it grew heavy they called on God, Lord of them both, 'Surely if thou givest us a rightly-shaped child we shall of a surety be of those who thank
7|190|And when He gave them both a rightly-shaped child they joined partners with Him for that which He had given them, but exalted be God above that which they associate with Him
7|191|Will they associate with Him those who cannot create aught, but are themselves created
7|192|which have no power to help them, and cannot even help themselves
7|193|But if ye call them unto guidance they will not follow you. It is the same to them if Thou dost call them or if Thou dost hold thy tongue
7|194|Those whom ye call on other than God are servants like yourselves. Call on them then, and let them answer you, if so be ye tell the truth
7|195|Have they feet to walk with? or have they hands to hold with? or have they eyes to see with? or have they ears to hear with? Call upon your partners; then plot against me, and do not wait
7|196|Verily, my patron is God, who hath sent down the Book, and He is the patron of the righteous
7|197|But those whom ye call on beside Him cannot help you, nor can they even help themselves
7|198|But if ye call them unto the guidance they will not hear, thou mayest see them looking towards thee, yet they do not see
7|199|Take to pardon, and order what is kind, and shun the ignorant
7|200|and if an incitement from the devil incites you, then seek refuge in God: verily, He both hears and knows
7|201|Verily, those who fear God, if a wraith from the devil touch, mention Him, and lo! they see
7|202|And their brethren he shall increase in error, then they shall not desist
7|203|Shouldst Thou not bring them a sign they say, 'Hast Thou not yet made choice of one?' Say, 'I only follow what is inspired to me by my Lord. These are perceptions from my Lord, and a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe
7|204|And when the Qur'an is read, then listen thereto and keep silence; haply ye may obtain mercy
7|205|And remember thy Lord within thyself humbly and with fear, not openly in words, in the morning and in the evening; and be not of those who do not care
7|206|Verily, they who are with my Lord are not too big with pride for His service, but they do celebrate His praise, and Him they do adore
8|1|They will ask thee about the spoils. Say, 'The spoils are God's and the Apostle's; fear God and settle it amongst yourselves; obey God and the Apostle if ye do believe
8|2|Verily, the believers are those who, when God's name is mentioned, their hearts sink with fear; and when His signs are rehearsed to them they increase them in faith; and on their Lord do they rely
8|3|who are steadfast in prayer, and of what we have bestowed upon them give in alms
8|4|these are in truth believers; to them are degrees with their Lord, and forgiveness, and a generous provision
8|5|As thy Lord caused thee to go forth from thy house with the truth, although a sect of the believers were averse therefrom
8|6|They wrangled with thee about the truth after it was made plain, as though they were being driven on to death and looked thereon
8|7|and when God promised you that one of the two troops should be yours, and ye would fain have had those who had no arms. God wished to prove the truth true by His words, and to cut off the hindermost parts of those who misbelieve
8|8|to prove the truth true, and to make vain the vain, although the sinners are averse
8|9|When ye asked for succour from your Lord, and He answered you, 'I will assist you with a thousand angels, with others in reserve
8|10|God made it only glad tidings to quiet your hearts therewith; for victory is only from God! verily, God is mighty and wise
8|11|When drowsiness covered you as a security from Him, and He sent down upon you from the heavens water to purify you withal, and to take away from you the plague of Satan, and to tie up your hearts and to make firm your footsteps
8|12|When your Lord inspired the angels - 'Verily, I am with you; make ye firm then those who believe; I will cast dread into the hearts of those who misbelieve,- strike off their necks then, and strike off from them every finger tip
8|13|That is, because they went into opposition against God and His Apostle; for he who goes into opposition against God and His Apostle - verily, God is keen to punish
8|14|There, taste it! since for the misbelievers is the torment of the Fire
8|15|O ye who believe! when ye meet those who misbelieve in swarms, turn not to them your hinder parts
8|16|for he who turns to them that day his hinder parts, save turning to fight or rallying to a troop, brings down upon himself wrath from God, and his resort is hell, and an ill journey shall it be
8|17|Ye did not slay them, but it was God who slew them; nor didst thou shoot when thou didst shoot, but God did shoot, to try the believers from Himself with a goodly trial; verily, God both hears and knows
8|18|There! verily, God weakens the stratagem of the misbelievers
8|19|If ye wish the matter to be decided, a decision has now come to you; but if ye desist, it is better for you; and if ye turn back we will turn too, and your troop shall avail nothing, great in number though it be, since God is with the believers
8|20|O ye who believe! obey God and His Apostle, and turn not from Him while ye hear
8|21|and be not like those who say, 'We hear,' and yet they hear not
8|22|Verily, the worst of beasts in God's sight are the deaf, the dumb who do not understand
8|23|Had God known any good in them, He would have made them hear; but had He made them hear, they would have turned back and have swerved aside
8|24|O ye who believe! answer God and His Apostle when He calls you to that which quickens you; and know that God steps in between man and his heart; and that to Him ye shall be gathered
8|25|And fear temptation, which will not light especially on those of you who have done wrong; but know that God is keen to punish
8|26|Remember when ye were few in number and weak in the land, fearing lest people should snatch you away; then He sheltered you and aided you with victory, and provided you with good things; haply ye may give thanks
8|27|O ye who believe! be not treacherous to God and His Apostle; nor be treacherous to your engagement while ye know
8|28|Know that your wealth and your children are but a temptation, and that God - with Him is mighty hire
8|29|O ye who believe! if ye fear God He will make for you a discrimination, and will cover for you your offences, and will forgive you; for God is Lord of mighty grace
8|30|And when those who misbelieve were crafty with thee to detain thee a prisoner, or kill thee, or drive thee forth; they were crafty, but God was crafty too, for God is best of crafty ones
8|31|But when our verses were rehearsed to them they said, 'We have already heard.- If we pleased we could speak like this; verily, this is nothing but tales of those of yore
8|32|When they said, 'O God! if this be truth, and from Thee, then rain upon us stones from heaven or bring us grievous woe
8|33|But God would not torment them while thou art amongst them; nor was God going to torment them while they asked Him to forgive
8|34|But what ails them that God should not torment them while they turn folk away from the Holy Mosque, though they are not the guardians thereof - its guardians are only the pious?- but most of them know not
8|35|Their prayer at the House was naught but whistling and clapping hands!- taste then the torment for that ye misbelieved
8|36|Verily, those who misbelieve expend their wealth to turn folk from the path of God; but they shall spend it, and then it shall be for them sighing, and then they shall be overcome! Those who misbelieve, into hell shall they be gathered
8|37|that God may distinguish the vile from the good, and may put the vile, some on the top of the other, and heap all up together, and put it into hell!- These are those who lose
8|38|Say to those who misbelieve, if they desist they will be forgiven what is past; but if they return,- the course of those of former days has passed away
8|39|Fight them then that there should be no sedition, and that the religion may be wholly God's; but if they desist, then God on what they do doth look
8|40|But if they turn their backs, then know that God is your Lord; a good Lord is He, and a good help
8|41|and know that whenever ye seize anything as a spoil, to God belongs a fifth thereof, and to His Apostle, and to kindred and orphans, and the poor and the wayfarer; if ye believe in God and what we have revealed unto our servants on the day of the discrimination,- the day when the two parties met; and God is mighty over all
8|42|When ye were on the near side of the valley, and they were on the far side, and the camels were below you; had ye made an appointment then ye would have failed to keep your appointment - but it was that God might accomplish a thing that was as good as done! that he who was to perish might perish with a manifest sign; and that he who was to live might live with a manifest sign; for, verily, God hears and knows
8|43|When God showed thee them in thy dream as though they were but few; but had He shown thee them as though they were many, ye would have been timid, and ye would have quarrelled about the matter;- but God preserved you; verily, He knows the nature of men's breasts
8|44|And when He showed them to you, as ye encountered them, as few in your eyes; and made you seem few in their eyes; that God might accomplish a thing that was as good as done; for unto God do things return
8|45|O ye who believe! when ye encounter a troop, then stand firm and remember God; and haply ye may prosper
8|46|and fear God and His Apostle, and do not quarrel or be timid, so that your turn of luck go from you; but be ye patient, verily, God is with the patient
8|47|And be not like those who went forth from their homes with insolence, and for appearance sake before men, and to turn folks off God's way; for all they do God comprehends
8|48|And when Satan made their works appear seemly to them, and said, 'There is none amongst mankind to conquer you today, for, verily, I am your neighbour!' and when the two troops came in sight of each other, he turned upon his heels and said, 'Verily, I am clear of you! verily, I see what you see not! verily, I fear God, for God is keen to punish
8|49|And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said, 'Their religion hath beguiled these men, but he who relies upon God, verily, God is mighty and wise
8|50|Couldst thou see when the angels take away the souls of those who misbelieve; they smite them on their faces and hinder parts.- 'Taste ye the torment of burning
8|51|that is for what your hands have sent on before; and for that God is no unjust one towards his servants
8|52|As was the wont of Pharaoh's people and those before them! they disbelieved in the signs of God, and God overtook them in their sins; verily, God is strong and keen to punish
8|53|That is because God is not one to change a favour He has favoured a people with, until they change what they have in themselves, and for that God both hears and knows
8|54|As was the wont of Pharaoh's people and those before them! they said our signs were lies, and we destroyed them in their sins, and drowned Pharaoh's people; and all of them were evildoers
8|55|Verily, the worst of beasts in God's eyes are those who misbelieve and will not believe
8|56|with whom if thou dost make a league, they break their league each time, for they fear not God
8|57|but shouldst thou ever catch them in war, then make those who come after them run by their example, haply they may remember then
8|58|And shouldst thou ever fear from any people treachery, then throw it back to them in like manner; verily, God loves not the treacherous
8|59|Deem not that those who misbelieve can win; verily, they cannot make (God) powerless
8|60|Prepare ye against them what force and companies of horse ye can, to make the enemies of God, and your enemies, and others beside them, in dread thereof. Ye do not know them, but God knows them! and whatever ye expend in God's way He will repay you; and ye shall not be wronged
8|61|But if they incline to peace, incline thou to it too, and rely upon God; verily, He both hears and knows
8|62|But if they wish to betray thee, then God is enough for thee! He it is who supports thee with His help and with the believers
8|63|and reconciles their hearts! Didst thou expend all that is in the earth thou couldst not reconcile their hearts, but God reconciled them, verily, He is mighty and wise
8|64|O thou prophet ! God is sufficient for thee, with those of the believers who follow thee
8|65|O thou prophet! urge on the believers to fight. If there be of you twenty patient men, they shall conquer two hundred; if there be of you a hundred, they shall conquer a thousand of those who misbelieve, because they are a people who did not discern
8|66|Now has God made it light for you; He knows that there is a weakness amongst you: but if there be amongst you but a patient hundred, they will conquer two hundred; and if there be of you a thousand, they will conquer two thousand, by the permission of God,- for God is with the patient
8|67|It has not been for any prophet to take captives until he hath slaughtered in the land! Ye wish to have the goods of this world, but God wishes for the next, for God is mighty, wise
8|68|Were it not for a book from God that had gone before, there would have touched you, for that which ye took, a mighty punishment
8|69|Eat of what spoils ye have taken, what is lawful and good; and fear God, verily, God is forgiving and merciful
8|70|O thou prophet! say to such of the captives as are in your hands, 'If God knows of any good in your hearts, he will give you better than that which is taken from you, and will forgive you; for God is forgiving and merciful
8|71|But if they desire to betray thee,- they have betrayed God before! but He hath given you power over them; for God is knowing, wise
8|72|Verily, those who believe and have fled and fought strenuously with their wealth and persons in God's way, and those who have given refuge and help, these shall be next of kin to each other. But those who believe, but have not fled, ye have naught to do with their claims of kindred, until they flee as well. But if they ask you for aid for religion's sake, then help is due from you, except against a people between whom and you there is an alliance; for God on what ye do doth look
8|73|And those who misbelieve, some of them are next of kin to others - unless ye act the same there will be sedition in the land, and great corruption
8|74|Those who believe and have fled and fought strenuously in God's cause, and those who have given a refuge and a help, those it is who believe; to them is forgiveness and generous provision due
8|75|And those who have believed afterwards and have fled and fought strenuously with you; these too are of you, but blood relations are nearer in kin by the Book of God. Verily, God all things doth know
9|1|AN immunity from God and His Apostle to those idolaters with whom ye have made a league
9|2|Roam ye at large in the land for four months, but know that ye cannot make God helpless, and that God disgraces the misbelievers
9|3|A proclamation from God and His Apostle to the people on the day of the greater pilgrimage, that God is clear of the idolaters as is His Apostle! If then ye repent it is better for you; but if ye turn your backs, then know that ye cannot make God helpless. Give to those who misbelieve glad tidings of grievous woe
9|4|Except to those of the idolaters with whom ye have made a league, and who then have not failed you at all, and have not backed up any one against you. Fulfill for them then your covenant until the time agreed upon with them; verily, God loves those who fear
9|5|But when the sacred months are passed away, kill the idolaters wherever ye may find them; and take them, and besiege them, and lie in wait for them in every place of observation; but if they repent, and are steadfast in prayer, and give alms, then let them go their way; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
9|6|And if any one of the idolaters ask thee for aid, then aid him, in order that he may hear the word of God; then let him reach his place of safety,- that is, because they are a folk who do not know
9|7|How can there be for the idolaters a treaty with God and with His Apostle, save those with whom ye have made a league at the Sacred Mosque! Then while they stand by you, stand ye by them; verily, God loves those who fear
9|8|How!- if they prevail against you, they will not observe either ties of blood or ties of client ship; they please you with their mouths, but their hearts refuse; and most of them do work abomination
9|9|They barter God's signs for a little price, and they turn folk from His way; verily, they - evil is that which they have done
9|10|They will not observe in a believer ties of kindred nor ties of clientship; but they it is are the transgressors
9|11|But if they repent and are steadfast in prayer and give alms, then they are your brethren in religion - we detail the signs unto a people that do know
9|12|But if they break faith with you after their treaty, and taunt your religion, then fight the leaders of misbelief; verily, they have no faith, haply they may desist
9|13|Will ye not fight a people who broke their oaths, and intended to expel the Apostle? They began with you at first, are ye afraid of them? God is more deserving that ye should fear Him! If ye be believers
9|14|kill them! God will torment them by your hands, and disgrace them, and aid you against them, and heal the breasts of a people who believe
9|15|and will remove rage from their hearts; for God turns unto Him whomsoever He pleases, and God is knowing, wise
9|16|Did ye reckon that ye would be left, when God knows not as yet those of you who fought strenuously, and who did not take other than God and His Apostle, and the believers for an intimate friend? for God is well aware of what ye do
9|17|It is not for idolaters to repair to the mosques of God, bearing witness against themselves to unbelief; they it is whose works are vain, and in the Fire shall they dwell for, aye
9|18|He only shall repair to the mosques of God who believes in God and the last day, and is steadfast in prayer, and gives the alms, and fears only God;- it may be that these will be of those who are guided
9|19|Have ye made out the giving drink to the pilgrims and the repairing to the Sacred Mosque to be like being one who believes in God and in the last day, and is strenuous in the way of God?- they are not equal in God's sight, and God guides not an unjust people
9|20|Those who believe and who have fled and been strenuous in the way of God, with their wealth and with their persons, are highest in rank with God, and these it is who are happy
9|21|Their Lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from Himself, and goodwill; and gardens shall they have therein and lasting pleasure
9|22|to dwell therein for aye! Verily, God, with Him is mighty here
9|23|O ye who believe! take not your fathers and your brothers for patrons if they love misbelief rather than faith; for whosoever amongst you takes them for patrons these are the unjust
9|24|Say, 'If your fathers, and your sons, and your brethren, and your wives, and your clansmen, and the wealth which ye have gained, and the merchandise which ye fear may be slack, and the dwellings which ye love are dearer to you than God and His Apostle, and than fighting strenuously in His way,- then wait awhile, until God brings His bidding, for God guides not a people who work abomination
9|25|God has helped you in many a place, and on the day of 'Honein when ye were so pleased with your numbers; but it did not serve you at all, and the road grew too strait for you, where it had been broad; and then ye turned your backs retreating
9|26|then God sent down His shechina upon His Apostle and upon the believers; and sent down armies which ye could not see, and punished those who misbelieved
9|27|for that is the reward of the misbelievers, then God turns after that to whom He will, for God is forgiving and merciful
9|28|O ye who believe! it is only the idolaters who are unclean; they shall not then approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. But if ye fear want then God will enrich you from His grace if He will; verily, God is knowing, wise
9|29|Fight those who believe not in God and in the last day, and who forbid not what God and His Apostle have forbidden, and who do not practice the religion of truth from amongst those to whom the Book has been brought, until they pay the tribute by their hands and be as little ones
9|30|The Jews say Ezra is the son of God; and the Christians say that the Messiah is the son of God; that is what they say with their mouths, imitating the sayings of those who misbelieved before.- God fight them! how they lie
9|31|They take their doctors and their monks for lords rather than God, and the Messiah the son of Mary; but they are bidden to worship but one God, there is no god but He; celebrated be His praise, from what they join with Him
9|32|They desire to put out the light of God with their mouths, but God will not have it but that we should perfect His light, averse although the misbelievers be
9|33|He it is who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of truth, to make it prevail over every other religion, averse although idolaters may be
9|34|O ye who believe! verily, many of the doctors and the monks devour the wealth of men openly, and turn folk from God's way; but those who store up gold and silver and expend it not in God's way,- give them glad tidings of grievous woe
9|35|On the day when it shall be heated in the fire of hell, and their brows shall be branded therewith, and their sides and their backs! - 'This is what ye stored up for yourselves, taste then what ye stored up
9|36|Verily, the number of months with God is twelve months in God's Book, on the day when He created the heavens and the earth; of these are four that are sacred; that is the subsisting religion. Then do not wrong yourselves therein, but fight the idolaters, one and all, as they fight you one and all, and know that God is with those who fear
9|37|Verily, putting off is but an increase in misbelief to lead astray therewith those who misbelieve. They make it lawful one year, but they make it unlawful another year, that they may come to an understanding as to the number which God has made sacred, and make lawful what God has prohibited. Seemly to them are their evil works, but God guides not a misbelieving people
9|38|O ye who believe! what ailed you when ye were told to march forth in God's way, that ye sank down heavily upon the earth? were ye content with the life of this world instead of the next? but the provision of this world's life is but a little to the next
9|39|Unless ye march forth He will punish you with grievous woe, and will put in your stead a people other than you! ye cannot hurt Him at all, for God is mighty over all
9|40|Unless ye help him - and God did help him, when those who misbelieved drove him forth the second of two. When they twain were in the cave; when he said to his comrade, 'Grieve not, verily, God is with us;' and God sent down His shechina upon him, and aided him with hosts ye could not see, and made the word of those who misbelieved inferior, and the word of God superior; for God is mighty and wise
9|41|March ye then, light and heavy, and fight strenuously with your wealth and persons in God's way; that is better for you if ye did but know
9|42|Were there goods nigh at hand, and a moderate journey, they would have followed you; but the distance was too far for them; they will swear by God, 'If we could, we would have gone forth with you.' They destroy themselves, but God knows that they lie
9|43|God forgive thee; why didst thou give them leave (to stay) until it was made manifest to thee who spake the truth - until thou mightest know the liars
9|44|Those who believe in God and in the last day will not beg off from fighting strenuously with their wealth and their persons; but God knows those who fear
9|45|It is only those who believe not in God and in the last day who beg off from thee, and those whose hearts are in doubt, and in their doubt do hesitate
9|46|Had they wished to go forth, they would have prepared for it a preparation; but God was averse from their starting off, and made them halt, and they were told to sit with those who sit
9|47|Had they gone forth with you they would but have made you more trouble, and they would have hurried about amongst you craving a sedition; amongst you are some who would have listened to them; but God knows those who are unjust
9|48|They used to crave sedition before and upset thy affairs; until the truth came, and God's bidding was made manifest, averse although they were
9|49|Of them are some who say, 'Permit me, and do not try me!' Have they not fallen into the trial already, but hell shall encompass the misbelievers
9|50|If good befall thee it seems ill to them; but if a calamity befall thee they say, 'We had taken care for our affair before;' and they turn their backs and they are glad
9|51|Say, 'Nought shall befall us save what God has written down for us; He is our Lord, and upon God believers do rely
9|52|Say, 'Do ye await for us aught but one of the two best things?' we too await for you that God will inflict on you torment from Himself, or by our hands. Wait then; and we with you are waiting too
9|53|Say, 'Expend ye in alms, whether ye will or no, it shall not be accepted from you; verily, ye are a people who do work abomination
9|54|But nought hinders their alms-giving from being accepted save that they misbelieve in God and His Apostle, and perform not prayer save lazily, and expend not in alms save reluctantly
9|55|Let not their wealth please you nor their children, God only wishes to torment them therewith in the life of this world, and that their souls may pass away while still they misbelieve
9|56|They swear by God that, verily, they are of you; but they are not of you, and they are a people who do stand aside in fear
9|57|Could they but have found a refuge, or some caves, or a place in which to creep, they would have turned round in haste thereto
9|58|Of them are some who defame thee, with respect to alms; though if they are given a part thereof, they are content; and if they are not given a part thereof, then are they in a rage
9|59|Would that they were content with what God and His Apostle had brought them, and would say, 'God is enough for us! God will bring us of His grace, and so will His Apostle; verily, unto God is our desire
9|60|Alms are only for the poor and needy, and those who work for them, and those whose hearts are reconciled, and those in captivity, and those in debt, and those who are on God's path, and for the wayfarer;- an ordinance this from God, for God is knowing, wise
9|61|And of them are some who are by the ears with the prophet, and say, 'He is all ear.' Say, 'An ear of good for you!' he believes in God, and believes in those who do believe, and is a mercy unto such of you as believe; but those who are by the ears with the Apostle of God, for them is grievous woe
9|62|They swear by God to please you; but God and His Apostle are more worthy for them to please if they be believers
9|63|Do they not know that whoso setteth himself against God and His Apostle, for him is the fire of hell, to dwell therein for aye? and that is mighty shame
9|64|The hypocrites are cautious lest there be revealed against them a surah to inform them of what is in their hearts; say, 'Mock ye! verily, God will bring forth that of which ye are so cautious
9|65|But if thou shouldst ask them, they will say, 'We did but discuss and jest;' say, 'Was it at God and His signs, and His Apostle, that ye mocked
9|66|Make no excuse! Ye have misbelieved after your faith; if we forgive one sect of you, we will torment another sect, for that they sinned
9|67|The hypocrites, men and women, some of them follow others, bidding what is wrong and forbidding what is right, and they clench their hands. They forget God and He forgets them! Verily, the hypocrites, they are the doers of abomination
9|68|God has promised unto the hypocrites, men and women, and unto the misbelievers, hell-fire, to dwell therein for aye; it is enough for them! God shall curse them, and theirs shall be enduring woe
9|69|Ye are like those who were before you. They were stronger than you and more abundant in wealth and children; they enjoyed their portion then, and ye enjoy your portion, as they enjoyed their portion before you; and ye discuss as they discussed. Their works are vain in this world and the next, and they it is who lose
9|70|Did there not come to them the declaration of those who were before them? of the people of Noah and 'Ad and Thamud, and of the people of Abraham, and the people of Midian? and of the overturned (cities)? Their apostles came to them with manifest signs; for God would not wrong them, but it was themselves they wronged
9|71|And the believers, men and women, are some the patrons of others; they bid what is reasonable, and forbid what is wrong, and are steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and obey God and His Apostle. On these will God have mercy; verily, God is mighty, wise
9|72|God has promised to believers, men and women, gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; and goodly places in the garden of Eden. But good-will from God is the greatest of all! that is the mighty happiness
9|73|O thou prophet! strive strenuously against the misbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern against them; for their resort is hell, and an ill journey shall it be
9|74|They swear by God they did not speak it, but they did speak the word of misbelief; and they disbelieved after they had embraced Islam, and they designed what they could not attain; and they only disapproved it because God and His Apostle had enriched them of His grace. If they turn again 'tis better for them; but if they turn their backs, God will torment them with mighty woe in this world and in the next, nor shall they have upon the earth a patron or protector
9|75|And of them are some who make a treaty with God, that 'If He bring us of His grace, we will give alms and we will surely be among the righteous
9|76|But when He gave them of His grace they were niggardly thereof, and turned their backs and swerved aside
9|77|So He caused hypocrisy to pursue them in their hearts unto the day when they shall meet Him,- for that they did fail God in what they promised Him, and for that they were liars
9|78|Do they not know that God knows their secrets and their whisperings, and that God knows the unseen things
9|79|Those who defame such of the believers as willingly give their alms, and such as can find nothing to give but their exertions, and who mock at them,- God will mock at them, and for them is grievous woe
9|80|Ask forgiveness for them or ask not forgiveness, for them! if they shouldst ask forgiveness for them seventy times, yet would not God forgive them; that is because they disbelieved in God and His Apostle, for God guides not a people who work abomination
9|81|Those who were left behind rejoiced in staying behind the Apostle of God, and were averse from fighting strenuously with their wealth and their persons in God's way, and said, 'March not forth in the heat.' Say, 'The fire of hell is hotter still, if ye could but discern
9|82|Let them then laugh little, and let them weep much, as a recompense for that which they have earned
9|83|But if God bring thee back to a sect of them, and they ask thee then for leave to sally forth; say, 'Ye shall by no means ever sally forth with me, nor shall ye ever fight a foe with me! verily, ye were content to sit at home the first time, sit ye then now with those who stay behind
9|84|Pray not for any one of them who dies, and stand not by his tomb; verily, they disbelieved in God and His Apostle and died workers of abomination
9|85|Let not their wealth and their children please you, God only wishes to torment them therewith in this world, and that their souls may pass away the while they misbelieve
9|86|Whenever a surah is sent down to them, 'Believe ye in God, and fight strenuously together with His Apostle,' those of them who have the means will ask thee for leave to stay at home and say, 'Let us be amongst those who stay behind
9|87|They are content to be with those who are left behind. A stamp is set upon their hearts that they should not discern
9|88|But the Apostle and those who believe with him are strenuous with their wealth and with their persons; these shall have good things, and these it is shall prosper
9|89|God has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; that is the mighty happiness
9|90|There came certain desert Arabs that they might be excused; and those stayed behind who had called God and His Apostle liars. There shall befall those of them who misbelieved, a mighty woe
9|91|For the weak, and the sick, and those who cannot find wherewith to expend in alms there is no hindrance, so they be only sincere towards God and His Apostle. There is no way against those who do well; for God is forgiving and merciful
9|92|Nor against those to whom, when they came to thee that thou shouldst mount them, thou didst say, 'I cannot find wherewith to mount you,' turned their backs while their eyes poured forth with tears, for grief that they could not find wherewith to expend
9|93|Only is there a way against those who ask thee for leave, to stay at home while they are rich; content to be with those who are left behind; on whose hearts God has set a stamp, so that they should not know
9|94|They make excuses to you when ye return to them: say, 'Make no excuse, we believe you not; God has informed us concerning you. God sees your works and His Apostle too!' Then shall ye be brought back unto Him who knows the unseen and the seen; and He shall inform you of that which ye have done
9|95|They will adjure you by God when ye have come back to them, to turn aside from them; turn ye aside then from them; verily, they are a plague, and their resort is hell! a recompense for that which they have earned
9|96|They will adjure you to be pleased with them; but if ye are pleased with them, God will not be pleased with a people who work abomination
9|97|The Arabs of the desert are keener in misbelief and hypocrisy, and are more likely not to know the bounds which God has sent down to His Apostle; but God is knowing and wise
9|98|And of the Arabs of the desert are some who take what they expend to be a forced loan, and they wait a turn of fortune against you; against them shall a turn of evil fortune be; for God both hears and knows
9|99|And of the Arabs of the desert are some who believe in God and the last day, and who take what they expend in alms to be a means of approach to God and to the Apostle's prayers,- is it not a means of approach for them? God will make them enter into His mercy; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
9|100|As for the foremost in the race, the first of those who fled, and the helpers, and those who followed them in their kindness, God is well pleased with them, and they are well pleased with Him; He has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; that is the mighty happiness
9|101|And of those who are round about you of the Arabs of the desert, some are hypocrites, and of the people of Medinah, some are stubborn in hypocrisy; thou dost not know them - we know them; we will torment them twice over; then shall they be sent off into mighty woe
9|102|And others have confessed their sins,- that they have mixed with a righteous action another evil action;- haply it may be God will turn again to them; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
9|103|Take from their wealth alms to cleanse and purify them thereby; and pray for them; verily, thy prayer is a repose for them; for God both hears and knows
9|104|Do they not know that God accepts repentance from His servants, and takes alms; and that God is He who is easily turned and merciful
9|105|And say, ' Act ye;' and God and His Apostle and the believers shall see your acts, and ye shall be brought back to Him who knows the seen and the unseen, and He shall inform you of that which ye have done
9|106|And others are in hopes of God's bidding; whether He will torment them, or whether He turn again towards them; for God is knowing, wise
9|107|And there are those who have taken to a mosque for mischief, and for misbelief, and to make a breach amongst the believers, and for an ambush for him who made war against God and His Apostle before; they surely swear, 'We only wished for what was good;' but God bears witness that they are liars
9|108|Never stand up therein!- there is a mosque founded on piety from the first day: it is more right that thou shouldst stand therein;- therein are men who love to be clean; for God doth love the clean
9|109|Is he who has laid his foundation upon the fear of God and of His good-will better, or he who has laid his foundation upon a crumbling wall of sand, which crumbles away with him into the fire of hell?- but God guides not a people who do wrong
9|110|The building which they have built will not cease to be a source of doubt in their hearts until their hearts are cut asunder; but God is knowing, wise
9|111|Verily, God hath bought of the believers their persons and their wealth, for the paradise they are to have; they shall fight in the way of God, and they shall slay and be slain: promised in truth, in the law and the gospel and the Qur'an;- and who is more faithful to His covenant than God ? Be ye glad then in the covenant which ye have made with Him, for that is the mighty happiness
9|112|Those who repent, those who worship, those who praise, those who fast, those who bow down, those who adore, those who bid what is right and forbid what is wrong, and those who keep the bounds of God,- glad tidings to those who believe
9|113|It is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the idolaters, even though they be their kindred, after it has been made manifest to them, that they are the fellows of hell
9|114|Nor was Abraham's asking pardon for his father aught else but through a promise he had promised him; but when it was made manifest to him that he was an enemy to God, he cleansed himself of him; verily, Abraham was pitiful and clement
9|115|Nor will God lead astray a people after He has guided them until that is made manifest to them which they have to fear; verily, God all things doth know
9|116|Verily, God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth! He quickens and He kills! Nor have ye beside God a patron or protector
9|117|God has now turned towards the prophet and those who fled with him, and towards the helpers who followed him in the hour of difficulty, after that the hearts of a part of them had well-nigh gone amiss. Then He turned unto them; verily to them He is kind and merciful
9|118|unto the three who were left behind, so that the earth with all its ample space was too strait for them, and their souls were straitened for them, and they thought that there was no refuge for them from God save unto Him. Then He turned again towards them that they might also turn; verily, God, He is easily turned and merciful
9|119|O ye who believe! fear God and be with those who speak the truth
9|120|It was not for the people of Medinah, and those around about them of the Arabs of the desert, to stay behind the Apostle of God and not to prefer their souls to his: that is because neither thirst, nor toil, nor heat, nor hunger befell them on God's way. Nor do they stop to anger the misbelievers, nor do they get any (harm) from the enemy without a good work being written down to them; verily, God wastes not the hire of those who do well
9|121|Nor do they expend in alms a small or great expense, nor do they cross a wady without it being written down to them; that God may reward them with better than that which they have done
9|122|The believers should not march forth altogether; and if a troop of every division of them march not forth, it is only that they may study their religion and warn their people when they return to them, that haply they may beware
9|123|O ye who believe! fight those who are near to you of the misbelievers, and let them find in you sternness; and know that God is with those who fear
9|124|And whenever a surah is sent down, there are some of them who say, 'Which of you has this increased in faith?' But as for those who believe, it does increase them in faith, and they shall rejoice
9|125|but as for those in whose hearts is sickness, it only adds a plague to their plague, and they die misbelievers
9|126|Do they not see that they are tried in every year once or twice? Yet they do not turn again, nor do they mind
9|127|And whenever a surah is sent down, some of them look at the others - 'Does any one see you?' - Then they turn away! God has turned their hearts, for that they are a people who do not discern
9|128|There has come to you an apostle from amongst yourselves; hard for him to bear is it that ye commit iniquity; he is anxious over you after the believers, pitiful, compassionate
9|129|But if they turn their backs, then say, 'God is enough for me! there is no god but He! upon Him do I rely, for He is Lord of the mighty throne
10|1|R
10|2|Those are the signs of the wise Book! was it a wonder to the folk I that we inspired a man from amongst themselves, 'Warn thou the folk; and give glad tidings to those who believe, that for them there is an advance of sincerity gone before them with their Lord?' The misbelievers say, 'Verily, this is an obvious sorcerer
10|3|Verily, your Lord is God, who created the heavens and the earth in six days; then He made for the throne, to govern the affair; there is no intercessor, except after His permission. That is God for you - your Lord! Then worship Him - do ye not mind
10|4|To Him is your return all of you - God's promise in truth; verily, He produces the creature, then He makes it return again, that He may recompense those who believe and do what is right with justice; but those who misbelieve, for them is a drink of boiling water, and grievous woe, for that they did misbelieve
10|5|He it is who made the sun for a brightness, and the moon for a light, and decreed for it mansions, that ye may know the number of the years and the reckoning.- God only created that in truth. He details the signs unto a people who do know
10|6|Verily, in the alternation of night and day, and in what God has created of the heavens and the earth, are signs unto a people who do fear
10|7|Verily, those who hope not for our meeting, and are content with the life of this world, and are comforted thereby, and those who are neglectful of our signs
10|8|these, their resort is fire for that which they have earned
10|9|Verily, those who believe and do what is right, their Lord guides them by their faith; beneath them shall rivers flow in the gardens of pleasure
10|10|Their cry therein shall be, 'Celebrated be Thy praises, O God!' and their salutation therein shall be, 'Peace!' and the end of their cry shall be, 'Praise (belongs) to God, the Lord of the worlds
10|11|And if God should hasten on the bad to men as they would hasten on the good, their appointed time would surely be fulfilled. But we will let those who hope not for our meeting go on in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
10|12|When distress touches man, he calls us to his side, whether sitting or standing; but when we have removed from him his distress, he passes on as though he had not called on us in a distress that touched him. Thus unto the extravagant is made seemly that which they have done
10|13|We have already destroyed generations before you when they did wrong, and there came to them their apostles with manifest signs, but they would not believe. Thus do we reward the sinful people
10|14|Then we made you their successors in the earth after them, that we may see how ye will act
10|15|But when our evident signs are recited to them, those who hope not for our meeting say, 'Bring a Qur'an other than this; or change it.' Say, 'It is not for me to change it of my own accord; I do not follow aught but what I am inspired with; verily, I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the torment of a mighty day
10|16|Say, 'Had God pleased, I should not have recited it to you, nor taught you therewith. I have tarried a lifetime amongst you before it;- have ye not then any sense
10|17|Who is more unjust than he who forges against God a lie, or says His signs are lies? verily, the sinners shall not prosper
10|18|They worship beside God what can neither harm them nor profit them, and they say, 'These are our intercessors with God!' Say, 'Will ye inform God of aught in the heavens or the earth, that He knows not of?' Celebrated be His praise! and exalted be He, above what they associate with Him
10|19|People were but one nation once, then they disagreed; and had it not been for thy Lord's word already passed, there would have been decided between them that concerning which they disagreed
10|20|They say, 'Why is not a sign sent down upon him from his Lord?' Say, 'The unseen is only God's; but wait ye for a while, verily, I with you am one of those who wait
10|21|When we have let men taste of mercy after distress which has touched them, lo! they use a stratagem against our signs! Say, 'God is quicker at stratagem.' Verily, our messengers write down what stratagem ye use
10|22|He it is who makes you travel in the land and sea, until when ye are in the ships - and these carry them afloat with a favouring wind, and they rejoice therein, there comes to them a violent wind, and there comes to them the wave from every place, and they think that they are encompassed about; then they call on God, sincere in religion towards Him, 'If thou dost save from this we will surely be of those who thank
10|23|But when He has saved them, lo! they are willful in the earth unjustly;- O ye folk! your willfulness against yourselves is but a provision of this world's life; then unto us is your return, and we will inform you of that which ye have done
10|24|Verily, the likeness of this world's life is like water which we send down from the sky, and the plants of the earth, from which men and cattle eat, are mingled therewith; until when the earth puts on its gilding and is adorned, the people thereof think that they have power over it. Our order comes to it by night or day, and we make it as it were mown down - as though it had not yesterday been rich!- Thus do we detail the signs unto a people who reflect
10|25|God calls unto the abode of peace, and guides whom He will into the right path
10|26|To those who do what is good, goodness and increase! nor shall blackness or abasement cover their faces! these are the fellows of Paradise, they shall dwell therein for aye
10|27|But, as for those who have earned ill, the reward of evil is the like thereof; abasement shall cover them! they shall have none to defend them against God;- as though their faces were veiled with the deep darkness of the night; these are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye
10|28|And on the day we gather them all together then we will say to those who associated other gods (with us), 'To your places, ye and your associates!' and we will part them; and their associates will say, 'It was not us ye worshipped
10|29|But God is witness enough between us and you, that we were heedless of your worshipping us
10|30|There shall every soul prove what it has sent on before; and they shall be returned unto God, their God, their true sovereign, and that which they devised shall stray away from them
10|31|Say, 'Who provides you from the heaven and the earth? who has dominion over hearing and sight? and who brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living? and who governs the affair?' And they will say, 'God.' Say, 'Do ye not then fear
10|32|That is God, your true Lord! and what is there after the truth but error? how then can ye turn away
10|33|Thus is the word of thy Lord verified against those who commit abomination; verily, they will not believe
10|34|Say, 'Is there any of your associates who can produce a creature and then turn it back again?' Say, 'God produces a creature, then turns it back again; how then can ye lie
10|35|Say, 'Is there any of your associates who guides unto the truth?' Say, 'God guides unto the truth.' Is then He who guides unto the truth more worthy to be followed, or he that guides not except he be himself guided? What ails you then, bow ye judge
10|36|But most of them follow only suspicion; verily, suspicion does not avail against the truth at all; verily, God knows what they do
10|37|This Qur'an could not have been devised by any beside God; but it verifies that which was before it, and details the Book - there is no doubt therein - from the Lord of the worlds
10|38|Do they say, 'He hath devised it?' say then, 'Bring a surah like it,- and call, if ye can, on other than God, if ye do tell the truth
10|39|Yet they call that a lie, the knowledge of which they cannot compass, while its interpretation has not yet come to them; so did those before them charge with lying, and see what was the end of the unjust
10|40|Of them are some who believe therein; and of them are some who do not believe therein; but thy Lord knows best who are corrupters
10|41|But if they call thee liar, say, 'I have my work, and ye have your work; ye are clear of what I work, and I am clear of what ye work
10|42|There are some of them who listen to thee - canst thou make the deaf to hear, although they have no sense
10|43|And of them are some who look at thee - canst thou guide the blind, although they cannot see
10|44|Verily, God wrongs not man at all, but men do wrong themselves
10|45|And on the day when we will gather them together it will be as though they had not tarried save an hour of the day, they shall know each other. Lost are those who called the meeting with God a lie, and were not guided
10|46|Either we will show thee something of that with which we threatened them, or we will take thee to ourself, for unto us is their return; then is God a witness to what they do
10|47|Every nation has its apostle; and when their apostle comes to them, it is decided between them with justice, and they are not wronged
10|48|But they say, 'When is this threat (to come), if ye tell the truth
10|49|Say, 'I have no power over myself for harm or for profit, save what God will. Every nation has its appointed time; when their appointed time comes to them they cannot delay it for an hour or bring it on
10|50|Say, 'Let us see now when the torment comes to you, by night or day, what will the sinners fain bring on thereof
10|51|And when it has fallen - will ye believe in it now!- And yet ye wish to bring it on
10|52|Then shall it be said to those who have done wrong, Taste ye the torment of eternity! shall ye be recompensed except for that which ye have earned
10|53|They will ask thee to inform them whether it be true. Say, 'Aye, by my Lord! verily, it is the truth, nor can ye weaken him
10|54|And if every soul that hath done wrong had whatever is in the earth, it would give it as a ransom. They will utter their repentance when they see the torment; and it shall be decided between them with justice, nor shall they be wronged
10|55|Is not indeed what is in the heavens and what is in the earth God's? is not indeed the promise of God true? Though most of them know not
10|56|He quickens and He kills, and unto Him are ye returned
10|57|O ye folk! there has come to you a warning from your Lord, and a balm for what is in your breasts, and a guidance and a mercy to believers
10|58|Say, 'By the grace of God and by His mercy,- and in that let them rejoice! It is better than that which they collect
10|59|Let us see now what God has sent down to you of provision! and yet ye have made of it unlawful and lawful. Say, 'Does God permit you, or against God do ye forge lies
10|60|What will those who forge lies against God think on the resurrection day? Verily, God is Lord of grace towards men, but most of them do not give thanks
10|61|Nor shalt thou be in any affair, nor shalt thou recite concerning it a Qur'an - nor shall ye do a work, without our being witness against you, when ye are engaged therein: nor does the weight of an atom escape thy Lord in earth or in heaven; nor is there less than that or greater, but it is in the perspicuous Book
10|62|Are not, verily, the friends of God those on whom there is no fear, neither shall they be grieved
10|63|They who believed and who did fear
10|64|for them are good tidings in the life of this world, and in the future too; there is no changing the words of God! That is the mighty happiness
10|65|Let not their speech grieve thee; verily, power is wholly God's! He both hears and knows
10|66|Is not, verily, whoever is in the heavens and whoever is in the earth God's? What then do they follow who call on associates other than God? Verily, they follow nothing but suspicion, and verily, they are telling naught but lies
10|67|He it is who made for you the night, that ye might rest therein, and the day to see therein; verily, in that are signs unto a people who can hear
10|68|They say, 'God has taken to Himself a son.' Celebrated be His praises! He is the rich one! His is whatever is in the heavens, and whatever is in the earth. Ye have no authority for this! will ye say against God, that which ye do not know
10|69|Say, 'Verily, those who forge against God a lie shall not prosper
10|70|A provision in this world - then unto us is their return! then we will make them taste keen torment for that they misbelieved
10|71|Recite to them the story of Noah, when he said to his people, 'O my people! if my stay with you be grievous to you, and my reminding you of the signs of God, yet upon God do I rely! Collect then your affairs and your associates; nor let your affair (be ordered) for you in the dark; then decide respecting me, and do not wait
10|72|and if ye turn your backs, I ask you not for hire; my hire is only due from God, and I am bidden to be of those resigned
10|73|But they called him a liar; and we saved him, and those with him, in the ark; and we made these successors, and drowned those who had said our signs were lies; see then how was the end of those who had been warned
10|74|Then we raised up after him apostles unto their people, and they came to them with manifest signs; but they would not believe in what they had called a lie before. Thus do we set a stamp upon the hearts of the transgressors
10|75|Then we raised up after them Moses and Aaron, unto Pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs; but they were too big with pride, and were a sinful people
10|76|and when the truth came to them from us they said, verily, 'This is obvious sorcery
10|77|Moses said, 'Will ye say of the truth when it comes to you, Is this sorcery? But sorcerers shall not prosper
10|78|They said, 'Hast thou come to turn us away from what we found our fathers at, that there may be for you twain grandeur in the earth? but we will not believe you
10|79|And Pharaoh said, 'Bring me every knowing sorcerer
10|80|and when the sorcerers came, Moses said to them, 'Throw down what ye have to throw
10|81|and when they threw down, Moses said, 'What ye have brought is sorcery! verily, God will make it vain; verily, God rights not the work of evildoers
10|82|But God verifies the truth by His words, although the sinners are averse therefrom
10|83|But none believed in Moses, save a race of his own people, through fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs; lest he should afflict them, for verily, Pharaoh was lofty in the earth, and verily, he was extravagant
10|84|And Moses said, 'O my people! if ye did believe in God, then on Him rely, if ye be resigned
10|85|They said, 'Upon God do we rely. O our Lord! make us not a cause of trial for a people who do wrong
10|86|but save us by Thy mercy from the people who misbelieve
10|87|And we inspired Moses and his brother thus, 'Establish, ye twain, houses for your people in Egypt; and make ye your houses a qiblah; and be ye steadfast in prayer, and give glad tidings to those who believe
10|88|Moses said, 'O our Lord! verily, Thou hast brought to Pharaoh and his chiefs ornaments and wealth in the life of this world; O our Lord! that they may err from Thy way! O our Lord! confound their wealth and harden their hearts that they may not believe until they see grievous woe
10|89|He said, 'Your prayer is answered; be upright then, ye two, and follow not the path of those who do not know
10|90|And we brought the children of Israel across the sea; and Pharaoh and his hosts followed them eager and hostile, until when drowning overtook him, he said, 'I believe that there is no god but He in whom the children of Israel believe, and I am of those who are resigned
10|91|Now! but thou didst rebel aforetime, and wert of those who do evil
10|92|but today we will save thee in thy body, that thou mayest be to those who come after thee a sign, for verily, many men are careless of our signs
10|93|And we established the people of Israel with a sure establishment, and we provided them with good things; nor did they disagree until there came to them the knowledge. Verily, thy Lord shall decide between them on the resurrection day concerning that whereon they did dispute
10|94|And if thou art in doubt of that which we have sent down unto thee, ask those who read the Book before thee; verily, the truth is come to thee from thy Lord, be not then of those who are in doubt
10|95|And be not of those who say the signs of God are lies, or thou wilt be of those who lose
10|96|Verily, those against whom God's word is pronounced will not believe
10|97|even though there come to them every sign, until they see the grievous woe
10|98|Were it not so, a city would have believed and its faith would have profited it. But (none did) except the people of Jonas; when they believed we removed from them the torment of disgrace in this world, and we gave them provision for a while
10|99|But had thy Lord pleased, all who are in the earth would have believed altogether; as for thee, wilt thou force men to become believers
10|100|It is not for any person to believe save by the permission of God; He puts horror on those who have no sense
10|101|Say, 'Behold what is in the heavens and in the earth! but signs and warners avail not a people who do not believe
10|102|Do they await aught but the like of the days of those who passed away before them?' Say, 'Wait ye then! verily, I am with you one of those who wait
10|103|Then we will save our apostles and those who believe; thus is it due from us to save believers
10|104|Say, 'O ye folk! if ye are in doubt concerning my religion, I will not worship those ye worship other than God; but I worship God, who takes you to Himself, and I am bidden to be of the believers
10|105|And, 'Make steadfast thy face to the religion as a 'Hanif; and be not of the idolaters
10|106|and call not besides God on what can neither profit thee nor harm thee; for if thou dost, verily, thou art then of the unjust
10|107|And should God touch thee with harm, there is none to remove it save He; and if He wish thee well, there is none to repel His grace; He makes it fall on whom He will of His servants; for He is pardoning and merciful
10|108|Say, 'O ye people! there has come to you the truth from your Lord, and he who is guided, his guidance is only for his soul; and he who errs, errs only against it; and I am not a guardian over you
10|109|Follow what is revealed to thee, and be patient until God judges, for He is the best of judges
11|1|R. A book whose signs are confirmed and then detailed, from the wise one, the aware
11|2|that ye worship not other than God,- verily, I am to you from Him a warner and a herald of glad tidings
11|3|and that ye seek pardon from your Lord, then turn again to Him! He will cause you to enjoy a good provision to a named and appointed time, and will give His grace to every one deserving grace; but if ye turn your backs, I fear for you the torment of a great day
11|4|Unto God is your return, and He is mighty over all
11|5|Do they not, verily, fold up their breasts, that they may hide from Him? But when they cover themselves with their garments, does He not know what they conceal and what they display? verily, He knows the nature of men's breasts
11|6|There is no beast that walks upon the earth but its provision is from God. He knows its settlement and its resting-place; all is in the perspicuous Book
11|7|He it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His throne was upon the water that He might try you, which of you did best. But shouldst thou say, 'Ye will be raised up after death,' those who misbelieve will surely say, 'This is naught but obvious sorcery
11|8|and if we keep back from them the torment to a stated generation, they will surely say, 'What hinders it?' - Aye! on the day it comes to them there is no turning it away from them, but that shall close in on them at which they mocked
11|9|And if we make man taste of mercy from us and then strip it off from him, verily, he is despairing, ungrateful
11|10|and if we make him taste of comfort after distress has touched him, he will surely say, 'The evils have gone away from me;' verily, then he is joyful and boasting
11|11|Save those who are patient and do right; these - for them is pardon and a mighty hire
11|12|Haply thou art leaving part of what is revealed to thee and thy breast is straitened thereby, lest they should say, 'Why is not a treasure sent down to him? or why did not an angel come with him?- thou art only a warner, and God is guardian over all
11|13|Or they will say, 'He hath devised it;' say, 'Bring ten surahs like it devised; and call upon whom ye can beside God, if ye do tell the truth
11|14|And if they do not answer, then know that it is revealed by the knowledge of God, and that there is no god but He - are ye then resigned
11|15|Whosoever shall wish for the life of this world and its ornaments, we will pay them their works therein, and they shall not be cheated
11|16|These are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter save the Fire; and void is what they made therein, and vain what they were doing
11|17|Is he (like them) who stands upon a manifest sign from his Lord, which is a witness from Him, and recites it, with the book of Moses before him for a model and a mercy? These believe in it; and whosoever of the crews disbelieves in him, the Fire is his promise. Be not thou in doubt about it; verily, it is truth from thy Lord, though most men do not believe
11|18|Who is more unjust than he who forges against God a lie? they shall be set before their Lord, and the witnesses shall say, 'These it is who lied against their Lord.' Aye! God's curse is on the unjust
11|19|who turn men away from the path, and crave to make it crooked, and in the hereafter disbelieve
11|20|They cannot make Him helpless in the earth, nor have they other than God for patrons. Doubled for them is the torment. They could not hear, nor did they see
11|21|Those it is who lose themselves; and that which they did devise has strayed away from them
11|22|No doubt but that in the hereafter these are those who lose
11|23|Verily, those who believe and do what is right, and humble themselves to their Lord, they are the fellows of Paradise; they shall dwell therein for aye
11|24|The two parties' likeness is as the blind and the deaf, and the seeing and the hearing; shall they two be equal in likeness? will ye not mind
11|25|We did send Noah unto his people, 'Verily, I am to you an obvious warner
11|26|that ye should not worship any save God. Verily, I fear for you the torment of the grievous day
11|27|But the chiefs of those who misbelieved amongst his people said, 'We only see in thee a mortal like ourselves; nor do we see that any follow thee except the reprobates amongst us by a rash judgment; nor do we see that you have any preference over us; nay more, we think you liars
11|28|He said, 'O my people! let us see! if I stand upon a manifest sign from my Lord, and there come to me mercy from him, and ye are blinded to it; shall we force you to it while ye are averse therefrom
11|29|O my people! I do, not ask you for wealth in return for it; my hire is only from God; nor do I repulse those who believe; verily, they shall meet their Lord. But I see you, a people who are ignorant
11|30|O my people! who will help me against God, were I to repulse you? do ye not then mind
11|31|I do not say that I have the treasures of God; nor do I know the unseen; nor do I say, " Verily, I am an angel; " nor do I say of those whom your eyes despise, "God will never give them any good!"- God knows best what is in their souls - verily, then should I be of the unjust
11|32|They said, 'O Noah! thou hast wrangled with us, and hast multiplied wranglings with us; bring us then what thou hast threatened us with, if thou art of those who tell the truth
11|33|Said he, 'God will only bring it on you if He pleases, nor can ye make Him helpless
11|34|nor will my advice profit you, should I wish to advise you, if God wish to lead you into error. He is your Lord, and unto Him shall ye be returned
11|35|Do they say, 'He has devised it? Say, 'If I have devised it, then on me be my sin. But I am clear of that wherein ye sin
11|36|And Noah was inspired, 'None shall surely believe amongst thy people but those who have believed already; take not then ill that which they do
11|37|And make the ark under our eyes, and at our inspiration; and plead not with me for those who have done wrong; verily, they shall be drowned
11|38|So he made the ark, and every time the chiefs of his people passed by him they jested at him. Said he, 'If ye jest at us, verily, we shall jest at you even as ye are jesting, and ye shall surely know
11|39|He to whom a torment comes, it shall shame him, and there shall light upon him lasting torment
11|40|Until at length when our order came, and the oven boiled, we said, 'Load therein of every kind two, and likewise thy family,- save those on whom the sentence has already been passed - likewise those who believe;' but there believed not with him save a few
11|41|And he said, 'Ride ye therein; in the name of God is its course, and its mooring. Verily, my Lord is forgiving and merciful
11|42|And it floated on with them mid waves like mountains; and Noah cried to his son who had gone aside, 'O my boy! ride with us and be not with the misbelievers
11|43|Said he, 'I will betake me to a mountain that shall save me from the water.' Said he, 'There is none to save today from the command of God, except for him on whom He may have mercy.' And the wave came between them, and he was amongst the drowned
11|44|And it was said, 'O earth! swallow down thy water!' and, 'O heaven! hold!' and the water abated; and the affair was decided, and it I settled on Gudi, and it was said, 'Away with the people who are evildoers
11|45|And Noah went unto his Lord and said, 'My Lord, verily, my son is of my people, and, verily, Thy promise is true, and Thou art the justest of judges
11|46|He said, 'O Noah! he is not of thy people; verily, it is a work that is not right. Then, ask me not for that of which thou knowest naught. Verily, I admonish thee that thou shouldst not be of the ignorant
11|47|He said, 'My Lord, verily, I seek refuge in Thee from asking Thee for aught of which I know nothing; and, unless Thou dost forgive me and have mercy on me, I shall be of those who lose
11|48|It was said, 'O Noah! descend in safety from us, and blessings upon thee and upon (some) nations of those who are with thee; but (some) nations we will allow to enjoy prosperity and then there shall touch them from us grievous woe
11|49|These are stories of the unseen which we reveal to thee; thou didst not know them, thou nor thy people before this. Be patient, then; verily, the issue is for those who fear
11|50|And unto 'Ad (we sent) their brother Hud; he said, 'O my people! serve God; ye have no god but Him. Ye do but devise a lie
11|51|O my people! I do not ask you for hire in return; my hire is only from Him who created me: have ye then no sense
11|52|O my people! ask pardon of your Lord; then turn to Him; He will send the skies down on you in torrents; and He will add strength to your strength: do not then turn back sinners
11|53|They said, 'O Hud! thou hast not come to us with a manifest sign; nor will we leave our gods at thy word; nor will we believe in thee
11|54|We can only say that some of our gods have attacked thee with evil.' Said he, 'Verily, I call God to witness, and do ye bear witness too, that I am free from that which ye associate beside Him
11|55|Plot then against me altogether, and give me no delay
11|56|Verily, I rely upon God, my Lord and your Lord. There is no beast that walks, but He taketh it by its forelock. Verily, my Lord is on the right way
11|57|But if ye turn your backs,- then I have conveyed to you what I was sent to you with; and my Lord will make another people your successors. Ye cannot harm Him at all; verily, my Lord is guardian over all
11|58|And when our order came we saved Hud, and those who believed with him, by mercy from us; and we saved them from harsh torment
11|59|That (tribe of) 'Ad denied the signs of their Lord, and rebelled against His apostles, and followed the bidding of every headstrong tyrant
11|60|They were followed in this world by a curse, and on the resurrection day - 'Did not 'Ad disbelieve their Lord? Aye! away with 'Ad the people of Hud
11|61|And unto Thamud (we sent) their brother Zalih; said he, 'O my people! worship God; ye have no god but Him. He it is that produced you from the earth, and made you live therein! Then ask pardon of Him; then turn again to Him: verily, my Lord is nigh and answers
11|62|They said, 'O Zalih! thou wert amongst us one we hoped in before this: dost thou forbid us to worship what our fathers worshipped? verily, we are in hesitating doubt as to that to which thou callest us
11|63|He said, 'O my people! let us see; if I stand upon a manifest sign from my Lord, and there come from Him mercy, who will help me against God if I rebel against Him? Ye will add only to my loss
11|64|O my people! this she-camel of God is a sign for you; leave her, then, to feed in God's earth, and touch her not with evil, or there will catch you torment that is nigh
11|65|But they did hamstring her, and he said, 'Enjoy yourselves in your houses for three days;- that is the promise that shall not be belied
11|66|And when our order came we saved Zalih, and those who believed with him, by our mercy, from disgrace upon that day. Verily, thy Lord He is powerful and mighty
11|67|And the noise caught those who had done wrong; and on the morrow they were lying corpses in their houses
11|68|as though they had never dwelt therein. Did not Thamud indeed disbelieve in their Lord? Aye! away with Thamud
11|69|Our messengers did come to Abraham with glad tidings; they said, ' Peace!' He said, 'Peace be it!' nor did he delay to bring the roasted calf
11|70|But when he saw that their hands reached not thereto, he could not understand them, and harboured fear of them. They said, 'Fear not. Verily, we are sent unto the people of Lot
11|71|And his wife was standing by, laughing; and we gave her the glad tidings of Isaac, and of Jacob after Isaac
11|72|Said she, ' Alas for me! shall I bear a son when I am an old woman, and this husband of mine an old man? Verily, this is a wonderful thing
11|73|They said, ' Dost thou wonder at the bidding of God? God's mercy and blessings upon you, ye people of the house! Verily, He is to be praised and glorified
11|74|And when his terror left Abraham, and the glad tidings came to him, he wrangled with us about the people of Lot
11|75|verily, Abraham was clement, pitiful, relenting
11|76|O Abraham! avoid this; verily, the bidding of thy Lord has come; verily, there is coming to them torment that cannot be put off
11|77|And when our messengers came to Lot, he was grieved for them; but his arm was straitened for them, and he said, 'This is a troublesome day
11|78|And his people came to him, rushing at him, for before that they used to work evil. He said, 'O my people! here are my daughters, they are purer for you; then, fear God, and do not disgrace me through my guests;- is there not among you one right-thinking man
11|79|They said, 'Thou knowest that we have no claim on thy daughters; verily, thou knowest what we want
11|80|He said, 'Had I but power over you; or could I but resort to some strong column
11|81|(The angels) said, 'O Lot! verily, we are the messengers of thy Lord, they shall certainly not reach thee; then travel with thy people in the darkness of the night, and let none of you look round except thy wife: verily, there shall befall her what befalls them. Verily, their appointment is for the morning! and is not the morning nigh
11|82|And when our bidding came, we made their high parts their low parts. And we rained down upon them stones and baked clay one after another
11|83|marked, from thy Lord, and these are not so far from the unjust
11|84|And unto Midian (we sent) their brother Sho'haib. He said, 'O my people! serve God; ye have no god but Him, and give not short measure and weight. Verily, I see you well off; but, verily, I fear for you the torments of an encompassing day
11|85|O my people! give measure and weight fairly, and defraud not men of their things; and wreak not wrong in the earth, corrupting it
11|86|God's residue is better for you if ye be believers. But I am not a guardian over you
11|87|They said, 'O Shohaib! Do thy prayers bid thee that we should forsake what our fathers served, or that we should not do as we please with our wealth? Thou art, forsooth, the clement and straightforward one
11|88|He said, 'O my people! Do ye see? If I stand upon a manifest sign from my Lord, and He provides me from Himself with a goodly provision, and I consent not with you to that which I forbid you, I only wish to better you so far as I can,- nor comes my grace through any one but God; on Him do I rely, and unto Him I turn
11|89|O my people! let not a breach with me make you so sin that there befall you the like of that which befell the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of Zalih - nor are the people of Lot so far from you
11|90|Ask pardon, then, from your Lord, then turn to Him; verily, my Lord is merciful, loving
11|91|They said, 'O Sho'haib! we do not understand much of what thou sayest, and we see that thou art weak amongst us; and were it not for thy family we would stone thee, nor couldst thou be powerful over us
11|92|He said, 'O my people! are my family more esteemed by you than God? or have you taken Him as something to cast behind your backs? Verily, my Lord, whate'er ye do, doth comprehend
11|93|O my people! act according to your power; verily, I too will act, and ye at length shall know! To whomsoever torment comes it shall disgrace him, and him who is a liar. Watch then; verily, I with you am watching too
11|94|And when our bidding came we saved Sho'haib, and those who believed with him, by our mercy; and the noise caught those who had done wrong, and on the morrow they were in their houses prone
11|95|as though they had not dwelt therein. Aye! 'Away with Midian!' as it was, 'Away with Thamud
11|96|And we sent Moses with our signs and with obvious power
11|97|unto Pharaoh and his chiefs; but they followed Pharaoh's bidding, and Pharaoh's bidding was not straightforward
11|98|He shall approach his people on the resurrection day, and take them down to water at the Fire,- an evil watering-place to water at
11|99|In this (world) were they followed by a curse; and on the resurrection day evil shall be the aid they are aided with
11|100|That is one of the stories of the cities which we recite to thee - some of them are standing now and some mown down
11|101|We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves. Their gods availed them naught, on which they called instead of God, when once the bidding of thy Lord had come; nor did they add save to their downfall
11|102|Thus is thy Lord's overtaking when He overtakes the cities that have done wrong; verity, His overtaking is grievous, keen
11|103|Verily, in that is a sign to him who fears the torment of the last day;- that is a day unto which men shall be gathered;- that is a witnessed day
11|104|We will not delay it, save unto a numbered and appointed time
11|105|The day when it shall come no soul shall speak save by His permission, and amongst them (shall be) the wretched and the glad
11|106|And as for those who are wretched - why, in the Fire! there shall they groan and sob! to dwell therein for aye
11|107|so long as the heavens and the earth endure; save what thy Lord will. Verily, thy Lord is one who works His will
11|108|And as for those who are glad - why, in Paradise! to dwell therein for aye, so long as the heavens and the earth endure; save what thy Lord will,- a ceaseless boon
11|109|Be not then in doubt concerning what these men do serve;- they only serve as their fathers served before; and we will give them their portion undiminished
11|110|We gave Moses the Book before, and then they disagreed concerning it, and, had it not been for a word that had been passed by thy Lord, it would have been decided between them; but, verily, they are (still) in hesitating doubt concerning it
11|111|But, verily, every one thy Lord will surely repay for their works; verily, He of what they do is well aware
11|112|Do thou then be upright, as thou art bidden, and whosoever turns repentantly with thee; and transgress ye not:- verily, He on what ye do doth look
11|113|Lean not unto, those who do wrong, lest the Fire touch you, for ye have no patrons but God; and, moreover, ye shall not be helped
11|114|And be thou steadfast in prayer at the two ends of the day and the (former and latter) parts of the night. Verily, good works remove evil works;- that is a reminder to the mindful
11|115|And be thou patient, for God wastes not the hire of those who do good
11|116|And were there among the generations before you any endowed with a remnant (of piety) forbidding evildoing in the earth, save a few of those whom we saved; but the evildoers followed what they enjoyed, and were sinners
11|117|Thy Lord would not have destroyed the cities unjustly while the people of them were well doers
11|118|Had thy Lord pleased, He would have made men one nation; but they will not cease to differ
11|119|save those thy Lord has had mercy on. For this has He created them, and the word of thy Lord is fulfilled, 'I will surely fill hell with ginns and mankind altogether
11|120|And all that we relate to thee of the stories of the apostles is what will establish thy heart: and herein has the truth come to thee, and an admonition and a reminder to the believers
11|121|Say to those who believe not, ' Act according to your power, verily, we are acting too
11|122|And wait ye, verily, we are waiting too
11|123|God's are the unseen things of the heavens and of the earth; and unto Him the affair doth all return. Then serve Him and rely on Him; for thy Lord is not heedless of that which ye do
12|1|R. Those are the signs of the perspicuous Book
12|2|Verily, we have revealed it, an Arabic Qur'an; haply ye may understand
12|3|We tell thee the best of stories, in inspiring thee with this Qur'an, though thou wert before it among the heedless
12|4|When Joseph said to his father, 'O my sire! Verily, I saw eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon,- I saw them adoring me
12|5|He said, 'O my boy! tell not thy vision to thy brethren, for they will plot a plot against thee verily, the devil is to man an open foe
12|6|Thus does thy Lord choose thee, and teach thee the interpretation of sayings, and fulfill His favour upon thee, and upon Jacob's people, as He fulfilled it upon thy two forefathers before thee, Abraham and Isaac,- verily, thy Lord is knowing, wise
12|7|In Joseph and his brethren were signs to those who enquire
12|8|When they said, 'Surely, Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we, a band although we be; verily, our father is in obvious error
12|9|Slay Joseph, or cast him in some land; that your father's face may be free for you, and ye may be, after he is gone, a people who do right
12|10|A speaker from amongst them spake, 'Slay not Joseph, but throw him into the bottom of the pit; some of the travellers may pick him up, if so ye do
12|11|Said they, 'O our father! what ails thee that thou wilt not trust us with Joseph while we are unto him sincere
12|12|Send him with us tomorrow to revel and to play, and, verily, we over him will keep good guard
12|13|Said he, 'Verily, it grieves me that ye should go off with him, for I fear lest the wolf devour him while ye of him do take no heed
12|14|Said they, 'Why, if the wolf should devour him while we are (such) a band, verily, we then should deserve to lose
12|15|And when they had gone off with him and agreed to put him in the depths of the pit, and we inspired him, 'Thou shalt surely inform them of this affair of theirs and they shall not perceive
12|16|And they came to their father at eve and weeping
12|17|said, 'O our father! verily, we went forth to race and left Joseph by our goods, and the wolf devoured him,- but thou wilt not believe us, truth tellers though we be
12|18|And they brought his shirt with lying blood upon it. Said he, 'Nay, but your souls have induced you to do this; but patience is fair! and God is He whom I ask for aid against that which ye describe
12|19|And travellers came and sent their water-drawer; and he let down his bucket. Said he, 'O glad tidings! this is a youth.' And they kept him secret, as a chattel; but God knew what they were doing
12|20|And they sold him for a mean price,- drachmae counted out,- and they parted with him cheaply
12|21|And the man from Egypt who had bought him said to his wife, 'Honour his abiding here; it may be he will be of use to us, or we may adopt him as a son.' Thus did we establish Joseph in the land; and we did surely teach him the interpretation of sayings; for God can overcome His affairs, though most men do not know
12|22|And when he had reached his strength we brought him judgment and knowledge, for thus do we reward those who do good
12|23|And she in whose house he was desired him for his person; and she locked the doors and said, 'Come along with thee!' Said he, 'Refuge in God! verily, my Lord has made good my abiding here; verily, the wrong-doers shall not prosper
12|24|And she was anxious for him, and he would have been anxious for her, had it not been that he saw the demonstration of his Lord; thus did we turn evil and fornication from him; verily, he was of our sincere servants
12|25|And they raced to the door and she rent his shirt from behind; and they met her master at the door. Said she, 'What is the recompense of him who wishes evil for thy family, but that imprisonment or a grievous torment
12|26|Said he, 'She desired me for my person.' And a witness from among her family bore witness: 'If his shirt be rent from in front, then she speaks the truth and he is of the liars
12|27|but if his shirt be rent from behind, then she lies and he is of the truth tellers
12|28|And when he saw his shirt rent from behind he said, 'This is one of your tricks; verily, your tricks are mighty
12|29|Joseph! turn aside from this. And do thou, woman, ask pardon for thy fault; verily, thou wert of the sinners
12|30|And women in the city said, 'The wife of the prince desires her young man for his person; he has infatuated her with love: verily, we see her in obvious error
12|31|And when she heard of their craftiness, she sent to them and prepared for them a banquet, and gave each of them a knife; and she said, 'Come forth to them!' And when they saw him they said, 'Great God!' and cut their hands and said, 'God forbid! This is no mortal, this is nothing but an honourable angel
12|32|Said she, 'This is he concerning whom ye blamed me. I did desire him for his person, but he was too continent. But if he do not what I bid him he shall surely be imprisoned and shall surely be among the small
12|33|Said he, 'My Lord! Prison is dearer to me than what they call on me to do; and unless Thou turn from me their craftiness I shall feel a passion for them and shall be among the ignorant
12|34|And his Lord answered him and turned from him their craftiness; verily, He both hears and knows
12|35|Then it appeared good to them, even after they had seen the signs, to imprison him until a time
12|36|And there entered the prison with him two young men. Said one of them, 'Verily, I see myself pressing wine.' And the other said, 'Verily, I see myself bearing on my head loaves from which the birds do eat; inform us of the interpretation thereof; verily, we see that thou art of those who do good
12|37|He said, 'There shall not come to you any food with which ye are provided, but I will inform you both of its interpretation before it comes to you. That is (some) of what my Lord has taught me; verily, I have left the faith of a people who do not believe in God, while in the future too they disbelieve
12|38|And I have followed the faith of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob; we could not associate aught with God; that is from God's grace upon us and upon men: but most men give not thanks
12|39|O ye twain fellow-prisoners! Are manifold lords better, or God, the one, the dominant
12|40|What ye worship beside Him are naught but names which ye have named, ye and your fathers, for which God has sent down no authority. Judgment is only God's; He bids you worship only Him. That is the standard of religion,- but most men do not know
12|41|O ye twain fellow-prisoners! as for one of you, he shall pour out wine for his lord: and as for the other, he shall be crucified, and the birds shall eat of his head. The matter is decreed whereon ye asked me for a decision
12|42|And he said to him whom he thought would escape of those two, 'Remember me with thy lord!' But Satan made him forget the remembrance of his lord, so he tarried in prison a few years
12|43|Then said the king, 'Verily, I see seven fat kine which seven lean kine devoured; and seven green ears of corn and others dry. O ye chiefs! Explain to me my vision, if a vision ye can expound
12|44|Said they, 'Confused dreams, and naught of the exposition of such dreams know we
12|45|Then he who had escaped of those twain said,- remembering after a while,- 'Verily, I will inform you of the interpretation thereof, so send me
12|46|Joseph! O thou truth teller! explain to us the seven fat kine which seven lean devoured; and the seven green ears of corn and others dry. Haply I may go back to the men, haply they then may know
12|47|He said, 'Ye shall sow for seven years, as is your wont; but what ye reap, let it remain in the ear, except a little whereof ye shall eat
12|48|Then there shall come after that seven severe (years) which shall devour what ye have put by before for them, save a little of what ye shall preserve
12|49|Then there will come after that a year in which men shall have rain and in which they shall press
12|50|Then said the king, 'Bring him to me.' And when the messenger came to him, he said, 'Go back to thy lord, and ask him, "What meant the women who cut their hands? Verily, my lord knows their craftiness
12|51|He said, 'What was your design when ye desired Joseph for his person?' They said, 'God forbid! we know no bad of him.' Said the wife of the prince, ' Now does the truth appear! I desired him for his person and, verily, he is of those who tell the truth
12|52|That' (said Joseph) 'was that he might know that I did not betray him in his absence, and that God guides not the craft of those who do betray
12|53|Yet I do not clear myself, for the soul is very urgent to evil, save what my Lord has had mercy on; verily, my Lord is forgiving and merciful
12|54|And the king said, 'Bring him to me. I will take him specially for myself.' And when he had spoken with him he said, 'Verily, today thou art with us in a permanent place of trust
12|55|He said, 'Place me over the treasures of the land; verily, I will be a knowing keeper
12|56|Thus did we establish Joseph in the land that he might settle in what part thereof he pleased - we overtake with our mercy whom we will, nor do we waste the hire of those who do good
12|57|and surely the hire of the future life is better for those who believe and who have feared
12|58|And his brethren came to Joseph, and they entered in unto him and he knew them, but they recognised not him
12|59|And when he had equipped them with their equipment he said, 'Bring me a brother that ye have from your father; do ye not see that I give good measure, and that I am the best of entertainers
12|60|But if ye bring him not to me, no measure shall ye have with me, nor shall ye come nigh me
12|61|They said, 'We will desire him of our father, and we will surely do it
12|62|Then he said to his young men, 'Put their chattels in their packs, haply they may know it when they are come back to their family; haply they may return
12|63|And when they returned to their father, they said, 'O our father! Measure is withheld from us; so send with us our brother that we may get measure, and, verily, him we will keep
12|64|He said, 'Shall I entrust you with him, save as I entrusted you with his brother before? but God is the best of keepers, and He is the most merciful of the merciful
12|65|And when they opened their goods they found their chattels restored to them. Said they, 'O our father! What more can we crave? Here are our chattels restored to us, and we shall guard our brother, and shall have an additional measure beside that - a small measure
12|66|He said, 'I will by no means send him with you until you give me a compact from God that ye will surely bring him to me, unless ye be encompassed.' So when they had given him their compact he said, 'God over what ye say has charge
12|67|And he said, 'O my sons! enter not by one gate, but enter by several gates; but I cannot avail you aught against God. Judgment is only God's; upon Him do I rely, and on Him do the reliant rely
12|68|And when they had entered as their father bade them, it availed them nothing against God, save for a want in Jacob's soul which it fulfilled; for, verily, he was possessed of knowledge, for that we had taught him;- but most men do not know
12|69|And when they entered in unto Joseph, he took his brother to stay with him, and said, 'Verily, I am thy brother - then take not ill that which they have been doing
12|70|And when he had equipped them with their equipment he placed the drinking cup in his brother's pack; then a crier cried out, 'O ye caravan! verily, ye are thieves
12|71|They said, approaching them, 'What is it that ye miss
12|72|Said they, 'We miss the goblet of the king, and whoso brings it shall have a camel-load, and I am guarantee thereof
12|73|They said, 'By God! Ye knew we came not to do evil in the land, and that we were not thieves
12|74|They said, 'And what shall be the recompense thereof if ye be liars
12|75|They said, 'The recompense thereof is he in whose pack it is found - he shall be the recompense thereof; thus do we recompense the unjust
12|76|And he began with their sacks before the sacks of his brother; then he drew it forth from his brother's sack. Thus did we devise a stratagem for Joseph. He could not take his brother by the king's religion except God pleased;- we raise the degrees of whomsoever we please, and over every possessor of knowledge is one who knows
12|77|They said, 'If he has stolen, a brother of his has stolen before him.' But Joseph kept it secret in his soul and disclosed it not to them. Said he, 'Ye are in a bad case, and God knows best about what ye describe
12|78|They said, 'O prince! Verily, he has a father, a very old man; take then one of us instead of him; verily, we can see that thou art of those who do good
12|79|Said he, '(I seek) refuge in God from taking any save him with whom we found our property; verily, we should then be certainly unjust
12|80|And when they despaired of him they retired to consult privately. Said the eldest of them, 'Do ye not know that your father has taken a compact from God against you? Aforetime ye exceeded in the matter of Joseph - I will surely not quit the land until my father give me leave, or God judge for me, for He is the best of judges
12|81|Return ye to your father and say, "O our father! verily, thy son has committed theft, and we bore testimony to naught but what we knew; for of the unforeseen we were not keepers
12|82|Ask then in the city where we were, and of the caravan in which we approached it, for, verily, we tell the truth
12|83|Said he, 'Nay, your souls have induced you to do this thing. But patience is fair. It may be that God will give me them all together;- verily, He is knowing, wise
12|84|And he turned away from them and said, 'O my lament for Joseph!' and his eyes grew white with grief, for he repressed (his woe)
12|85|They said, 'By God! thou wilt not cease to remember Joseph till thou art at the point of death, or art of those who perish
12|86|Said he, 'I only complain of my emotion and my grief to God, for I know that from God which ye know nothing of
12|87|O my sons! go and enquire concerning Joseph and his brother, and despair not of God's comfort; for, verily, none need despair of God's comfort save a misbelieving people
12|88|And when they entered in unto him they said, 'O prince! distress has touched both us and our families, and we have brought trifling chattels. So give us full measure and bestow upon us in charity; verily, God rewards the charitable
12|89|He said, 'Do ye know what ye did with Joseph and his brother, while ye were ignorant
12|90|They said, 'Art thou then indeed Joseph? He said, 'I am Joseph, and this is my brother; God has been gracious towards us. Verily, whoso fears God and is patient,- verily, God wastes not the hire of those who do good
12|91|They said, 'By God! God has chosen thee over us; and we indeed were sinners
12|92|He said, 'No reproach against you today! God will pardon you, for He is the most merciful of the merciful
12|93|Take this my shirt, and throw it over the face of my father, he will become able to see; and bring, me your families all together
12|94|And when the caravan departed, their father said, 'Verily, I find the smell of Joseph, unless ye think I dote
12|95|They said, 'By God! thou art in thy old error
12|96|And when the herald of glad tidings came he threw it on his face, and he was restored to sight. Said he, 'Did I not tell you that I know from God that of which ye know not
12|97|They said, 'O our father! ask pardon for us of our sins;- verily, we were sinners
12|98|He said, 'I will ask pardon for you from my Lord; verily, He is the pardoning and merciful
12|99|And when they entered in unto Joseph, he took his father to stay with him, and said, 'Enter ye into Egypt, if it please God, safe
12|100|And he raised his father upon the throne, and they fell down before him adoring. And he said, 'O my sire! This is the interpretation of my vision aforetime; my Lord has made it come true, and He has been good to me, in bringing me forth out of prison, and bringing you from the desert, after Satan had made a breach between me and my brethren;- verily, my Lord is kind to whomsoever He will;- verily, He is the knowing, the wise
12|101|O my Lord! thou least given me dominion, and hast taught me the interpretation of sayings; O originator of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my patron in this world and the next; take me to Thyself resigned, And let me reach the righteous
12|102|That is one of the stories of the unseen which we inspire thee with, though thou wert not with them when they agreed in their affair, when they were so crafty
12|103|And yet most men, though thou shouldst be urgent, will not believe
12|104|Thou dost not ask them for it a hire; it is naught but a reminder to the world
12|105|How many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by and turn away therefrom
12|106|Nor do most of them believe in God without associating (other gods) with Him
12|107|Are they safe, then, from overwhelming vengeance coming on them from the torment of God? or from the Hour coming upon them suddenly while they do not perceive
12|108|Say, 'This is my way; I call now unto God on clear proof, I and those who follow me; and celebrated be God's praises, for I am not of the idolaters
12|109|Nor did we ever send before thee any save men whom we inspired, of the people of the cities. Have they not journeyed on in the earth, and beheld how was the end of those before them? But the abode of the future is surely better for those who believe;- what! have they then no sense
12|110|Until when the apostles despaired and they thought that they were proved liars, our help came to them, and whosoever we pleased was saved; but our violence is not averted from the sinful people
12|111|Their stories were a lesson to those endowed with minds. It was not a tale forged, but a verification of what was before it, and a detailing of everything, and a guide and a mercy to a people who believe
13|1|M. R. Those are the signs of the Book, and that which is sent down to thee from thy Lord is the truth; but most people will not believe
13|2|God it is who has raised the heavens without columns that ye can see; then He made for the throne, and subjected the sun and the moon; each one runs on to a stated and appointed time; He governs the affair, details the signs;- haply of the meeting with your Lord ye will be sure
13|3|And He it is who has stretched out the earth and placed therein firm mountains and rivers, and of every fruit has He placed therein two kinds. He makes the night cover the day;- verily, in that are signs unto a people who reflect
13|4|And on the earth are neighbouring portions, and gardens of grapes and corn and palms growing together (from one root) and not growing together; they are watered with one water, yet we distinguish one over the other as food;- verily, in that are signs unto a people who have sense
13|5|And if thou shouldst wonder, wondrous is their speech: 'What! when we have become dust, shall we really then be created anew?' These are they who disbelieve in their Lord, and these are they with fetters round their necks, and these are the fellows of the Fire; they shall dwell therein for aye
13|6|They will wish thee to hasten on the evil rather than the good; examples have passed away before them: but thy Lord is possessor of forgiveness unto men, notwithstanding their injustice; but, verily, thy Lord is keen to punish
13|7|Those who misbelieve say, 'Unless a sign be sent down upon him from his Lord....' - Thou art only a warner, and every people has its guide
13|8|God knows what each female bears, and what the wombs fall short of or add; for dimensions of every thing are with Him
13|9|He who knows the unseen and the visible,- the great, the lofty one
13|10|Alike among you is he who keeps secret his speech and he who displays it; and he who hides by night and he who stalks abroad by day
13|11|Each of them has pursuers before him and behind him, to keep guard over him at the command of God; verily, God changes not what a people has until they change it for themselves. And when God wishes evil to a people there is no averting it, nor have they a protector beside Him
13|12|He it is who shows you the lightning for fear and hope; and He brings up the heavy clouds
13|13|And the thunder celebrates His praise, and the angels too for fear of Him; and He sends the thunder-clap and overtakes therewith whom He will;- yet they wrangle about God! But He is strong in might
13|14|On Him is the call of truth, and those who call on others than Him shall not be answered at all, save as one who stretches out his hand to the water that it may reach his mouth, but it reaches it not! The call of the misbelievers is only in error
13|15|And God do those who are in the heavens and the earth adore, whether they will or no! as do their shadows also morn and eve
13|16|Say, 'Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth?' say, 'God;' say, 'Do ye take beside God patrons who cannot control profit or harm for themselves?' say, 'Shall the blind and the seeing be held equal? or shall the darkness and the light be held equal? or have they made associates with God who can create as He creates, so that the creation seem familiar to them?' say, 'God is the creator of everything, and He is the one, the dominant
13|17|He sends down from the sky water, and the water-courses flow according to their bulk, and the torrent bears along the floating scum: and from what they set fire to, craving ornaments or utensils, comes a scum like that;- thus does God hit the truth and the falsehood;- and as for the scum it is thrown off, and as for what profits man it stays on the earth. Thus does God strike out parables
13|18|For those who respond to their Lord is good; but those who respond not to Him, had they all that is in the earth and the like thereof as well, they would give it for a ransom; these shall have an evil reckoning up! and their resort is hell,- an evil couch shall it be
13|19|Is he who knows that naught but the truth is sent down upon thee from thy Lord like him who is blind? Only those possessed of minds will remember
13|20|Those who fulfill God's covenant and break not the compact
13|21|and those who attain what God has bidden to be attained, and dread their Lord and fear the evil reckoning up
13|22|and those who are patient, craving their Lord's face, and are steadfast in prayer, and expend in alms of what we have bestowed upon them secretly and openly, and ward off evil with good,- these shall have the recompense of the abode
13|23|gardens of Eden, into which they shall enter with the righteous amongst their fathers and their wives and their seed; and the angels shall enter in unto them from every gate
13|24|Peace be upon you! for that ye were patient; and goodly is the recompense of the abode
13|25|And those who break God's covenant after compacting for it, and who cut asunder what God hath bidden to be joined, and who do evil in the earth, these - upon them is the curse of God, and for them is an evil abode
13|26|God extends his bounty freely to whomsoever He will, or He metes it out; and they rejoice in the life of this world, but the life of this world is naught but a (temporary) provision compared with the next
13|27|Those who 'misbelieve say, 'Unless a sign is sent down upon him from his Lord . . . ' Say, 'God leads whom He will astray, but guides unto Him those who turn again
13|28|Those who believe and whose hearts are comforted by the mention of God,- aye! by the mention of God shall their hearts be comforted
13|29|who believe and do what is right. Good cheer for them and an excellent resort
13|30|Thus have we sent thee to a nation before which other nations have passed away, to recite to them that which we have inspired thee with; yet they misbelieve in the merciful! Say, 'He is my Lord; there is no god but He; upon Him do I rely, and unto Him is my repentance
13|31|And though it were a Qur'an by which the mountains were moved, or by which the earth were cut up, or the dead made to speak - nay, God's is the command altogether! Did not those who believed know that if God had pleased He would have guided men altogether? And a striking calamity shall not cease to overtake those who misbelieve for what they have wrought, or to alight close by their dwellings; until God's promise comes - verily, God fails not in His promise
13|32|Before thee have apostles been mocked at; and those who misbelieved have I allowed to range at large; and then it caught them up! How then was my punishment
13|33|Shall He who is standing over every soul (to note) what it has earned -? And they join partners with God! Say, 'Name them; can ye inform Him of what He does not know in the earth? or is it for name's sake only (that ye call upon them)? 'Nay, then, stratagem is made seemly to those who misbelieve, and they turn folks from the path of God! But whomsoever God doth lead astray, no guide has he
13|34|For them is torment in this world's life; but surely the torment of the next is more wretched still - nor have they against God a keeper
13|35|The likeness of the Paradise which those who fear God are promised, beneath it rivers flow, its food is enduring, and likewise its shade! That is the recompense of those who fear; but the recompense of misbelievers is the Fire
13|36|And those to whom we brought the Book rejoice in that which we have sent down to thee; but of the confederates are some who deny a part thereof. Say, 'I am only bidden to serve God and not to associate any with Him; on Him I call and to Him is my recourse
13|37|Thus have we sent it down, an Arabic judgment, but hadst thou followed their lusts, after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou hadst not had against God a patron or a keeper
13|38|And we sent apostles before thee, and we made for them wives and seed; and no apostle could bring a sign save by God's permission;- for every period there is a book
13|39|God blots out what He will, or He confirms; and with Him is the Mother of the Book
13|40|Either we will let thee see a part of what we threaten them with, or we will take thee to Ourself; but thy duty is only to deliver thy message, and ours to reckon up
13|41|Did they not see that we come to the land and diminish the borders thereof? God judges, and there is none to reverse His judgment, and He is swift at reckoning up
13|42|And those who were before them were crafty too; but God's is the craft altogether! He knows what every soul earns; and the misbelievers shall know whose is the recompense of the abode
13|43|And those who misbelieve say, 'Thou art not sent!' Say, 'God is witness enough between me and you; and so is he who has the knowledge of the Book
14|1|M. A book which we have sent down to thee, to bring men forth from darkness into light, by permission of their Lord, unto the way of the mighty and praiseworthy one
14|2|God is He whose is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. Alas for the misbelievers, for their torment is keen
14|3|Who love this world's life better than the next, and turn folks from the path of God, and crave to make it crooked; these are in remote error
14|4|We have not sent any apostle save with the language of his people, that he might explain to them. But God leads whom He will astray, and guides whom He will; and He is the mighty, the wise
14|5|We did send Moses with our signs, 'Bring forth thy people from the darkness into the light, and remind them of the days of God!' verily, in that are signs to every patient, grateful one
14|6|When Moses said to his people, 'Remember the favours of God towards you, when He saved you from Pharaoh's people, who sought to wreak you evil woe, slaughtering your sons and letting your women live;' in that was a great trial for you from your Lord
14|7|When your Lord proclaimed, 'If ye give thanks I will surely give you increase; but if ye misbelieve, verily, my torment is severe
14|8|And Moses said, 'if ye misbelieve, ye and those who are on the earth altogether - then, verily, God is rich, and to be praised
14|9|Has not the story come to you of those who were before you, of the people of Noah, and 'Ad, and Thamud, and those who came after them? none knows them save God. Apostles came unto them with manifest signs; but they thrust their hands into their mouths and said, 'Verily, we disbelieve in that which ye are sent with, and we are in hesitating doubt concerning that to which ye call us
14|10|Their apostles said, 'Is there doubt about God, the originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you to pardon you for your sins, and to respite you until an appointed time.' They said, 'Ye are but mortals like ourselves; ye wish to turn us from what our fathers used to serve. Bring us, then, obvious authority
14|11|Their apostles said unto them, 'We are only mortals like yourselves; but God is gracious unto whomsoever He will of His servants, and it is not for us to bring you an authority, save by His permission; but upon God do the believers rely
14|12|What ails us that we should not rely on God when He has guided us in our paths? we will be surely patient in your hurting us; for upon God rely those who do rely
14|13|And those who misbelieved said to their apostles, 'We will drive you forth from our land; or else ye shall return to our faith! ' And their Lord inspired them, 'We will surely destroy the unjust
14|14|and we will make you to dwell in the land after them. That is for him who fears my place and fears my threat
14|15|Then they asked for an issue; and disappointed was every rebel tyrant
14|16|Behind such a one is hell, and he shall be given to drink liquid pus
14|17|He shall try to swallow it, but cannot gulp it down; and death shall come upon him from every place, and yet he shall not die; and behind him shall be rigorous woe
14|18|The likeness of those who disbelieve on their Lord,- their works are as ashes whereon the wind blows fiercely on a stormy day. They have no power at all over that which they have earned.' That is the remote error
14|19|Dost not thou see that God created the heavens and the earth in truth? If He please He can take you off and bring a new creation
14|20|nor is that hard for God
14|21|They all come out to God; and the weak say to those who were big with pride, 'We were followers of yours, can ye now avail us aught against God's torment?' They say, 'If God had guided us we would have guided you. It is the same to us if we are agonized or if we are penitent, we have no escape
14|22|And Satan says, when the affair is decided, 'Verily, God promised you a promise of truth; but I promised you and failed you; for I had no authority over you. I only called you, and ye did answer me; then blame me not, but blame yourselves; I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I disbelieved in your associating me (with God) before; verily, the wrong-doers, for them is grievous woe
14|23|But I will cause those who believe and do aright to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye by the permission of their Lord; their salutation therein is 'Peace
14|24|Dost thou not see how God strikes out a parable? A good word is like a good tree whose root is firm, and whose branches are in the sky
14|25|it gives its fruit at every season by the permission of its Lord - but God strikes out parables for men that haply they may be mindful
14|26|And the likeness of a bad word is as a bad tree, which is felled from above the earth, and has no staying place
14|27|God answers those who believe with the sure word in this world's life and in the next; but God leads the wrong-doers astray; for God does what He will
14|28|Dost not thou see those who have changed God's favours for misbelief, and have made their people to alight at the abode of perdition
14|29|in hell they shall broil, and an ill resting-place shall it be
14|30|And they made peers for God, to lead men astray from His path. Say, 'Enjoy yourselves, for, verily, your journey is to the Fire
14|31|Say to my servants who believe, that they be steadfast in prayer and expend in alms of what we have bestowed upon them in secret and in public, before there comes the day when there shall be no buying and no friendship
14|32|God it is who created the heavens and the earth; and sent down from the sky water, and brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for you; and subjected to you the ships, to float therein upon the sea at His bidding; and subjected for you the rivers
14|33|and subjected for you the sun and the moon, constant both; and subjected for you the night and the day
14|34|and brought you of everything ye asked Him: but if ye try to number God's favours, ye cannot count them;- verily, man is very unjust and ungrateful
14|35|And when Abraham said, 'My Lord, make this land safe, and turn me and my sons away from serving idols
14|36|My Lord, verily, they have led many men astray; but he who follows me, verily, he is of me; but he who rebels against me,- verily, thou art pardoning, merciful
14|37|O our Lord! verily, I have made some of my seed dwell in a valley without corn, by thy Sacred House. O our Lord! let them be steadfast in prayer and make the hearts of men yearn towards them, and provide them with fruits, haply they may give thanks
14|38|O our Lord! verily, Thou knowest what we hide and what we publish; for naught is hid from God in the earth or in the sky
14|39|Praise to God who hath bestowed on me, notwithstanding my old age, Ishmael and Isaac!- verily, my Lord surely hears prayer
14|40|O my Lord! make me steadfast in prayer, and of my seed likewise! O our Lord! and accept my prayer
14|41|O our Lord! pardon me and my parents and the believers on the reckoning day
14|42|So think not God careless of what the unjust do; He only respites them until the day on which all eyes shall stare
14|43|Hurrying on, raising up their heads, with their looks not turned back to them, and their hearts void
14|44|and warn men of the day when the torment shall come! And those who have done wrong shall say, 'O our Lord! respite us until an appointed time nigh at hand, and we will respond to Thy call, and follow the apostles!' - 'What! did ye not swear before, ye should have no decline
14|45|And ye dwelt in the dwellings of those who had wronged themselves; and it was made plain to you how we did with them; and we struck out parables for you
14|46|but they plotted their stratagems, but with God is a stratagem for them, although at their stratagem the mountains should give way
14|47|Think then not indeed that God fails in his promise to his apostles;- verily, God is mighty, the Lord of vengeance
14|48|on the day when the earth shall be changed for another earth, and the heavens too; and (all) shall go forth unto God, the one, the dominant
14|49|Thou shalt see the sinners on that day bound together in fetters
14|50|with shirts of pitch, and fire covering their faces
14|51|that God may reward each soul according to what it has earned; verily, God is swift at reckoning up
14|52|This is a message to be delivered to men that they may be warned thereby, and know that only He is God,- one,- and that those who have minds may remember
15|1|R. Those are the signs of the Book and of a perspicuous Qur'an
15|2|Many a time will those who disbelieve fain they had been resigned
15|3|Leave them to eat and enjoy themselves and let hope beguile them, but they at length shall know
15|4|We never destroyed a city without it had its noted doom
15|5|No nation can hasten on its appointed time, nor put it off
15|6|But they say, 'O thou to whom the Reminder has been sent down! verily, thou art possessed
15|7|Why dost thou not bring us the angels if thou dost tell the truth
15|8|We sent not down the angels save by right nor even then would these be respited
15|9|Verily, we have sent down the Reminder, and, verily, we will guard it
15|10|And we sent before thee among the sects of those of yore
15|11|But there never came an apostle to them but they mocked at him
15|12|Such conduct also will we put into the hearts of the sinners
15|13|They will not believe therein, but the course of those of yore is run
15|14|But had we opened to them a door of the sky and they had mounted up into it all the while
15|15|then also had they said, 'Our eye-sight is only intoxicated; nay, we are an enchanted people
15|16|And we have placed in the sky the signs of the zodiac, and have made them seemly to the beholders
15|17|and we have guarded them from every pelted devil
15|18|save from such as steal a hearing, and there follows him an obvious shooting-star
15|19|And the earth we have stretched out and have thrown on it firm mountains, and have caused to grow upon it of everything a measured quantity
15|20|And we have made for you means of livelihood therein, and for those for whom ye have not to provide
15|21|Nor is there aught but the treasuries of it are with us, and we do not send it down save in a noted quantity
15|22|And we send forth the impregnating winds, and we send down water from the sky, and we give it to you to drink, nor is it ye who store it up
15|23|And we, verily, we quicken and kill; and we are of (all things) heirs
15|24|And we already know the foremost of you, and we know the laggards too
15|25|And, verily, it is your Lord who will gather you; verily, He is wise and knowing
15|26|And we did create man from crackling clay of black mull wrought in form
15|27|And the ginns had we created before of smokeless fire
15|28|And when thy Lord said to the angels, 'Verily, I am creating a mortal from crackling clay of black mud wrought into shape
15|29|And when I have fashioned it, and breathed into it of my spirit, then fall ye down before it adoring
15|30|And the angels adored all of them together
15|31|save Iblis, who refused to be among those who adored
15|32|He said, 'O Iblis! what ails thee that thou art not among those who adore
15|33|Said he, 'I would not adore a mortal whom Thou hast created from crackling clay of black mud wrought into form
15|34|He said, 'Then get thee forth therefrom, and, verily, thou art to be pelted
15|35|And, verily, the curse is upon thee until the day of judgment
15|36|Said he, 'O my Lord! respite me until the day when they shall be raised
15|37|He said, 'Then, verily, thou art of the respited
15|38|until the day of the noted time
15|39|He said, 'O my Lord! for that Thou hast seduced me I will surely make it seem seemly for them on earth, and I will surely seduce them all together
15|40|save such of Thy servants amongst them as are sincere
15|41|Said He, 'This is a right way against me
15|42|Verily, my servants thou hast no authority over, save over those who follow thee of such as are seduced
15|43|and, verily, hell is promised to them all together
15|44|It has seven doors; at every door is there a separate party of them
15|45|Verily, those who fear God shall dwell amidst gardens and springs
15|46|Enter ye therein with peace in safety
15|47|And we will strip off whatever ill-feeling is in their breasts; as brethren on couches face to face
15|48|No toil shall touch them therein, nor shall they be brought forth therefrom
15|49|Inform my servants that I am the pardoning, the merciful
15|50|and that my woe is the grievous woe
15|51|And inform them concerning Abraham's guests
15|52|when they entered in unto him and said, 'Peace!' he said, 'Verily, we are afraid of you
15|53|They said, 'Be not afraid! verily, we give thee glad tidings of a knowing boy
15|54|He said, 'Do ye give me this glad tidings although old age has touched me? give me the glad tidings then
15|55|They said, 'We give the glad tidings of the truth, then be not of those who despair
15|56|He said, 'Who would despair of the mercy of his Lord save those who err
15|57|He said, 'What is your business, O ye messengers
15|58|They said, 'Verily, we are sent unto a sinful people
15|59|save only Lot's family, them will we save all together
15|60|except his wife; we have decreed, verily, she shall be of those who linger
15|61|And when the messengers came unto Lot's family
15|62|he said, 'Verily, ye are a people whom I recognise not
15|63|They said, 'Nay, but we have come to thee with that whereof they did doubt
15|64|And we have brought thee the truth, and, verily, we speak the truth
15|65|Travel then with thy family in the deep darkness of the night, and follow thou their rear; and let not any one of you turn round to look; but go on to where ye are bidden
15|66|And we decided for him this affair because the uttermost one of these people should be cut off on the morrow
15|67|Then the people of the city came, clad at the tidings
15|68|Said he, 'Verily, these are my guests, therefore disgrace me not
15|69|but fear God, and put me not to shame
15|70|They said, 'Have we not forbidden thee everybody in the world
15|71|He said, 'Here are my daughters, if do it ye must
15|72|By thy life! verily, they were surely in their intoxication blindly wandering on
15|73|And the noise caught them at the dawn
15|74|And we made the higher parts (of the cities) their lower parts, and rained down on them stones of baked clay
15|75|Verily, in that is a sign to those who mark
15|76|And, verily, the (cities) are on a path that still remains
15|77|Verily, in that is a sign to the believers
15|78|And the fellows of the Grove too were unjust
15|79|and we took vengeance on them, and, verily, they both are for an obvious example
15|80|And the fellows of El 'Hagr called the messengers liars
15|81|and we brought them our signs, but they therefrom did turn away
15|82|And they did hew them in the mountain houses to dwell in in safety
15|83|But the noise caught them in the morn
15|84|and that which they had earned availed them naught
15|85|We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them both, save in truth. And, verily, the Hour is surely coming; then do thou pardon with a fair pardon
15|86|Verily, thy Lord He is the creator, the knowing
15|87|We have already brought thee Seven of the Repetition, and the mighty Qur'an
15|88|Let not thine eyes strain after what we have allowed a few pairs of them to enjoy, nor grieve for them; but lower thy wing to the believers
15|89|and say, 'Verily, I am an obvious warner
15|90|As we sent down (punishment) on the separatists
15|91|who dismember the Qur'an
15|92|But, by thy Lord! we will question them, one and all
15|93|about what they have done
15|94|Therefore, publish what thou art bidden, and turn aside from the idolaters
15|95|Verily, we are enough for thee against the scoffers
15|96|Who place with God other gods; but they at length shall know
15|97|And we knew that thy breast was straitened at what they say
15|98|Then celebrate the praises of thy Lord, and be thou of those who adore
15|99|And serve thy Lord until the certainty shall come to thee
16|1|God's bidding will come; seek not then to hasten it on. Celebrated be His praises from what they join with Him
16|2|He sends down the angels with the Spirit at His bidding upon whom He will of His servants (to say), 'Give warning that there is no god but Me; Me therefore do ye fear
16|3|He created the heavens and the earth in truth! Exalted be He above that which they join with Him
16|4|He created man from a clot; and yet, behold, he is an open opponent
16|5|The cattle too have we created for you; in them is warmth and profit, and from them do ye eat
16|6|In them is there beauty for you when ye drive them home to rest, and when ye drive them forth to graze
16|7|And they bear your heavy burdens to towns which ye could not otherwise reach, except with great wretchedness of soul;- verily, your Lord is kind and merciful
16|8|And horses too, and mules, and asses, for you to ride upon and for an ornament.- He creates also what ye know not of
16|9|God's it is to show the path; from it some turn aside: but had He pleased He would have guided you one and all
16|10|He it is who sends down water from the sky, whence ye have drink, and whence the trees grow whereby ye feed your flocks
16|11|He makes the corn to grow, and the olives, and the palms, and the grapes, and some of every fruit;- verily, in that is a sign unto a people who reflect
16|12|And He subjected to you the night and the day, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars are subjected to His bidding. Verily, in that are signs to a people who have sense
16|13|And what He has produced for you in the earth varying in hue, verily, in that is a sign for a people who are mindful
16|14|He it is who has subjected the sea, that ye may eat fresh flesh therefrom; and ye bring forth from it ornaments which ye wear,- and thou mayest see the ships cleaving through it,- and that ye may search after His grace,- and haply ye may give thanks
16|15|And He has cast firm mountains on the earth lest it move with you; and rivers and roads; haply ye may be guided
16|16|And landmarks; and by the stars too are they guided
16|17|Is He who creates like him who creates not?- are they then unmindful
16|18|But if ye would number the favours of God, ye cannot count them. Verily, God is forgiving, merciful
16|19|God knows what ye keep secret, and what ye disclose
16|20|And those on whom ye call beside God cannot create anything, for they are themselves created
16|21|Dead, not living, nor can they perceive! When shall they be raised
16|22|Your God is one God, and those who believe not in the hereafter their hearts are given to denial, and they are big with pride
16|23|Without a doubt God knows what ye keep secret and what ye disclose! Verily, He does not love those big with pride
16|24|And when it is said to them, 'What is it that your Lord has sent down?' they say, 'Old folks' tales
16|25|Let them bear the burden of their sins entirely on the resurrection day, and some of the burdens of those whom they led astray without knowledge.- Aye! an ill burden shall they bear
16|26|Those who were before them devised a stratagem, but God brought their building off its foundations, and the roof fell over them, and the torment came to them, from whence they could not perceive
16|27|Then on the resurrection day He will put them to shame, and say, 'Where are your associates whom ye divided into parties about?' Those to whom knowledge is brought will say, 'Verily, disgrace today, and evil are upon the misbelievers
16|28|Those whom the angels took away were wronging themselves; then they offered peace: 'We have done no evil.' - 'Yea! verily, God knows what ye did
16|29|Wherefore enter ye the doors of hell, to dwell therein for aye; for ill is the resort of the proud
16|30|And it will be said to those who fear God, 'What is it that your Lord has sent down?' They will say, 'The best,' for those who do good, good in this world; but certainly the abode of the next is best, and surely pleasant is the abode of those who fear
16|31|Gardens of Eden which they shall enter, beneath them rivers flow; therein shall they have what they please;- thus does God reward those who fear Him
16|32|To those whom the angels take off in a goodly state they shall say, 'Peace be upon you! enter ye into Paradise for that which ye have done
16|33|Do they expect other than that the angels should come to take them off, or that thy Lord's bidding should come?- thus did those before them; God did not wrong them; but it was themselves they wronged
16|34|And the evil which they had done befell them, and that environed them at which they used to mock
16|35|And those who associated (others with God) said, 'Had God pleased we had not served aught beside Him, neither we nor our fathers; nor had we prohibited aught without Him;' - thus did those before them: but have messengers aught to do but to deliver their message plainly
16|36|We have sent in every nation an apostle (to say), 'Serve ye God, and avoid Taghut!' and amongst them are some whom God has guided, and amongst them are some for whom error is due;- go ye about then on the earth, and behold how was the end of those who called (the apostles) liars
16|37|If thou art ever so eager for their guidance, verily, God guides not those who go astray, nor have they any helpers
16|38|They swear by their most strenuous oath, 'God will not raise up him who dies.' - Yea! a promise binding on him true!- but most men do not know
16|39|To explain to them that which they disputed about, and that those who misbelieved may know that they are liars
16|40|We only say unto a thing we wish,' BE,' and it is
16|41|But those who fled for God's sake, after they were wronged, we will surely establish them in this world with good things; but the hire of the future, life is greater, if ye did but know
16|42|Those who are patient, and upon their Lord rely
16|43|And we have not sent before thee any but men whom we inspire,- ask ye those who have the Reminder, if ye know not yourselves
16|44|with manifest signs and with scriptures; and we have sent down the Reminder to thee too, that thou mayest explain to men what has been sent down to them, and haply they may reflect
16|45|Are those who were so crafty in evil sure that God will not cleave open the earth with them, or bring them torment from whence they cannot perceive
16|46|or seize them in their going to and fro? for they cannot make Him helpless
16|47|Or that He should seize them with a gradual destruction? for, verily, your Lord is kind, merciful
16|48|Do they not regard whatever thing God has created; its shadow falls on the right or the left, adoring God and shrinking up
16|49|Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth, beast or angel, adores God; nor are they big with pride
16|50|They fear their Lord above them, and they do what they are bidden
16|51|And God says, 'Take not to two gods; God is only one; me then do ye fear
16|52|His is what is in the heavens and in the earth; to Him is obedience due unceasingly; other than God then will ye fear
16|53|And whatever favours ye have, they are from God; then, whenever distress touches you, unto Him ye turn for succour
16|54|Yet, when He removes the distress from you, lo! a party of you join partners with their Lord
16|55|That they may disbelieve in what we have brought them and may enjoy,- but at length they shall know
16|56|And they set aside for what they know not a portion of what we have bestowed upon them.- By God! ye shall be questioned concerning that which ye have devised
16|57|They make for God daughters;- celebrated be His praise!- and for themselves they like them not
16|58|When any one of them has tidings of a female child, his face is overclouded and black, and he has to keep back his wrath
16|59|He skulks away from the people, for the evil tidings he has heard;- is he to keep it with its disgrace, or to bury it in the dust?- aye! evil is it that they judge
16|60|For those who disbelieve in the future life is a similitude of evil: but for God is the loftiest similitude; for He is the mighty, the wise
16|61|If God were to punish men for their wrong-doing. He would not leave upon the earth a single beast; but He respites them until a stated time; and when their time comes they cannot put it off an hour, nor can they bring it on
16|62|They set down to God what they abhor themselves; and their tongues describe the lie that 'good is to be theirs.' Without a doubt theirs is the Fire, for, verily, they shall be sent on there
16|63|By God! we sent (messengers) to nations before thee, but Satan made their works seemly to them, for he is their patron today, and for them is grievous woe
16|64|We have only sent down to thee the Book, that thou mayest explain to them that which they did dispute about, and as a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe
16|65|And God sends down water from the sky, and quickens therewith the earth after its death; verily, in that is a sign to a people who can hear
16|66|Verily, ye have in cattle a lesson; we give you to drink from that which is in their bellies, betwixt chyme and blood,- pure milk,- easy to swallow for those who drink
16|67|And of the fruit of the palms and the grapes ye take therefrom an intoxicant and a goodly provision; verily, in that is a sign to a people who have sense
16|68|And thy Lord inspired the bee, 'Take to houses in the mountains, and in the trees, and in the hives they build
16|69|Then eat from every fruit, and walk in the beaten paths of thy Lord;' there cometh forth from her body a draught varying in hue, in which is a cure for men; verily, in that are signs unto a people who reflect
16|70|God created you; then He will take you to Himself; but amongst you are some whom He will thrust into the most decrepit age; so that he may not know aught that once he knew. Verily, God is knowing, powerful
16|71|And God has preferred some of you over others in providing for you; but those who have been preferred will not restore their provision to those whom their right hands possess that they may share equally therein:- is it God's favours they gainsay
16|72|And God has made for you from amongst yourselves wives, and has made for you from your wives sons and grandchildren; and has provided you with good things;- is it in vanity that they believe, while for God's favour they are ungrateful
16|73|And they serve beside God what cannot control for them any provision from the heavens or the earth, and have no power at all
16|74|Do not then strike out parables for God! Verily, God knows, but ye do not know
16|75|God has struck out a parable; an owned slave, able to do nothing; and one whom we have provided with a good provision, and who expends therefrom in alms secretly and openly:- shall they be held equal?- Praise be to God, most of them do not know
16|76|And God has struck out a parable: two men, one of them dumb, able to do nothing, a burden to his lord wherever he directs him he comes not with success; is he to be held equal with him who bids what is just and who is on the right way
16|77|God's are the unseen things of the heavens and the earth; nor is the matter of the Hour aught but as the twinkling of an eye, or nigher still! Verily, God is mighty over all
16|78|God brings you forth out of the wombs of your mothers knowing naught; and He makes for you hearing, and sight, and hearts,- haply ye may give thanks
16|79|Do they not see the birds subjected in the vault of the sky?- none holds them in but God: verily, in that is a sign unto a people who believe
16|80|God made for you in your houses a repose; and made for you, of the skins of cattle, houses, that ye may find them light, on the day ye move your quarters and the day when ye abide; and from their wool, and from their fur, and from their hair come furniture and chattels for a season
16|81|And God has made for you, of what He has created, shades; and has made for you shelters in the mountains; and He has made for you shirts to keep you from the heat, and shirts to keep you from each other's violence:- thus does He fulfill His favours towards you,- haply ye yet may be resigned
16|82|But if they turn their backs,- thine is only to preach thy plain message
16|83|They recognise the favours of God, and yet they deny them, for most men are ungrateful
16|84|And on the day when we shall send from every nation a witness; then shall those who misbelieve not be allowed (to excuse themselves), and they shall not be taken back into favour
16|85|missing
16|86|And when those who join their partners with God say, 'Our Lord! these be our partners on whom we used to call beside Thee.' And they shall proffer them the speech, 'Verily, ye are liars
16|87|And they shall proffer on that day peace unto God; and that which they had devised shall stray away from them
16|88|Those who misbelieve and turn folks off God's path, we will add torment to their torment, for that they were evildoers
16|89|And on the day when we will raise up in every nation a witness against them from among themselves, and we will bring thee as a witness against these;- for we have sent down to thee a book explaining clearly everything, and a guidance, and a mercy, and glad tidings to the believers
16|90|Verily, God bids you do justice and good, and give to kindred (their due), and He forbids you to sin, and do wrong, and oppress; He admonishes you, haply ye may be mindful
16|91|Fulfill God's covenant when ye have covenanted, and break not your oaths after asseverating them, for ye thereby make God your surety; verily, God knows what ye do
16|92|And be not like her who unravels her yarn, fraying it out after she hath spun it close, by taking your oaths for mutual intrigue, because one nation is more numerous than another; God only tries you therewith, but He will make manifest to you on the resurrection day that whereon ye did dispute
16|93|But had God pleased He would have made you one nation; but He leads astray whom He will, and guides whom He will;- but ye shall be questioned as to that which ye have done
16|94|Take not therefore your oaths for mutual intrigue, lest a foot slip after being planted firmly, and ye taste of evil for that ye turned folks off the path of God, and for you there be mighty woe
16|95|And sell not God's covenant for a little price; with God only is what is better for you, if ye did but know
16|96|What ye have is spent, but what God has endures; and we will recompense the patient with their hire for the best deeds they have done
16|97|Whoso acts aright, male or female, and is a believer, we will quicken with a goodly life; and we will recompense them with their hire for the best deeds they have done
16|98|When thou dost read the Qur'an, ask refuge with God from Satan the pelted one
16|99|Verily, he has no power over those who believe and who upon their Lord rely
16|100|His power is only over those who take him for a patron, and over the idolaters
16|101|And whenever we change one verse for another,- God knows best what He sends down. They say, 'Thou art but a forger!' - Nay, most of them do not know
16|102|Say, 'The Holy Spirit brought it down from thy Lord in truth, to stablish those who believe, and for a guidance and glad tidings to those who are resigned
16|103|We knew that they said, 'It is only some mortal who teaches him.' - The tongue of him they lean towards is barbarous, and this is plain Arabic
16|104|Verily, those who believe not in God's signs, God will not guide them, and for them is grievous woe
16|105|Only they are the forgers of a lie who believe not in God's signs; and these, they are the liars
16|106|Whoso disbelieves in God after having believed, unless it be one who is forced and whose heart is quiet in the faith,- but whoso expands his breast to misbelieve,- on them is wrath from God, and for them is mighty woe
16|107|That is because they preferred the love of this world's life to the next;- but, verily, God guides not the unbelieving people
16|108|These are they on whose hearts, and hearing, and eyesight, God has set a stamp, and these, they are the careless
16|109|Without a doubt that in the next life they will be the losers
16|110|Then, verily, thy Lord, to those who fled after they had been tried, and then fought strenuously and were patient,- verily, thy Lord after that will be forgiving and merciful
16|111|On the day every soul will come to wrangle for itself, and every soul shall be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
16|112|God has struck out a parable: a city which was safe and quiet, its provision came to it in plenty from every place, and then it denied God's favours, and God made it feel the clothing of hunger and fear, for that which they had wrought
16|113|And there came to them an apostle from amongst themselves, but they called him a liar, and the torment seized them, while yet they were unjust
16|114|Eat, then, from what God has provided you with, things lawful and good, and give thanks for the favours of God, if it be Him ye serve
16|115|He has only forbidden you that which dies of itself, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is devoted to other than God; but he who is forced, neither revolting nor transgressing, it is no sin for him: verily, God is forgiving and merciful
16|116|And say not of the lie your tongues pronounce, 'This is lawful, and this is unlawful,' forging against God a lie; verily, those who forge against God a lie shall not prosper
16|117|A little enjoyment - then for them is grievous woe
16|118|For those who are Jews we have forbidden what we have narrated to thee before; we did not wrong them, but it was themselves they wronged
16|119|Then, verily, thy Lord to those who have done evil in ignorance and then repented after that and done aright,- verily, thy Lord afterwards is forgiving and merciful
16|120|Verily, Abraham was a high priest, a 'Hanif, and was not of the idolaters
16|121|thankful for His favours; He chose him and He guided him unto the right way
16|122|And we gave him in this world good things; and, verily, in the next he will be among the righteous
16|123|Then we inspired thee, 'Follow the faith of Abraham, a 'Hanif, for he was not of the idolaters
16|124|The Sabbath was only made for those who dispute thereon; but, verily, thy Lord will judge between them on the resurrection day concerning that whereon they do dispute
16|125|Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and goodly warning; and wrangle with them in the kindest way; verily, thy Lord He knows best who has erred from His way, for He knows best the guided ones
16|126|But if ye punish, punish (only) as ye were punished; but if ye are patient, it is best for those who are patient
16|127|Be thou patient then; but thy patience is only in God's hands. Do not grieve about them; and be not in a strait at their craftiness
16|128|verily, God is with those who fear Him, and with those who do well
17|1|Celebrated be the praises of Him who took His servant a journey by night from the Sacred Mosque, to the Remote Mosque, the precinct of which we have blessed, to show him of our signs! verily, He both hears and looks
17|2|And we gave Moses the Book and made it a guidance to the children of Israel: 'Take ye to no guardian but me
17|3|Seed of those we bore with Noah (in the ark)! verily, he was a thankful servant
17|4|And we decreed to the children of Israel in the Book, 'Ye shall verily do evil in the earth twice, and ye shall rise to a great height (of pride)
17|5|And when the threat for the first (sin) of the two came, we sent over them servants of ours, endued with violence, and they searched inside your houses; and it was an accomplished threat
17|6|Then we rallied you once more against them, and aided you with wealth and sons, and made you a numerous band
17|7|If ye do well, ye will do well to your own souls; and if ye do ill, it is against them! 'And when the threat for the last came - to harm your faces and to enter the mosque as they entered it the first time, and to destroy what they had got the upper-hand over with utter destruction
17|8|It may be that thy Lord will have mercy on you;- but if ye return we will return, and we have made hell a prison for the misbelievers
17|9|Verily, this Qur'an guides to the straightest path, and gives the glad tidings to the believers who do aright that for them is a great hire
17|10|and that for those who believe not in the hereafter, we have prepared a mighty woe
17|11|Man prays for evil as he prays for good; and man was ever hasty
17|12|We made the night and the day two signs; and we blot out the sign of the night and make the sign of the day visible, that ye may seek after plenty from your Lord, and that ye may number the years and the reckoning; and we have detailed everything in detail
17|13|And every man's augury have we fastened on his neck; and we will bring forth for him on the resurrection day a book offered to him wide open
17|14|Read thy book, thou art accountant enough against thyself today
17|15|He who accepts guidance, accepts it only for his own soul: and he who errs, errs only against it; nor shall one burdened soul bear the burden of another. Nor would we punish until we had sent an apostle
17|16|And when we desired to destroy a city we bade the opulent ones thereof; and they wrought abomination therein; and its due sentence was pronounced; and we destroyed it with utter destruction
17|17|How many generations have we destroyed after Noah! but thy Lord of the sins of his servant is well aware, and sees enough
17|18|Whoso is desirous of this life that hastens away, we will hasten on for him therein what we please,- for whom we please. Then we will make hell for him to broil in - despised and outcast
17|19|But whoso desires the next life, and strives for it and is a believer - these, their striving shall be gratefully received
17|20|To all - these and those - will we extend the gifts of thy Lord; for the gifts of thy Lord are not restricted
17|21|See how we have preferred some of them over others, but in the next life are greater degrees and greater preference
17|22|Put not with God other gods, or thou wilt sit despised and forsaken
17|23|Thy Lord has decreed that ye shall not serve other than Him; and kindness to one's parents, whether one or both of them reach old age with thee; and say not to them, 'Fie!' and do not grumble at them, but speak to them a generous speech
17|24|And lower to them the wing of humility out of compassion, and say, 'O Lord! have compassion on them as they brought me up when I was little
17|25|Your Lord knows best what is in your souls if ye be righteous, and, verily, He is forgiving unto those who come back penitent
17|26|And give thy kinsman his due and the poor and the son of the road; and waste not wastefully
17|27|for the wasteful were ever the devil's brothers; and the devil is ever ungrateful to his Lord
17|28|But if thou dost turn away from them to seek after mercy from thy Lord, which thou hopest for, then speak to them an easy speech
17|29|Make not thy hand fettered to thy neck, nor yet spread it out quite open, lest thou shouldst have to sit down blamed and straitened in means
17|30|Verily, thy Lord spreads out provision to whomsoever He will or He doles it out. Verily, He is ever well aware of and sees His servants
17|31|And slay not your children for fear of poverty; we will provide for them; beware! for to slay them is ever a great sin
17|32|And draw not near to fornication; verily, it is ever an abomination, and evil is the way thereof
17|33|And slay not the soul that God has forbidden you, except for just cause; for he who is slain unjustly we have given his next of kin authority; yet let him not exceed in slaying; verily, he is ever helped
17|34|And draw not near to the wealth of the orphan, save to improve it, until he reaches the age of puberty, and fulfil your compacts; verily, a compact is ever enquired of
17|35|And give full measure when ye measure out, and weigh with a right balance; that is better and a fairer determination
17|36|And do not pursue that of which thou hast no knowledge; verily, the hearing, the sight, and the heart, all of these shall be enquired of
17|37|And walk not on the earth proudly; verily, thou canst not cleave the earth, and thou shalt not reach the mountains in height
17|38|All this is ever evil in the sight of your Lord and abhorred
17|39|That is something of what thy Lord has inspired thee with of wisdom; do not then put with God other gods, or thou wilt be thrown into hell reproached and outcast
17|40|What! has your Lord chosen to give you sons, and shall He take for Himself females from among the angels? verily, ye are speaking a mighty speech
17|41|Now have we turned it in various ways in this Qur'an, so let them bear in mind; but it will only increase them in aversion
17|42|Say, 'Were there with Him other gods, as ye say, then would they seek a way against the Lord of the throne
17|43|Celebrated be His praises, and exalted be He above what they say with a great exaltation
17|44|The seven heavens and the earth celebrate His praises, and all who therein are; nor is there aught, but what celebrates His praise: but ye cannot understand their celebration;- verily, He is clement and forgiving
17|45|And when thou readest the Qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a covering veil
17|46|And we place covers upon their hearts, lest they should understand, and dulness in their ears. And when thou dost mention in the Qur'an thy Lord by Himself they turn their backs in aversion
17|47|We know best for what they listen when they listen to thee; and when they whisper apart - when the wrongdoers say, 'Ye only follow a man enchanted
17|48|Behold, how they strike out for you parables, and err, and cannot find the way
17|49|They say, 'What! when we have become bones and rubbish are we to be raised up a new creature
17|50|Say, 'Be ye stones, or iron
17|51|or a creature, the greatest your breasts can conceive -!' Then they shall say, 'Who is to restore us?' Say, 'He who originated you at first;' and they will wag their heads and say, 'When will that be?' Say, 'It may, perhaps, be nigh
17|52|The day when He shall call on you and ye shall answer with praise to Him, and they will think that they have tarried but a little
17|53|And say to my servants that they speak in a kind way; verily, Satan makes ill-will between them; verily, Satan was ever unto man an open foe
17|54|Your Lord knows you best; if He please He will have mercy upon you, or if He please He will torment you: but we, have not sent thee to take charge of them
17|55|And thy Lord best knows who is in the heavens and the earth; we did prefer some of the prophets over the others, and to David did we give the Psalms
17|56|Say, 'Call on those whom ye pretend other than God;' but they shall not have the power to remove distress from you, nor to turn it off
17|57|Those on whom they call, seek themselves for a means of approaching their Lord, (to see) which of them is nearest: and they hope for His mercy and they fear His torment; verily, the torment of thy Lord is a thing to beware of
17|58|There is no city but we will destroy it before the day of judgment, or torment it with keen torment;- that is in the Book inscribed
17|59|Naught hindered us from sending thee with signs, save that those of yore said they were lies; so we gave Thamud the visible she-camel, but they treated her unjustly! for we do not send (any one) with signs save to make men fear
17|60|And when we said to thee, 'Verily, thy Lord encompasses men!' and we made the vision which we showed thee only a cause of sedition unto men, and the cursed tree as well; for we will frighten them, but it will only increase them in great rebellion
17|61|And when we said to the angels, ' Adore Adam;' and they adored, save Iblis, who said, ' Am I to adore one whom Thou hast created out of clay
17|62|Said he, 'Dost thou see now? this one whom Thou hast honoured above me, verily, if Thou shouldst respite me until the resurrection day, I will of a surety utterly destroy his seed except a few
17|63|Said He, 'Begone! and whoso of them follows thee - verily, hell is your recompense, an ample recompense
17|64|Entice away whomsoever of them thou canst with thy voice; and bear down upon them with thy horse and with thy foot; and share with them in their wealth and their children; and promise them,- but Satan promises them naught but deceit
17|65|Verily, my servants, thou hast no authority over them; thy Lord is guardian enough over them
17|66|It is your Lord who drives the ships for you in the sea that ye may seek after plenty from Him; verily, He is ever merciful to you
17|67|And when distress touches you in the sea, those whom ye call on, except Him, stray away from you; but when He has brought you safe to shore, ye turn away; for man is ever ungrateful
17|68|Are ye sure that He will not cleave with you the side of the shore, or send against you a heavy sand-storm? then ye will find no guardian for yourselves
17|69|Or are ye sure that He will not send you back therein another time, and send against you a violent wind, and drown you for your misbelief? then ye will find for yourselves no protector against us
17|70|But, we have been gracious to the children of Adam, and we have borne them by land and sea, and have provided them with good things, and have preferred them over many that we have created
17|71|The day when we will call all men by their high priest; and he whose book is given in his right hand - these shall read their book, nor shall they be wronged a straw
17|72|But he who in this life is blind shall be blind in the next too, and err farther from the way
17|73|They had well-nigh beguiled thee from what we inspired thee with, that thou shouldst forge against us something else, and then they would have taken thee for a friend
17|74|and had it not been that we established thee, thou wouldst have well-nigh leant towards them a little
17|75|then would we have made thee taste of torment both of life and death, then thou wouldst not have found against us any helper
17|76|And they well-nigh enticed thee away from the land, to turn thee out therefrom; but then - they should not have tarried after thee except a little
17|77|[This is] the course of those of our prophets whom we have sent before thee; and thou shalt find no change in our course
17|78|Be thou steadfast in prayer from the declining of the sun until the dusk of the night, and the reading of the dawn; verily, the reading of the dawn is ever testified to
17|79|And for the night, watch thou therein as an extra service. It may be that thy Lord will raise thee to a laudable station
17|80|And say, 'O my Lord! make me enter with a just entry; and make me come forth with a just coming forth; and grant me from, Thee authority to aid
17|81|And say, 'Truth has come, and falsehood has vanished! verily, falsehood is transient
17|82|And we will send down of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers, but it will only increase the wrong-doers in loss
17|83|And when we favour man he turns away and retires aside, but when evil touches him he is ever in despair
17|84|Say, 'Every one acts after his own manner, but your Lord knows, best who is most guided in the way
17|85|They will ask thee of the spirit. Say, 'The spirit comes at the bidding of my Lord, and ye are given but a little knowledge thereof
17|86|If we had wished we would have taken away that with which we have inspired thee; then thou wouldst have found no guardian against us
17|87|unless by a mercy from thy Lord; verily, His grace towards thee is great
17|88|Say, 'If mankind and ginns united together to bring the like of this Qur'an, they could not bring the like, though they should back each other up
17|89|We have turned about for men in this Qur'an every parable; but most men refuse to accept it, save ungratefully
17|90|And they say, 'We will by no means believe in thee, until there gush forth for thee a fountain from the earth
17|91|or there be made for thee a garden of palms and grapes, and rivers come gushing out amidst them
17|92|or thou make the sky to fall down upon us in pieces; or thou bring us God and the angels before us
17|93|or there be made for thee a house of gold; or thou climb up into the heaven; and even then we will not believe in thy climbing there, until thou send down on us a book that we may read!' Say, 'Celebrated be the praises of my Lord! was I aught but a mortal apostle
17|94|Naught prohibited men from believing when the guidance came to them, save their saying, 'God has sent a mortal for an apostle
17|95|Say, 'Were there angels on the earth walking in quiet, we had surely sent them an angel as an apostle
17|96|Say, 'God is witness enough between me and you; verily, He is ever of His servants well aware, and sees
17|97|He whom God guides, he is guided indeed; and he whom God leads astray, thou shalt never find patrons for them beside Him; and we will gather them upon the resurrection day upon their faces, blind, and dumb, and deaf; their resort is hell; whenever it grows dull we will give them another blaze
17|98|That is their reward for that they disbelieved in our signs, and said, 'What! when we are bones and rubbish, shall we then be raised up a new creation
17|99|Could they not see that God who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them, and to set for them an appointed time; there is no doubt therein, yet the wrong-doers refuse to accept it, save ungratefully
17|100|Say, 'Did ye control the treasuries of the mercy of my Lord, then ye would hold them through fear of expending; for man is ever niggardly
17|101|And we did bring Moses nine manifest signs; then ask the children of Israel (about) when he came to them, and Pharaoh said to him, 'Verily, I think thee, O Moses! enchanted
17|102|He said, 'Well didst thou know that none sent down these save the Lord of the heavens and the earth as visible signs; and, verily, I think thee, O Pharaoh! ruined
17|103|And he desired to drive them out of the land; but we drowned him and those with him, one and all
17|104|And after him we said to the children of Israel, 'Dwell ye in the land; and when the promise of the hereafter comes to pass, we will bring you in a mixed crowd (to judgment)
17|105|In truth have we sent it down, and in truth has it come down; and we have not sent thee as aught but a herald of glad tidings and a warner
17|106|And a Qur'an which we have divided, that thou mayst read it to mankind leisurely, and we sent it down, sending it down
17|107|Say, 'Believe ye therein, or believe not; verily, those who were given the knowledge before it, when it is read to them fall down upon their beards adoring
17|108|and they say, "Celebrated be the praises of our Lord! verily, the promise of our Lord is ever fulfilled
17|109|they fall down upon their beards weeping, and it increases their humility
17|110|Say, 'Call on God, or call on the Merciful One, whichever ye may call on Him by; for His are the best of names.' And do not say thy prayers openly, nor yet murmur them, but seek a way between these
17|111|And say, 'Praise belongs to God, who has not taken to Himself a son, and has not had a partner in His kingdom, nor had a patron against (such) abasement.' And magnify Him greatly
18|1|Praise belongs to God, who sent down to His servant the Book and put no crookedness therein
18|2|straight, to give warning of keen violence from Him; and to give the glad tidings to the believers, who do what is right, that for them is a goodly reward
18|3|wherein they shall abide for ever and for aye
18|4|and to give warning to those who say, 'God hath taken to Himself a son
18|5|They have no knowledge thereof, nor their fathers; a serious word it is that comes forth from their mouths! verily, they only speak a lie
18|6|Haply thou wilt grieve thyself to death for sorrow after them, if they believe not in this new revelation
18|7|Verily, we have made what is on the earth an ornament thereof, to try them, which of them is best in works
18|8|but, verily, we are going to make what is thereon bare soil
18|9|Hast thou reckoned that the Fellows of the Cave and Er-raqim were a wonder amongst our signs
18|10|When the youths resorted to the cave and said, 'O our Lord! bring us mercy from Thee, and dispose for us our affair aright
18|11|And we struck their ears (with deafness) in the cave for a number of years
18|12|Then we raised them up again, that we might know which of the two crews could best calculate the time of their tarrying
18|13|We will narrate to thee their story in truth. Verily, they were youths who believed in their Lord, and we added to their guidance
18|14|and we braced up their hearts, when they stood up and said, 'Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, we will not call upon any god beside Him, for then we should have said an extravagant thing
18|15|These people of ours have taken to other gods beside Him. Though they do not bring any manifest authority for them. And who is more unjust than he who forges against God a lie
18|16|So when ye have gone apart from them and what they serve other than God, then resort ye to the cave. Our Lord will unfold His mercy to you, and will dispose for you your affair advantageously
18|17|And thou mightst have seen the sun when it rose decline from their cave towards the right hand, and when it set leave them on the left hand, while they were in the spacious part thereof. That is one of the signs of God. Whom God guides he is guided indeed, and whom He leads astray thou shalt surely find for him no patron to guide aright
18|18|Thou mightst have reckoned them waking though they were sleeping, as we turned them towards the right and towards the left; and their dog spreading out his fore-paws on the threshold. Hadst thou come suddenly upon them thou wouldst surely have turned and fled away from them, and wouldst surely have been filled by them with dread
18|19|Thus did we raise them up that they might question each other. Spake a speaker amongst them, 'How long have ye tarried?' They said, 'We have tarried a day or part of a day.' They said, 'Your Lord knows best your tarrying; so send one of you with this coin of yours to the city, and let him look which of them has purest food, and let him bring you provision thereof; and let him be subtle and not let any one perceive you
18|20|Verily, they - should they perceive you - would stone you, or would force you back again unto their faith, and ye would never prosper then
18|21|Thus did we make their people acquainted with their story, that they might know that God's promise is true; and that the Hour, there is no doubt concerning it. When they disputed amongst themselves concerning their affair, and said, 'Build a building over them, their Lord knows best about them;' and those who prevailed in their affair said, 'We will surely make a mosque over them
18|22|They will say, 'Three, and the fourth of them was their dog:' and they will say, 'Five, and the sixth of them was their dog:' guessing at the unseen: and they will say, 'Seven, and the eighth of them was their dog.' Say, 'My Lord knows best the number of them; none knows them but few.' Dispute not therefore concerning them save with a plain disputation, and ask not any one of them concerning them
18|23|And never say of anything, 'Verily, I am going to do that to-morrow
18|24|except 'if God please;' and remember thy Lord when thou hast forgotten, and say,' It may be that my Lord will guide me to what is nearer to the right than this
18|25|They tarried in their cave three hundred years and nine more
18|26|Say, 'God knows best of their tarrying. His are the unseen things of the heavens and the earth - He can see! and hear!' They have no patron beside Him, nor does He let any one share in His judgment
18|27|So, recite what thou art inspired with of the Book of thy Lord; there is no changing His words; nor shalt thou ever find a refuge beside Him
18|28|and keep thyself patient, with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, desiring His face; nor let thine eyes be turned from them, desiring the adornment of the life of this world; and obey not him whose heart we have made heedless of remembrance of us, and who follows his lusts, for his affair is ever in advance (of the truth)
18|29|But say, 'The truth is from your Lord, so let him who will, believe; and let him who will, disbelieve.' Verily, we have prepared for the evildoers a fire, sheets of which shall encompass them; and if they cry for help, they shall be helped with water like molten brass, which shall roast their faces: - an ill drink and an evil couch
18|30|Verily, those who believe and act aright,- verily, we will not waste the hire of him who does good works
18|31|These, for them are gardens of Eden; beneath them rivers flow; they shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and shall wear green robes of silk, and of brocade; reclining therein on thrones;- pleasant is the reward, and goodly the couch
18|32|Strike out for them a parable: Two men, for one of whom we made two gardens of grapes, and surrounded them with palms, and put corn between the two
18|33|Each of the two gardens brought forth its food and did not fail in aught. And we caused a river to gush forth amidst them
18|34|and he had fruit, and said unto his fellow, who was his next-door neighbour, 'I am more wealthy than thee, and mightier of household
18|35|And he went in unto his garden, having wronged himself: said he, 'I do not think that this will ever disappear
18|36|and I do not think that the hour is imminent; and if even I be sent back unto my Lord, I shall find a better one than it in exchange
18|37|Said unto him his fellow, who was his next-door neighbour, 'Thou hast disbelieved in Him who created thee from earth, and then from a clot, then fashioned thee a man
18|38|but, God, He is my Lord; nor will I associate any one with my Lord
18|39|Why couldst thou not have said, when thou didst go into thy garden, "What God pleases! there is no power save in God," - to look at, I am less than thee in wealth and children
18|40|but haply my Lord will give me something better than thy garden, and will send upon it thunder-claps from the sky, and it shall be on the morrow bare slippery soil
18|41|or on the morrow its water may be deeply sunk, so that thou canst not get thereat
18|42|And his fruits were encompassed, and on the morrow he turned down the palms of his hands for what he had spent thereon, for it was fallen down upon its trellises. And he said, 'Would that I had never associated any one with my Lord
18|43|And he had not any party to help him beside God, nor was he helped
18|44|In such a case the patronage is God's, the true; He is best at rewarding and best at bringing to an issue
18|45|Strike out for them, too, a parable of the life of this world; like water which we send down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth is mingled therewith; - and on the morrow it is dried up, and the winds scatter it; for God is powerful over all
18|46|Wealth and children are an adornment of the life of this world; but enduring good works are better with thy Lord, as a recompense, and better as a hope
18|47|And the day when we will move the mountains, and thou shalt see the (whole) earth stalking forth; and we will gather them, and will not leave one of them behind
18|48|Then shall they be presented to thy Lord in ranks. - Now have ye come to us as we created you at first! nay, but ye thought that we would never make our promise good
18|49|And the Book shall be placed, and thou shalt see the sinners in fear of what is in it; and they will say, ' Alas, for us! what ails this Book, it leaves neither small nor great things alone, without numbering them?' and they shall find present what they have done; and thy Lord will not wrong any one
18|50|And when we said to the angels, ' Adore Adam,' they adored him, save only Iblis, who was of the ginn, who revolted from the bidding of his Lord. 'What! will ye then take him and his seed as patrons, rather than me, when they are foes of yours? bad for the wrong-doers is the exchange
18|51|I did not make them witnesses of the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor of the creation of themselves, nor did I take those who lead astray for my supporters
18|52|On the day when He shall say, 'Call ye my partners whom ye pretend:' and they shall call on them, but they shall not answer them; and we will set the vale of perdition between them
18|53|and the sinners shall see the fire, and shall think that they are going to fall therein, and shall find no escape therefrom
18|54|We have turned about in this Qur'an for men every parable; but man is ever at most things a caviller
18|55|Naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them, or from asking pardon of their Lord, except the coming on them of the course of those of yore, or the coming of the torment before their eyes
18|56|We sent not prophets save as heralds of glad tidings and as warners; but those who misbelieve wrangle with vain speech to make void the truth therewith; and they take my signs and the warnings given them as a jest
18|57|Who is more unjust than he who, being reminded of the signs of his Lord, turns away therefrom, and forgets what his hands have done before? verily, we will place veils upon their hearts lest they should understand, and dullness in their ears! And if thou shouldst call them to the guidance, they will not be guided then for ever
18|58|But thy Lord is forgiving, endowed with mercy; were He to punish them for what they have earned He would have hastened for them the torment. Nay rather, they have their appointed time, and shall never find a refuge beside Him
18|59|These cities, we destroyed them when they were unjust; and for their destruction we set an appointed time
18|60|And when Moses said to his servant, 'I will not cease until I reach the confluence of the two seas, or else I will go on for years
18|61|But when they reached the confluence of the two they forgot their fish, and it took its way in the sea with a free course
18|62|And when they had passed by, he said to his servant, 'Bring us our dinners, for we have met with toil from this journey of ours
18|63|Said he, 'What thinkest thou? when we resorted to the rock, then, verily, I forgot the fish, but it was only Satan who made me forget it, lest I should remember it; and it took its way in the set wondrously
18|64|Said he, 'This is what we were searching for.' So they turned back upon their footsteps, following them up
18|65|Then they found a servant of our servants, to whom we had given mercy from ourselves, and had taught him knowledge from before us
18|66|Said Moses to him, 'Shall I follow thee, so that thou mayest teach me, from what thou hast been taught, the right way
18|67|said he, 'Verily, thou canst never have patience with me
18|68|How canst thou be patient in what thou comprehendest no knowledge of
18|69|He said, 'Thou wilt find me, if God will, patient; nor will I rebel against thy bidding
18|70|He said, 'Then, if thou followest me, ask me not about anything until I begin for them the mention of it
18|71|So they set out until when they rode in the bark, he scuttled it. Said he, 'Hast thou scuttled it to drown its crew? Thou hast produced a strange thing
18|72|Said he, 'Did I not tell thee, verily, thou canst never have patience with me
18|73|Said he, 'Rebuke me not for forgetting, and impose not on me a difficult command
18|74|So they set out until they met a boy, and he killed him. And he (Moses) said, 'Hast thou killed a pure person without (his killing) a person? thou hast produced an unheard-of thing
18|75|Said he, 'Did I not tell thee, verily, thou canst not have patience with me
18|76|Said he, 'If I ask thee about anything after it, then do not accompany me. Now hast thou arrived at my excuse
18|77|So they set out until when they came to the people of a city; and they asked the people thereof for food; but they refused to entertain them. And they found therein a wall which wanted to fall to pieces, and he set it upright. Said (Moses), 'Hadst thou pleased thou mightst certainly have had a hire for this
18|78|Said he, 'This is the parting between me and thee. I will give thee the interpretation of that with which thou couldst not have patience
18|79|As for the bark it belonged to poor people, who toiled on the sea, and I wished to damage it, for behind it was a king who seized on every bark by force
18|80|And as for the youth, his parents were believers, and we feared lest he should impose upon them rebellion and misbelief
18|81|So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange a better one than him in purity, and nearer in filial affection
18|82|And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan youths in the city, and beneath it was a treasure belonging to them both, and their father was a righteous man, and their Lord desired that they should reach puberty, and then take out their treasure as a mercy from thy Lord; and I did it not on my own bidding. That is the interpretation of what thou couldst not have patience with
18|83|And they will ask thee about Dhu 'l Qarnain, say, 'I will recite to you a mention of him
18|84|verily, we established for him in the earth, and we gave him a way to everything
18|85|and he followed a way
18|86|until when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it setting in a black muddy spring, and he found thereat a people.' We said, 'O Dhu 'l Qarnain! thou mayest either torment these people, or treat them well
18|87|Said he, 'As for him who does wrong, I will torment him, then shall be be sent back to his Lord, and He will torment him with An unheard-of torment
18|88|but as for him who believes and acts aright, for him is an excellent reward, and we will tell him our easy bidding
18|89|Then he followed a way
18|90|until when he reached the rising of the sun, he found it rise upon a people to whom we had given no shelter therefrom
18|91|So! And we comprehended the knowledge of what (forces) he had with him
18|92|Then he followed a way
18|93|until when he reached the point between the two mountains, he found below them both a people who could scarcely understand speech
18|94|They said, 'O Dhu 'l Qarnain! verily, Yagug and Magug are doing evil in the land. Shall we then pay thee tribute, on condition that thou set between us and them a rampart
18|95|He said, 'What my Lord hath established me in is better; so help me with strength, and I will set between you and them a barrier
18|96|Bring me pigs of iron until they fill up the space between the two mountain sides.' Said he, 'Blow until it makes it a fire.' Said he, 'Bring me, that I may pour over it, molten brass
18|97|So they could not scale it, and they could not tunnel it
18|98|Said he, 'This is a mercy from my Lord; but when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will make it as dust, for the promise of my Lord is true
18|99|And we left some of them to surge on that day over others, and the trumpet will be blown, and we will gather them together
18|100|And we will set forth hell on that day before the misbelievers
18|101|whose eyes were veiled from my Reminder, and who were unable to hear
18|102|What! did those who misbelieve reckon that they could take my servants for patrons beside me? Verily, we have prepared hell for the misbelievers to alight in
18|103|Say, 'Shall we inform you of those who lose most by their works
18|104|those who erred in their endeavours after the life of this world, and who think they are doing good deeds
18|105|Those who misbelieve in the signs of their Lord and in meeting Him, vain are their works; and we will not give them right weight on the resurrection day
18|106|That is their reward, - hell! for that they misbelieved and took my signs and my apostles as a mockery
18|107|Verily, those who believe and act aright, for them are gardens of Paradise to alight in
18|108|to dwell therein for aye, and they shall crave no change therefrom
18|109|Say, 'Were the sea ink for the words of my Lord, the sea would surely fail before the words of my Lord fail; aye, though we brought as much ink again
18|110|Say, 'I am only a mortal like yourselves; I am inspired that your God is only one God. Then let him who hopes to meet his Lord act righteous acts, and join none in the service of his Lord
19|1|Y.'H. Z
19|2|The mention of thy Lord's mercy to His servant Zachariah
19|3|when he called on his Lord with a secret calling
19|4|Said he, 'My Lord! verily, my bones are weak, and my head flares with hoariness; - and I never was unfortunate in my prayers to Thee, my Lord
19|5|But I fear my heirs after me, and my wife is barren; then grant me from Thee a successor
19|6|to be my heir and the heir of the family of Jacob, and make him, my Lord! acceptable
19|7|O Zachariah! verily, we, give thee glad tidings of a son, whose name shall be John. We never made a namesake of his before
19|8|Said he, 'My Lord! how can I have a son, when my wife is barren, and I have reached through old age to decrepitude
19|9|He said, 'Thus says thy Lord, It is easy for Me, for I created thee at first when yet thou wast nothing
19|10|Said he, 'O my Lord! make for me a sign.' He said, 'Thy sign is that thou shalt not speak to men for three nights (though) sound
19|11|Then he went forth unto his people from the chamber, and he made signs to them: 'Celebrate (God's) praises morning and evening
19|12|O John! take the Book with strength;' and we gave him judgment when a boy
19|13|and grace from us, and purity; and he was pious
19|14|and righteous to his parents, and was not a rebellious tyrant
19|15|So peace upon him the day he was born, and the day he died, and the day he shall be raised up alive
19|16|And mention, in the Book, Mary; when she retired from her family into an eastern place
19|17|and she took a veil (to screen herself) from them; and we sent unto her our spirit; and he took for her the semblance of a well-made man
19|18|Said she, 'Verily, I take refuge in the Merciful One from thee, if thou art pious
19|19|Said he, 'I am only a messenger of thy Lord to bestow on thee a pure boy
19|20|Said she, 'How can I have a boy when no man has touched me, and when I am no harlot
19|21|He said, 'Thus says thy Lord, It is easy for Me! and we will make him a sign unto man, and a mercy from us; for it is a decided matter
19|22|So she conceived him, and she retired with him into a remote place
19|23|And the labour pains came upon her at the trunk of a palm tree, and she said, 'O that I had died before this, and been forgotten out of mind
19|24|and he called to her from beneath her, 'Grieve not, for thy Lord has placed a stream beneath thy feet
19|25|and shake towards thee the trunk of the palm tree, it will drop upon thee fresh dates fit to gather
19|26|so eat, and drink, and cheer thine eye; and if thou shouldst see any mortal say, "Verily, I have vowed to the Merciful One a fast, and I will not speak today with a human being
19|27|Then she brought it to her people, carrying it; said they, 'O Mary! thou hast done an extraordinary thing
19|28|O sister of Aaron! thy father was not a bad man, nor was thy mother a harlot
19|29|And she pointed to him, and they said, 'How are we to speak with one who is in the cradle a child
19|30|He said, 'Verily, I am a servant of God; He has brought me the Book, and He has made me a prophet
19|31|and He has made me blessed wherever I be; and He has required of me prayer and almsgiving so long as I live
19|32|and piety towards my mother, and has not made me a miserable tyrant
19|33|and peace upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I shall be raised up alive
19|34|That is, Jesus the son of Mary, - by the word of truth whereon ye do dispute
19|35|God could not take to himself any son! celebrated be His praise! when He decrees a matter He only says to it, 'BE,' and it is
19|36|and, verily, God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him; this is the right way
19|37|And the parties have disagreed amongst themselves, but woe to those who disbelieve, from the witnessing of the mighty day
19|38|they can hear and they can see, on the day when they shall come to us; but the evildoers are today in obvious error
19|39|And warn them of the day of sighing, when the matter is decreed while they are heedless, and while they do not believe
19|40|Verily, we will inherit the earth and all who are upon it, and unto us shall they return
19|41|And mention, in the Book, Abraham; verily, he was a confessors,- a prophet
19|42|When he said to his father, 'O my sire! why dost thou worship what can neither hear nor see nor avail thee aught
19|43|O my sire! verily, to me has come knowledge which has not come to thee; then follow me, and I will guide thee to a level way
19|44|O my sire! serve not Satan; verily, Satan is ever a rebel against the Merciful
19|45|O my sire! verily,. I fear that there may touch thee torment from the Merciful, and that thou mayest be a client of Satan
19|46|Said he, 'What! art thou averse from my gods, O Abraham? verily, if thou dost not desist I will certainly stone thee; but get thee gone from me for a time
19|47|Said he, 'Peace be upon thee! I will ask forgiveness for thee from my Lord; verily, He is very gracious to me
19|48|but I will part from you and what ye call on beside God, and will pray my Lord that I be not unfortunate in my prayer to my Lord
19|49|And when he had parted from them and what they served beside God, we granted him Isaac and Jacob, and each of them we made a prophet
19|50|and we granted them of our mercy, and we made the tongue of truth lofty for them
19|51|And mention, in the Book, Moses; verily, he was sincere, and was an apostle,- a prophet
19|52|We called him from the right side of the mountain; and we made him draw nigh unto us to commune with him
19|53|and we granted him, of our mercy, his brother Aaron as a prophet
19|54|And mention, in the Book, Ishmael; verily, he was true to his promise, and was an apostle,- a prophet
19|55|and he used to bid his people prayers and almsgiving, and was acceptable in the sight of his Lord
19|56|And mention, in the Book, Idris; verily, he was a confessors prophet,- a prophet
19|57|and we raised him to a lofty place
19|58|These are those to whom God has been gracious, of the prophets of the seed of Adam, and of those whom we bore with Noah, and of the seed of Abraham and Israel, and of those we guided and elected; when the signs of the Merciful are read to them, they fall down adoring and weeping
19|59|And successors succeeded them, who lost sight of prayer and followed lusts, but they shall at length find themselves going wrong
19|60|except such as repent and believe and act aright; for these shall enter Paradise, and shall not be wronged at all
19|61|gardens of Eden, which the Merciful has promised to His servants in the unseen; verily, His promise ever comes to pass
19|62|They shall hear no empty talk therein, but only 'peace;' and they shall have their provision therein, morning and evening
19|63|that is Paradise which we will give for an inheritance to those of our servants who are pious
19|64|We do not descend save at the bidding of thy Lord; His is what is before us, and what is behind us, and what is between those; for thy Lord is never forgetful
19|65|the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and of what is between the two; then serve Him and persevere in His service. Dost thou know a namesake of His
19|66|Man will say, 'What! when I have died shall I then come forth alive
19|67|Does not man then remember that we created him before when he was naught
19|68|And by thy Lord! we will surely gather them together, and the devils too; then we will surely bring them forward around hell, on their knees
19|69|Then we will drag off from every sect whichever of them has been most bold against the Merciful
19|70|Then we know best which of them deserves most to be broiled therein
19|71|There is not one of you who will not go down to it,- that is settled and decided by thy Lord
19|72|Then we will save those who fear us; but we will leave the evildoers therein on their knees
19|73|And when our signs are recited to them manifest, those who misbelieve say to those who believe, 'Which of the two parties is best placed and in the best company
19|74|And how many generations before them have we destroyed who were better off in property and appearance
19|75|Say, 'Whosoever is in error, let the Merciful extend to him length of days!- until they see what they are threatened with, whether it be the torment or whether it be the Hour, then they shall know who is worse placed and weakest in forces
19|76|And those who are guided God will increase in guidance. And enduring good works are best with thy Lord for a reward, and best for restoration
19|77|Hast thou seen him who disbelieves in our signs, and says, 'I shall surely be given wealth and children
19|78|Has he become acquainted with the unseen, or has he taken a compact with the Merciful
19|79|Not so! We will write down what he says, and we will extend to him a length of torment
19|80|and we will make him inherit what he says, and he shall come to us alone
19|81|They take other gods besides God to be their glory
19|82|Not so! They shall deny their worship and shall be opponents of theirs
19|83|Dost thou not see that we have sent the devils against the misbelievers, to drive them on to sin
19|84|but, be not thou hasty with them. Verily, we will number them a number (of days)
19|85|the day when we will gather the pious to the Merciful as ambassadors
19|86|and we will drive the sinners to hell like (herds) to water
19|87|They shall not possess intercession, save he who has taken a compact with the Merciful
19|88|They say, 'The Merciful has taken to Himself a son
19|89|ye have brought a monstrous thing
19|90|The heavens well-nigh burst asunder thereat, and the earth is riven, and the mountains fall down broken
19|91|that they attribute to the Merciful a son
19|92|but it, becomes not the Merciful to take to Himself a son
19|93|there is none in the heavens or the earth but comes to the Merciful as a servant
19|94|He counts them and numbers them by number
19|95|and they are all coming to Him on the resurrection day singly
19|96|Verily, those who believe and act aright, to them the Merciful will give love
19|97|We have only made it easy for thy tongue that thou mayest thereby give glad tidings to the pious, and warn thereby a contentious people
19|98|How many a Generation before them have we destroyed? Canst thou find any one of them, or hear a whisper of them
20|1|H
20|2|We have not sent down this Qur'an to thee that thou shouldst be wretched
20|3|only as a reminder to him who fears
20|4|descending from Him who created the earth and the high heavens
20|5|the Merciful settled on the throne
20|6|His are what is in the heavens, and what is in the earth, and what is between the two, and what is beneath the ground
20|7|And if thou art public in thy speech - yet, verily, he knows the secret, and more hidden still
20|8|God, there is no god but He! His are the excellent names
20|9|Has the story of Moses come to thee
20|10|When he saw the fire and said to his family, 'Tarry ye; verily, I perceive a fire! Haply I may bring you therefrom a brand, or may find guidance by the fire
20|11|And when he came to it he was called to, 'O Moses
20|12|verily, I am thy Lord, so take off thy sandals; verily, thou art in the holy valley Tuva
20|13|and I have chosen thee. So listen to what is inspired thee
20|14|verily, I am God, there is no god but Me! then serve Me, and be steadfast in prayer to remember Me
20|15|Verily, the hour is coming, I almost make it appear, that every soul may be recompensed for its efforts
20|16|Let not then him who believes not therein and follows his lusts ever turn thee away therefrom, and thou be ruined
20|17|What is that in thy right hand, O Moses
20|18|Said he, 'It is my staff on which I lean, and wherewith I beat down leaves for my flocks, and for which I have other uses
20|19|Said He, 'Throw it down, O Moses
20|20|and he threw it down, and behold! it was a snake that moved about
20|21|Said He, 'Take hold of it and fear not; we will restore it to its first state
20|22|But press thy hand to thy side, it shall come forth white without harm, - another sign
20|23|to show thee of our great signs
20|24|Go unto Pharaoh, verily, he is outrageous
20|25|Said he, 'My Lord! expand for me my breast
20|26|and make what I am bidden easy to me
20|27|and loose the knot from my tongue
20|28|that they may understand my speech
20|29|and make for me a minister from my people
20|30|Aaron my brother
20|31|gird up my loins through him
20|32|and join him with me in the affair
20|33|that we may celebrate Thy praises much
20|34|and remember Thee much
20|35|Verily, Thou dost ever behold us
20|36|He said, 'Thou art granted thy request, O Moses
20|37|and we have already shown favours unto thee at another time
20|38|When we inspired thy mother with what we inspired her
20|39|Hurl him into the ark, and hurl him into the sea; and the sea shall cast him on the shore, and an enemy of mine and of his shall take him;" - for on thee have I cast my love, that thou mayest be formed under my eye
20|40|When thy sister walked on and said, "Shall I guide you to one who will take charge of him?" And we restored thee to thy mother, that her eye might be cheered and that she should not grieve. And thou didst slay a person and we saved thee from the trouble, and we tried thee with various trials. And thou didst tarry for years amongst the people of Midian; then thou didst come (hither) at (our) decree, O Moses
20|41|And I have chosen thee for myself
20|42|Go, thou and thy brother, with my signs, and be not remiss in remembering me
20|43|Go ye both to Pharaoh; verily, he is outrageous
20|44|and speak to him a gentle speech, haply he may be mindful or may fear
20|45|They two said, 'Our Lord! verily, we fear that he may trespass against us, or that he may be outrageous
20|46|He said, 'Fear not; verily, I am with you twain. I hear and see
20|47|So come ye to him and say, "Verily, we are the apostles of thy Lord; send then the children of Israel with us; and do not torment them. We have brought thee a sign from thy Lord, and peace be upon him who follows the guidance
20|48|Verily, we are inspired that the torment will surely come upon him who calls us liars and turns his back
20|49|Said he, 'And who is your Lord, O Moses
20|50|He said, 'Our Lord is He who gave everything its creation, then guided it
20|51|Said he, 'And what of the former generations
20|52|He said 'The knowledge of them is with my Lord in a Book; my Lord misleads not, nor forgets
20|53|Who made for you the earth a bed; and has traced for you paths therein; and has sent down from the sky water, - and we have brought forth thereby divers sorts of different vegetables
20|54|Eat and pasture your cattle therefrom; verily, in that are signs to those endued with intelligence
20|55|From it have we created you and into it will we send you back, and from it will we bring you forth another time
20|56|We did show him our signs, all of them, but he called them lies and did refuse
20|57|Said he, 'Hast thou come to us, to turn us out of our land with thy magic, O Moses
20|58|Then we will bring you magic like it; and we will make between us and thee an appointment; we will not break it, nor do thou either;-a fair place
20|59|Said he, 'Let your appointment be for the day of adornment, and let the people assemble in the forenoon
20|60|But Pharaoh turned his back, and collected his tricks, and then he came
20|61|Said Moses to them, 'Woe to you! do not forge against God a lie; lest He destroy you by torment; for disappointed has ever been he who has forged
20|62|And they argued their matter among themselves; and secretly talked it over
20|63|Said they, 'These twain are certainly two magicians, who wish to turn you out of your land by their magic, and to remove your most exemplary doctrine
20|64|Collect therefore your tricks, and then form a row; for he is prosperous today who has the upper hand
20|65|Said they, 'O Moses! either thou must throw, or we must be the first to throw
20|66|He said, 'Nay, throw ye!' and lo! their ropes and their staves appeared to move along
20|67|And Moses felt a secret fear within his soul
20|68|Said we, 'Fear not! thou shalt have the upper hand
20|69|Throw down what is in thy right hand; and it shall devour what they have made. Verily, what they have made is but a magician's trick; and no magician shall prosper wherever he comes
20|70|And the magicians were cast down in adoration; said they, 'We believe in the Lord of Aaron and of Moses
20|71|Said he, 'Do ye believe in Him before I give you leave? Verily, he is your master who taught you magic! Therefore will I surely cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides, and I will surely crucify you on the trunks of palm trees; and ye shall surely know which of us is keenest at torment and more lasting
20|72|Said they, 'We will never prefer thee to what has come to us of manifest signs, and to Him who originated us. Decide then what thou canst decide; thou canst only decide in the life of this world
20|73|Verily, we believe in our Lord, that He may pardon us our sins, and the magic thou hast forced us to use; and God is better and more lasting
20|74|Verily, he who comes to his Lord a sinner,- verily, for him is hell; he shall not die therein, and shall not live
20|75|But he who comes to Him a believer who has done aright - these, for them are the highest ranks
20|76|gardens of Eden beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; for that is the reward of him who keeps pure
20|77|And we inspired Moses, 'Journey by night with my servants, and strike out for them a dry road in the sea. Fear not pursuit, nor be afraid
20|78|Then Pharaoh followed them with his armies, and there overwhelmed them of the sea that which overwhelmed them
20|79|And Pharaoh and his people went astray and were not guided
20|80|O children of Israel! We have saved you from your enemy; and we made an appointment with you on the right side of the mount; and we sent down upon you the manna and the quails
20|81|Eat of the good things we have provided you with, and do not exceed therein, lest my wrath light upon you; for whomsoever my wrath lights upon he falls
20|82|Yet am I forgiving unto him who repents and believes and does right, and then is guided
20|83|But what has hastened thee on away from thy people, O Moses
20|84|He said, 'They were here upon my track and I hastened on to Thee, my Lord! that thou mightest be pleased
20|85|Said He, 'Verily, we have tried thy people, since thou didst leave, and es Samariy has led them astray
20|86|And Moses returned to his people, wrathful, grieving! Said he, 'O my, people! did not your Lord promise you a good promise? Has the time seemed too long for you, or do you desire that wrath should light on you from your Lord, that ye have broken your promise to me
20|87|They said, 'We have not broken our promise to thee of our own accord. But we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people, and we hurled them down, and so did es Samariy cast
20|88|and he brought forth for the people a corporeal calf which lowed.' And they said, 'This is your god and the god of Moses, but he has forgotten
20|89|What! do they not see that it does not return them any speech, and cannot control for them harm or profit
20|90|Aaron too told them before, 'O my people! ye are only being tried thereby; and, verily, your Lord is the Merciful, so follow me and obey my bidding
20|91|They said, 'We will not cease to pay devotion to it until Moses come back to us
20|92|Said he, 'O Aaron! what prevented thee, when thou didst see them go astray
20|93|from following me? Hast thou then rebelled against my bidding
20|94|Said he, 'O son of my mother! seize me not by my beard, or my head! Verily, I feared lest thou shouldst say, "Thou hast made a division amongst the children of Israel, and hast not observed my word
20|95|Said he, 'What was thy design, O Samariy
20|96|Said he, 'I beheld what they beheld not, and I grasped a handful from the footprint of the messenger and cast it; for thus my soul induced me
20|97|Said he, 'Then get thee gone; verily, it shall be thine in life to say, "Touch me not!" and, verily, for thee there is a threat which thou shalt surely never alter. But look at thy god to which thou wert just now devout; we will surely burn it, and then we will scatter it in scattered pieces in the sea
20|98|Your God is only God who,- there is no god but He,- He embraceth everything in His knowledge
20|99|Thus do we narrate to thee the history of what has gone before, and we have brought thee a reminder from us
20|100|Whoso turns therefrom, verily, he shall bear on the resurrection day a burden
20|101|for them to bear for aye, and evil for them on the resurrection day will it be to bear
20|102|On the day when the trumpet shall be blown, and we will gather the sinners in that day blue-eyed
20|103|They shall whisper to each other, 'Ye have only tarried ten days
20|104|We know best what they say, when the most exemplary of them in his way shall say, 'Ye have only tarried a day
20|105|They will ask thee about the mountains; say, 'My Lord will scatter them in scattered pieces
20|106|and He will leave them a level plain
20|107|thou wilt see therein no crookedness or inequality
20|108|On that day they shall follow the caller in whom is no crookedness; and the voices shall be hushed before the Merciful, and thou shalt hear naught but a shuffling
20|109|On that day shall no intercession be of any avail, save from such as the Merciful permits, and who is acceptable to Him in speech
20|110|He knows what is before them and what is behind them, but they do not comprehend knowledge of Him
20|111|Faces shall be humbled before the Living, the Self-subsistent; and he who bears injustice is ever lost
20|112|But he who does righteous acts and is a believer, he shall fear neither wrong nor diminution
20|113|Thus have we sent it down an Arabic Qur'an; and we have turned about in it the threat,- haply they may fear, or it may cause them to remember
20|114|Exalted then be God, the king, the truth! Hasten not the Qur'an before its inspiration is decided for thee; but say, 'O Lord! increase me in knowledge
20|115|We did make a covenant with Adam of yore, but he forgot it, and we found no firm purpose in him
20|116|And when we said to the angels, ' Adore Adam,' they adored, save Iblis, who refused
20|117|And we said, 'O Adam! verily, this is a foe to thee and to thy wife; never then let him drive you twain forth from the garden or thou wilt be wretched
20|118|Verily, thou hast not to be hungry there, nor naked
20|119|and, verily, thou shalt not thirst therein, nor feel the noonday heat
20|120|But the devil whispered to him. Said he, 'O Adam! shall I guide thee to the tree of immortality, and a kingdom that shall not wane
20|121|And they eat therefrom, and their shame became apparent to them; and they began to stitch upon themselves some leaves of the garden; and Adam rebelled against his Lord, and went astray
20|122|Then his Lord chose him, and relented towards him, and guided him
20|123|Said he, 'Go down, ye twain, therefrom altogether, some of you foes to the other. And if there should come to you, from me a guidance; then whoso follows my guidance shall neither err nor be wretched
20|124|But he who turns away from my reminder, verily, for him shall be a straitened livelihood; and we will gather him on the resurrection day blind
20|125|He shall say, 'My Lord! wherefore hast Thou gathered me blind when I used to see
20|126|He shall say, 'Our signs came to thee, and thou didst forget them; thus today art thou forgotten
20|127|Thus do we recompense him who is extravagant and believes not in the signs of his Lord; and the torment of the hereafter is keener and more lasting
20|128|Does it not occur to them how many generations we have destroyed before them?- they walk in their very dwelling-places; verily, in that are signs to those endued with intelligence
20|129|And had it not been for thy Lord's word already passed (the punishment) would have been inevitable and (at) an appointed time
20|130|Bear patiently then what they say, and celebrate the praises of thy Lord before the rising of the sun, and before its setting, and at times in the night celebrate them; and at the ends of the day; haply thou mayest please (Him)
20|131|And do not strain after what we have provided a few of them with - the flourish of the life of this world, to try them by; but the provision of thy Lord is better and more lasting
20|132|Bid thy people prayer, and persevere in it; we do not ask thee to provide. We will provide, and the issue shall be to piety
20|133|They say, 'Unless he bring us a sign from his Lord - What! has there not come to them the manifest sign of what was in the pages of yore
20|134|But had we destroyed them with torment before it, they would have said, 'Unless Thou hadst sent to us an apostle, that we might follow Thy signs before we were abased and put to shame
20|135|Say, ' Each one has to wait, so wait ye but in the end ye shall know who are the fellows of the level way, and who are guided
21|1|Their reckoning draws nigh to men, yet in heedlessness they turn aside
21|2|No reminder comes to them from their Lord of late, but they listen while they mock
21|3|and their hearts make sport thereof! And those who do wrong discourse secretly (saying), 'Is this man aught but a mortal like yourselves? will ye accede to magic, while ye can see
21|4|Say, 'My Lord knows what is said in the heavens and the earth, He hears and knows
21|5|Nay!' they say, 'a jumble of dreams; nay! he has forged it; nay! he is a poet; but let him bring us a sign as those of yore were sent
21|6|No city before them which we destroyed believed - how will they believe
21|7|Nor did we send before them any but men whom we inspired? Ask ye the people of the Scriptures if ye do not know
21|8|Nor did we make them bodies not to eat food, nor were they immortal
21|9|Yet we made our promise to them good, and we saved them and whom we pleased; but we destroyed those who committed excesses
21|10|We have sent down to you a book in which is a reminder for you; have ye then no sense
21|11|How many a city which had done wrong have we broken up, and raised up after it another people
21|12|And when they perceived our violence they ran away from it
21|13|Run not away, but return to what ye delighted in, and to your dwellings! haply ye will be questioned
21|14|Said they, 'O woe is us! verily, we were wrong-doers
21|15|And that ceased not to be their cry until we made them mown down,- smouldering out
21|16|We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between the two in play
21|17|Had we wished to take to a sport, we would have taken to one from before ourselves; had we been bent on doing so
21|18|Nay, we hurl the truth against falsehood and it crashes into it, and lo! it vanishes, but woe to you for what ye attribute (to God)
21|19|His are whosoever are in the heavens and the earth, and those who are with Him are not too big with pride for His service, nor do they weary
21|20|They celebrate His praises by night and day without intermission
21|21|Or have they taken gods from the earth who can raise up (the dead)
21|22|Were there in both (heaven and earth) gods beside God, both would surely have been corrupted. Celebrated then be the praise of God, the Lord of the throne, above what they ascribe
21|23|He shall not be questioned concerning what He does, but they shall be questioned
21|24|Have they taken gods beside Him? Say, 'Bring your proofs. This is the reminder of those who are with me, and of those who were before me.' Nay, most of them know not the truth, and they do turn aside
21|25|We have not sent any prophet before thee, but we inspired him that, 'There is no god but Me, so serve ye Me
21|26|And they say, 'The Merciful has taken a son; celebrated be His praise!' - Nay, honoured servants
21|27|they do not speak until He speaks; but at His bidding do they act
21|28|He knows what is before them, and what is behind them, and they shall not intercede except for him whom He is pleased with; and they shrink through fear
21|29|And whoso of them should say, 'Verily, I am god instead of Him,' such a one we recompense with hell; thus do we recompense the wrongdoers
21|30|Do not those who misbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were both solid, and we burst them asunder; and we made from water every living thing - will they then not believe
21|31|And we placed on the earth firm mountains lest it should move with them, and He made therein open roads for paths, haply they may be guided
21|32|and we made the heaven a guarded roof; yet from our signs they turn aside
21|33|He it is who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, each floating in a sky
21|34|We never made for any mortal before thee immortality; what, if thou shouldst die, will they live on for aye
21|35|Every soul shall taste of death! we will test them with evil and with good, as a trial; and unto us shall they return
21|36|And when those who misbelieve see thee, they only take thee for a jest, 'Is this he who mentions your gods?' Yet they at the mention of the Merciful do disbelieve
21|37|Man is created out of haste. I will show, you my signs; but do not hurry Me
21|38|And they say, 'When will this threat (come to pass), if ye tell the truth
21|39|Did those who misbelieve but know when the fire shall not be warded off from their faces nor from their backs, and they shall not be helped
21|40|Nay, it shall come on them suddenly, and shall dumbfounder them, and they shall not be able to repel it, nor shall they be respited
21|41|Prophets before thee have been mocked at, but that whereat they jested encompassed those who mocked
21|42|Say, 'Who shall guard you by night and by day from the Merciful?' Nay, but they from the mention of their Lord do turn aside
21|43|Have they gods to defend them against us? These cannot help themselves, nor shall they be abetted against us
21|44|Nay, but we have granted enjoyment to these men and to their fathers whilst life was prolonged. Do they not see that we come to the land and shorten its borders? Shall they then prevail
21|45|Say, 'I only warn you by inspiration;' but the deaf hear not the call when they are warned
21|46|But if a blast of the torment of thy Lord touches them, they will surely say, 'O, woe is us! verily, we were wrong-doers
21|47|We will place just balances upon the resurrection day, and no soul shall be wronged at all, even though it be the weight of a grain of mustard seed, we will bring it; for we are good enough at reckoning up
21|48|We did give to Moses and Aaron the Discrimination, and a light and a reminder to those who fear
21|49|who are afraid of their Lord in secret; and who at the Hour do shrink
21|50|This is a blessed reminder which we have sent down, will ye then deny it
21|51|And we gave Abraham a right direction before; for about him we knew
21|52|When he said to his father and to his people, 'What are these images to which ye pay devotion
21|53|Said they, 'We found our fathers serving them
21|54|Said he, 'Both you and your fathers have been in obvious error
21|55|They said, 'Dost thou come to us with the truth, or art thou but of those who play
21|56|He said, 'Nay, but your Lord is Lord of the heavens and the earth, which He originated; and I am of those who testify to this
21|57|and, by God! I will plot against your idols after ye have turned and shown me your backs
21|58|So he brake them all in pieces, except a large one they had; that haply they might refer it to that
21|59|Said they, 'Who has done this with our gods? verily, he is of the wrong-doers
21|60|They said, 'We heard a youth mention them who is called Abraham
21|61|Said they, 'Then bring him before the eyes of men; haply they will bear witness
21|62|Said they, 'Was it thou who did this to our gods, O Abraham
21|63|Said he, 'Nay, it was this largest of them; but ask them, if they can speak
21|64|Then they came to themselves and said, 'Verily, ye are the wrong-doers
21|65|Then they turned upside down again: 'Thou knewest that these cannot speak
21|66|Said he, 'Will ye then serve, beside God, what cannot profit you at all, nor harm you
21|67|fie upon you, and what ye serve beside God! have ye then no sense
21|68|Said they, 'Burn him, and help your gods, if ye are going to do so
21|69|We said, 'O fire! be thou cool and a safety for Abraham
21|70|They desired to plot against him, but we made them the losers
21|71|And we brought him and Lot safely to the land which we have blessed for the world
21|72|and we bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob as a fresh gift, and each of them we made righteous persons
21|73|and we made them high priests to guide (men) by our bidding, and we inspired them to do good works, and to be steadfast in prayer, and to give alms; and they did serve us
21|74|And Lot, to him we gave judgment and knowledge, and we brought him safely out of the city which had done vile acts; verily, they were a people who wrought abominations
21|75|And we made him enter into our mercy; verily, he was of the righteous
21|76|And Noah, when he cried aforetime, and we answered him and saved him and his people from the mighty trouble
21|77|and we helped him against the people who said our signs were lies; verily, they were a bad people, so we drowned them all together
21|78|And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment concerning the field, when some people's sheep had strayed therein at night; and we testified to their judgment
21|79|and this we gave Solomon to understand. To each of them we gave judgment and knowledge; and to David we subjected the mountains to celebrate our praises, and the birds too,- it was we who did it
21|80|And we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you, to shield you from each other's violence; are ye then grateful
21|81|And to Solomon (we subjected) the wind blowing stormily, to run on at his bidding to the land which Ave have blessed, - for all things did we know
21|82|and some devils to dive for him, and to do other works beside that; and we kept guard over them
21|83|And Job, when he cried to his Lord, 'As for me, harm has touched me, but Thou art the most merciful of the merciful ones
21|84|And we answered him, and removed from him the distress that was upon him; and we gave his family, and the like of them with them, as a mercy from us, and a remembrance to those who serve us
21|85|And Ishmael, and Idris, and Dhu 'l Kifl, all of these were of the patient
21|86|and we made them enter into our mercy; verily, they were among the righteous
21|87|And Dhu 'nnun, when he went away in wrath and thought that we had no power over him; and he cried out in the darkness, ' There is no god but Thou, celebrated be Thy praise! Verily, I was of the evildoers
21|88|And we answered him, and saved him from the trouble. Thus do we save believers
21|89|And Zachariah, when he cried unto his Lord, 'O Lord! leave me not alone; for thou art the best of heirs
21|90|And we answered him, and bestowed upon him John; and we made his wife right for him; verily, these vied in good works, and called on us with longing and dread, and were humble before us
21|91|And she who guarded her private parts, and we breathed into her of our Spirit, and we made her and her son a sign unto the worlds
21|92|Verily, this your nation is one nation; and I am your Lord, so serve me
21|93|But they cut up their affair amongst themselves; they all shall return to us
21|94|and he who acts aright, and he who is a believer, there is no denial of his efforts, for, verily, we will write them down for him
21|95|There is a ban upon a city which we have destroyed that they shall not return
21|96|until Yagug and Magug are let out, and they from every hummock shall glide forth
21|97|And the true promise draws nigh, and lo! they are staring - the eyes of those who misbelieve! O, woe is us! we were heedless of this, nay, we were wrong-doers
21|98|Verily, ye, and what ye serve beside God, shall be the pebbles of hell, to it shall ye go down
21|99|Had these been God's they would not have gone down thereto: but all shall dwell therein for aye
21|100|for them therein is groaning, but they therein shall not be heard
21|101|Verily, those for whom the good (reward) from us was fore-ordained, they from it shall be kept far away
21|102|they shall not hear the slightest sound thereof, and they in what their souls desire shall dwell for aye
21|103|The greatest terror shall not grieve them; and the angels shall meet them, (saying), 'This is your day which ye were promised
21|104|The day when we will roll up the heavens as es-Sigill rolls up the books; as we produced it at its first creation will we bring it back again - a promise binding upon us; verily, we are going to do it
21|105|And already have we written in the Psalms after the reminder that the earth shall my righteous servants inherit
21|106|Verily, in this is preaching for a people who serve me
21|107|We have only sent thee as a mercy to the worlds
21|108|Say, 'I am only inspired that your God is one God; are ye then resigned
21|109|But if they turn their backs say, 'I have proclaimed (war) against all alike, but I know not if what ye are threatened with be near or far
21|110|Verily, He knows what is spoken openly, and He knows what ye hide
21|111|I know not, haply, it is a trial for you and a provision for a season
21|112|Say, 'My Lord! judge thou with truth! and our Lord is the Merciful whom we ask for aid against what they ascribe
22|1|O ye folk! fear your Lord. Verily, the earthquake of the Hour is a mighty thing
22|2|On the day ye shall see it, every suckling woman shall be seared away from that to which she gave suck; and every pregnant woman shall lay down her load; and thou shalt see men drunken, though they be not drunken: but the torment of God is severe
22|3|And amongst men is one who wrangles about God without knowledge, and follows every rebellious devil
22|4|against whom it is written down that whoso takes him for a patron, verily, he will lead him astray, and will guide him towards the torment of the blaze
22|5|O ye folk! if ye are in doubt about the raising (of the dead),- verily, we created you from earth, then from a clot, then from congealed blood, then from a morsel, shaped or shapeless, that we may explain to you. And we make what we please rest in the womb until an appointed time; then we bring you forth babes; then let you reach your full age; and of you are some who die; and of you are some who are kept back till the most decrepit age, till he knows no longer aught of knowledge. And ye see the earth parched, and when we send down water on it, it stirs and swells, and brings forth herbs of every beauteous kind
22|6|That is because God, He is the truth, and because He quickens the dead, and because He is mighty over all
22|7|and because the Hour is coming, there is no doubt therein, and because God raises up those who are in the tombs
22|8|And amongst men is one who wrangles about God without knowledge or guidance or an illuminating book
22|9|twisting his neck from the way of God; for him is disgrace in this world, and we will make him taste, upon the resurrection day, the torment of burning
22|10|That is for what thy hands have done before, and for that God is not unjust unto His servants
22|11|And amongst men is one who serves God (wavering) on a brink; and if there befall him good, he is comforted; but if there befall him a trial, he turns round again, and loses this world and the next - that is an obvious loss
22|12|He calls, besides God, on what can neither harm him nor profit him;- that is a wide error
22|13|He calls on him whose harm is nigher than his profit,- a bad lord and a bad comrade
22|14|Verily, God makes those who believe and do aright enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow; verily, God does what He will
22|15|He who thinks that God will never help him in this world or the next - let him stretch a cord to the roof and put an end to himself; and let him cut it and see if his stratagem will remove what he is enraged at
22|16|Thus have we sent down manifest signs; for, verily, God guides whom He will
22|17|Verily, those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Sabaeans, and the Christians, and the Magians, and those who join other gods with God, verily, God will decide between them on the resurrection day; verily, God is witness over all
22|18|Do they not see that God, whosoever is in the heavens adores Him, and whosoever is in the earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the mountains, and the beasts, and many among men, though many a one deserves the torments? Whomsoever God abases there is none to honour him; verily, God does what He pleases
22|19|These are two disputants who dispute about their Lord, but those who misbelieve, for them are cut out garments of fire, there shall be poured over their heads boiling water
22|20|wherewith what is in their bellies shall be dissolved and their skins too
22|21|and for them are maces of iron
22|22|Whenever they desire to come forth therefrom through pain, they are sent back into it:. 'And taste ye the torment of the burning
22|23|Verily, God will make those who believe and do right enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow; they shall be bedecked therein with bracelets of gold and with pearls, and their garments therein shall be of silk
22|24|and they shall be guided to the goodly speech, and they shall be guided to the laudable way
22|25|Verily, those who misbelieve and who turn men away from God's path and the Sacred Mosque, which we have made for all men alike, the dweller therein, and the stranger, and he who desires therein profanation with injustice, we will make him taste grievous woe
22|26|And when we established for Abraham the place of the House, (saying), 'Associate naught with me, but cleanse my House for those who make the circuits, for those who stand to pray, for those who bow, and for those too who adore
22|27|And proclaim amongst men the Pilgrimage; let them come to you on foot and on every slim camel, from every deep pass
22|28|that they may witness advantages for them, and may mention the name of God for the stated days over what God has provided them with of brute beasts, then eat thereof and feed the badly off, the poor
22|29|Then let them finish the neglect of their persons, and let them pay their vows and make the circuit round the old House
22|30|That do. And whoso magnifies the sacred things of God it is better for him with his Lord. 'Cattle are lawful for you, except what is recited to you; and avoid the abomination of idols, and avoid speaking falsely
22|31|being 'Hanifs to God, not associating aught with Him; for he who associates aught with God, it is as though he had fallen from heaven, and the birds snatch him up, or the wind blows him away into a far distant place
22|32|That - and he who makes grand the symbols of God, they come from piety of heart
22|33|Therein have ye advantages for an appointed time, then the place for sacrificing them is at the old House
22|34|To every nation have we appointed rites, to mention the name of God over what He has provided them with of brute beasts; and your God is one God, to Him then be resigned, and give glad tidings to the lowly
22|35|whose hearts when God is mentioned are afraid, and to those who are patient of what befalls them, and to those who are steadfast in prayer and of what we have given them expend in alms
22|36|The bulky (camels) we have made for you one of the symbols of God, therein have ye good; so mention the name of God over them as they stand in a row, and when they fall down (dead) eat of them, and feed the easily contented and him who begs
22|37|Thus have we subjected them to you; haply, ye may give thanks! Their meat will never reach to God, nor yet their blood, but the piety from you will reach to Him. Thus hath He subjected them to you that ye may magnify God for guiding you: and give thou glad tidiness to those who do good
22|38|Verily, God will defend those who believe; verily, God loves not any misbelieving traitor
22|39|Permission is given to those who fight because they have been wronged, - and, verily, God to help them has the might
22|40|who have been driven forth from their homes undeservedly, only for that they said, 'Our Lord is God;' and were it not for God's repelling some men with others, cloisters and churches and synagogues and mosques, wherein God's name is mentioned much, would be destroyed. But God will surely help him who helps Him; verily, God is powerful, mighty
22|41|Who, if we establish them in the earth, are steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and bid what is right, and forbid what is wrong; and God's is the future of affairs
22|42|But if they call thee liar, the people of Noah called him liar before them, as did 'Ad and Thamud
22|43|and the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot
22|44|and the fellows of Midian; and Moses was called a liar too: but I let the misbelievers range at large, and then I seized on them, and how great was the change
22|45|And how many a city have we destroyed while it yet did wrong, and it was turned over on its roofs, and (how many) a deserted well and lofty palace
22|46|Have they not travelled on through the land? and have they not hearts to understand with, or ears to hear with? for it is not their eyes which are blind, but blind are the hearts which are within their breasts
22|47|They will bid thee hasten on the torment, but God will never fail in his promise; for, verily, a day with thy Lord is as a thousand years of what ye number
22|48|And to how many a city have I given full range while it yet did wrong! then I seized on it, and unto me was the return
22|49|Say, 'O ye folk! I am naught but a plain warner to you
22|50|but those who believe and do right, for them is forgiveness and a generous provision
22|51|but those who strive to discredit our signs, they are the fellows of hell
22|52|We have not sent before thee any apostle or prophet, but that when he wished, Satan threw not something into his wish; but God annuls what Satan throws; then does God confirm his signs, and God is knowing, wise
22|53|to make what Satan throws a trial unto those in whose hearts is sickness, and those whose hearts are hard; and, verily, the wrong - doers are in a wide schism
22|54|and that those who have been given 'the knowledge' may know that it is the truth from thy Lord, and may believe therein, and that their hearts may be lowly; for, verily, God surely will guide those who believe into a right way
22|55|But those who misbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the Hour comes on them suddenly, or there comes on them the torment of the barren day
22|56|The kingdom on that day shall be God's, He shall judge between them; and those who believe and do aright shall be in gardens of pleasure
22|57|but those who misbelieve and say our signs are lies, these - for them is shameful woe
22|58|And those who flee in God's way, and then are slain or die, God will provide them with a goodly provision; for, verily, God is the best of providers
22|59|He shall surely make them enter by an entrance that they like; for, verily, God is knowing, clement
22|60|That (is so). Whoever punishes with the like of what he has been injured with, and shall then be outraged again, God shall surely help him; verily, God pardons, forgives
22|61|That for that God joins on the night to the day, and joins on the day to the night, and that God is hearing, seeing
22|62|that is for that God is the truth, and for that what ye call on beside Him is falsehood, and that God is the high, the great
22|63|Hast thou not seen that God sends down from the sky water, and on the morrow the earth is green? verily, God is kind and well aware
22|64|His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and, verily, God is rich and to be praised
22|65|Hast thou not seen that God has subjected for you what is in the earth, and the ship that runs on in the sea at His bidding, and He holds back the sky from falling on the earth save at His bidding? verily, God to men is gracious, merciful
22|66|He it is who quickens you, then makes you die, then will He quicken you again - verily, man is indeed ungrateful
22|67|For every nation have we made rites which they observe; let them not then dispute about the matter, but call upon thy Lord; verily, thou art surely in a right guidance
22|68|But if they wrangle with thee, say, 'God best knows what ye do
22|69|God shall judge between them on the resurrection day concerning that whereon they disagreed
22|70|Didst thou not know that God knows what is in the heavens and the earth? verily, that is in a book; verily, that for God is easy
22|71|And they serve beside God what He has sent down no power for, and what they have no knowledge of; but the wrong-doers shall have none to help them
22|72|When our signs are read to them manifest, thou mayest recognise in the faces of those who misbelieve disdain; they well-nigh rush at those who recite to them our signs. Say, 'Shall I inform you of something worse than that for you, the Fire which God has promised to those who misbelieve? an evil journey shall it be
22|73|O ye folk! a parable is struck out for you, so listen to it. Verily, those on whom ye call beside God could never create a fly if they all united together to do it, and if the fly should despoil them of aught they could not snatch it away from it - weak is both the seeker and the sought
22|74|They do not value God at His true value; verily, God is powerful, mighty
22|75|God chooses apostles of the angels and of men; verily, God hears and sees
22|76|He knows what is before them and what is behind them; and unto God affairs return
22|77|O ye who believe! bow down and adore, and serve your Lord, and do well, haply ye may prosper
22|78|and fight strenuously for God, as is His due. He has elected you, and has not put upon you any hindrance by your religion,- the faith of your father Abraham. He has named you Muslims before and in this (book), that the Apostle may be a witness against you, and that ye may be witnesses against men. Be ye then steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and hold fast by God; He is your sovereign, and an excellent sovereign, and an excellent help
23|1|Prosperous are the believers
23|2|who in their prayers are humble
23|3|and who from vain talk turn aside
23|4|and who in almsgiving are active
23|5|And who guard their private parts
23|6|except for their wives or what their right hands possess for then, verily, they are not to be blamed
23|7|but whoso craves aught beyond that, they are the transgressors
23|8|and who observe their trusts and covenants
23|9|and who guard well their prayers
23|10|these are the heirs
23|11|who shall inherit Paradise; they shall dwell therein for aye
23|12|We have created man from an extract of clay
23|13|then we made him a clot in a sure depository
23|14|then we created the clot congealed blood, and we created the congealed blood a morsel; then we created the morsel bone, and we clothed the bone with flesh then we produced it another creation; and blessed be God, the best of creators
23|15|Then shall ye after that surely die
23|16|then shall ye on the day of resurrection be raised
23|17|And we have created above you seven roads; nor are we heedless of the creation
23|18|And we send down from the heaven water by measure, and we make it rest in the earth; but, verily, we are able to take it away
23|19|and we produce for you thereby gardens of palms and grapes wherein ye have many fruits, and whence ye eat
23|20|And a tree growing out of Mount Sinai which produces oil, and a condiment for those who eat
23|21|And, verily, ye have a lesson in the cattle; we give you to drink of what is in their bellies; and ye have therein many advantages, and of them ye eat
23|22|and on them and on ships ye are borne
23|23|We sent Noah unto his people, and he said, 'O my people! worship God, ye have no god but Him; do ye then not fear
23|24|Said the chiefs of those who misbelieved among his people, 'This is nothing but a mortal like yourselves who wishes to have preference over you, and had God pleased He would have sent angels; we have not heard of this amongst our fathers of yore
23|25|he is nothing but a man possessed; let him bide then for a season
23|26|Said he, 'Help me, for they call me liar
23|27|And we inspired him, 'Make the ark under our eyes and inspiration; and when the oven boils over, conduct into it of every kind two, with thy family, except him of them against whom the word has passed; and do not address me for those who do wrong, verily, they are to be drowned
23|28|But when thou art settled, thou and those with thee in the ark, say, "Praise belongs to God, who saved us from the unjust people
23|29|And say, "My Lord! make me to alight in a blessed alighting-place, for Thou art the best of those who cause men to alight
23|30|Verily, in that is a sign, and, verily, we were trying them
23|31|Then we raised up after them another generation
23|32|and we sent amongst them a prophet of themselves (saying), 'Serve God, ye have no god but He; will ye then not fear
23|33|Said the chiefs of his people who misbelieved, and called the meeting of the last day a lie, and to whom we gave enjoyment in the life of this world, 'This is only a mortal like yourselves, who eats of what ye eat
23|34|and drinks of what ye drink; and if ye obey a mortal like yourselves, verily, ye will then be surely losers
23|35|Does he promise you that when ye are dead, and have become dust and bones, that then ye will be brought forth
23|36|Away, away with what ye are threatened
23|37|there is only our life in the world! We die and we live, and we shall not be raised
23|38|He is only a man who forges against God a lie. And we believe not in him
23|39|Said he, 'My Lord! help me, for they call me liar
23|40|He said, 'Within a little they will surely awake repenting
23|41|And the noise seized them deservedly; and we made them as rubbish borne by a torrent; so, away with the unjust people
23|42|Then we raised up after them other generations
23|43|No nation can anticipate its appointed time, nor keep it back
23|44|Then we sent our apostles one after another. Whenever its apostle came to any nation they called him a liar; and we made some to follow others; and we made them legends; away then with a people who do not believe
23|45|Then we sent Moses and his brother Aaron with our signs
23|46|and with plain authority to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they were too big with pride, and were a haughty people
23|47|And they said, 'Shall we believe two mortals like ourselves, when their people are servants of ours
23|48|So they called them liars, and were of those who perished
23|49|And we gave Moses the Book, that haply they might be guided
23|50|And we made the son of Mary and his mother a sign; and we lodged them both on a high place, furnished with security and a spring
23|51|O ye apostles! eat of the good things and do right; verily, what ye do I know
23|52|And, verily, this nation of yours is one nation, and I am your Lord; so fear me
23|53|And they have become divided as to their affair amongst themselves into sects, each party rejoicing in what they have themselves
23|54|So leave them in their flood (of error) for a time
23|55|Do they reckon that that of which we grant them such an extent
23|56|of wealth and children, we hasten to them as good things - nay, but they do not perceive
23|57|Verily, those who shrink with terror at their Lord
23|58|and those who in the signs of their Lord believe
23|59|and those who with their Lord join none
23|60|and those who give what they do give while their hearts are afraid that they unto their Lord will return
23|61|these hasten to good things and are first to gain the same
23|62|But we will not oblige a soul beyond its capacity; for with us is a book that utters the truth, and they shall not be wronged
23|63|Nay, their hearts are in a flood (of error) at this, and they have works beside this which they do
23|64|Until we catch the affluent ones amongst them with the torment; then lo! they cry for aid
23|65|Cry not for aid today! verily, against us ye will not be helped
23|66|My signs were recited to you, but upon your heels did ye turn back
23|67|big with pride at it, in vain discourse by night
23|68|Is it that they did not ponder over the words, whether that has come to them which came not to their fathers of yore
23|69|Or did they not know their apostle, that they thus deny him
23|70|Or do they say, 'He is possessed by a ginn?' Nay, he came to them with the truth, and most of them are averse from the truth
23|71|But if the truth were to follow their lusts, the heavens and the earth would be corrupted with all who in them are! - Nay, we brought them their reminder, but they from their reminder turn aside
23|72|Or dost thou ask them for a tribute? but the tribute of thy Lord is better, for He is the best of those who provide
23|73|And, verily, thou dost call them to a right way
23|74|but, verily, those who believe not in the hereafter from the way do veer
23|75|But if we had mercy on them, and removed the distress they have, they would persist in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
23|76|And we caught them with the torment, but they did not abase themselves before their Lord, nor did they humble themselves
23|77|until we opened for them a door with grievous torment, then lo! they are in despair
23|78|He it is who produced for you hearing, and sight, and minds, - little is it that ye thank
23|79|And He it is who created you in the earth, and unto Him shall ye be gathered
23|80|And He it is who gives you life and death; and His is the alternation of the night and the day; have ye then no sense
23|81|Nay, but they said like that which those of yore did say
23|82|They said, 'What! when we have become earth and bones, are we then going to be raised
23|83|We have been promised this, and our fathers too, before;- this is naught but old folks' tales
23|84|Say, 'Whose is the earth and those who are therein, if ye but know
23|85|They will say, 'God's.' Say, 'Do ye not then mind
23|86|Say, 'Who is Lord of the seven heavens, and Lord of the mighty throne
23|87|They will say, 'God.' Say, 'Do ye not then fear
23|88|Say, 'In whose hand is the dominion of everything; He succours but is not succoured, - if ye did but know
23|89|They will say, 'God's.' Say, 'Then how can ye be so infatuated
23|90|Nay, we have brought them the truth, but, verily, they are liars
23|91|God never took a son, nor was there ever any god with Him;- then each god would have gone off with what he had created, and some would have exalted themselves over others,- celebrated be His praises above what they attribute (to Him)
23|92|He who knows the unseen and the visible, exalted be He above what they join with Him
23|93|Say, 'My Lord! if Thou shouldst show me what they are threatened
23|94|my Lord! then place me not amongst the unjust people
23|95|Missing
23|96|Repel evil by what is better. We know best what they attribute (to thee)
23|97|And say, 'My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the incitings of the devils
23|98|and I seek refuge in Thee from their presence
23|99|Until when death comes to any one of them he says, 'My Lord! send ye me back
23|100|haply I may do right in that which I have left!' Not so! - a mere word he speaks! - but behind them is a bar until the day they shall be raised
23|101|And when, the trumpet shall be blown, and there shall be no relation between them on that day, nor shall they beg of each other then
23|102|And he whose scales are heavy,- they are the prosperous
23|103|But he whose scales are light,- these are they who lose themselves, in hell to dwell for aye
23|104|The fire shall scorch their faces, and they shall curl their lips therein
23|105|Were not my signs recited to you? and ye said that they were lies
23|106|They say, 'Our Lord! our misery overcame us, and we were a people who did err
23|107|Our Lord! take us out therefrom, and if we return, then shall we be unjust
23|108|He will say, 'Go ye away into it and speak not to me
23|109|Verily, there was a sect of my servants who said, Our Lord! we believe, so pardon us, and have mercy upon us, for Thou art the best of the merciful ones
23|110|And ye took them for a jest until ye forgat my reminder and did laugh thereat
23|111|Verily, I have recompensed them this day for their patience; verily, they are happy now
23|112|He will say, 'How long a number of years did ye tarry on earth
23|113|They will say, 'We tarried a day or part of a day, but ask the Numberers
23|114|He will say, 'Ye have only tarried a little, were ye but to know it
23|115|Did ye then reckon that we created you for sport, and that to us ye would not return
23|116|But exalted be God, the true; there is no god but He, the Lord of the noble throne
23|117|and whoso calls upon another god with God has no proof of it, but, verily, his account is with his Lord; verily, the misbelievers shall not prosper
23|118|And say, 'Lord, pardon and be merciful, for Thou art the best of the merciful ones
24|1|A chapter which we have sent down and determined, and have sent down therein manifest signs; haply ye may be mindful
24|2|The whore and the whoremonger. Scourge each of them with a hundred stripes, and do not let pity for them take hold of you in God's religion, if ye believe in God and the last day; and let a party of the believers witness their torment
24|3|And the whoremonger shall marry none but a whore or an idolatress; and the whore shall none marry but an adulterer or an idolater; God has prohibited this to the believers
24|4|but those who cast (imputations) on chaste women and then do not bring four witnesses, scourge them with eighty stripes, and do not receive any testimony of theirs ever, for these are the workers of abomination
24|5|Except such as repent after that and act aright, for, verily, God is forgiving and compassionate
24|6|And those who cast (imputation) on their wives and have no witnesses except themselves, then the testimony of one of them shall be to testify four times that, by God, he is of those who speak the truth
24|7|and the fifth testimony shall be that the curse of God shall be on him if he be of those who lie
24|8|And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bears testimony four times that, by God, he is of those who lie
24|9|and the fifth that the wrath of God shall be on her if he be of those who speak the truth
24|10|And were it not for God's grace upon you and His mercy, and that God is relenting, wise
24|11|Verily, those who bring forward the lie, a band of you,- reckon it not as an evil for you, nay, it is good for you; every man of them shall have what he has earned of sin; and he of them who managed to aggravate it, for him is mighty woe
24|12|Why did not, when ye heard it, the believing men and believing women think good in themselves, and say, 'This is an obvious lie
24|13|Why did they not bring four witnesses to it? but since they did not bring the witnesses, then they in God's eyes are the liars
24|14|And but for God's grace upon you, and His mercy in this world and the next, there would have touched you, for that which ye spread abroad, mighty woe
24|15|When ye reported it with your tongues, and spake with your mouths what ye had no knowledge of, and reckoned it a light thing, while in God's eyes it was grave
24|16|And why did ye not say when ye heard it, 'It is not for us to speak of this? Celebrated be His praises, this is a mighty calumny
24|17|God admonishes you that ye return not to the like of it ever, if ye be believers
24|18|and God manifests to you the signs, for God is knowing, wise
24|19|Verily, those who love that scandal should go abroad amongst those who believe, for them is grievous woe in this world and the next; for God knows, but ye do not know
24|20|And but for God's grace upon you, and His mercy, and that God is kind and compassionate
24|21|O ye who believe! follow not the footsteps of Satan, for he who follows the footsteps of Satan, verily, he bids you sin and do wrong; and but for God's grace upon you and His mercy, not one of you would be ever pure; but God purifies whom He will, for God both hears and knows
24|22|And let not those amongst you who have plenty and ample means swear that they will not give aught to their kinsman and the poor and those who have fled their homes in God's way, but let them pardon and pass it over. Do ye not like God to forgive you? and God is forgiving, compassionate
24|23|Verily, those who cast imputations on chaste women who are negligent but believing shall be cursed in this world and the next; and for them is mighty woe
24|24|The day when their tongues and hands and feet shall bear witness against them of what they did
24|25|on that day God will pay them their just due; and they shall know that God, He is the plain truth
24|26|The vile women to the vile men, and the vile men to the vile women; and the good women to the good men, and the good men to the good women: these are clear of what they say to them - forgiveness and a noble provision
24|27|O ye who believe! enter not into houses which are not your own houses, until ye have asked leave and saluted the people thereof, that is better for you; haply ye may be mindful
24|28|And if ye find no one therein, then do not enter them until permission is given you, and if it be said to you, 'Go back!' then go back, it is purer for you; for God of what ye do doth know
24|29|It is no crime against you that ye enter uninhabited houses,- a convenience for you;- and God knows what ye show and what ye hide
24|30|Say to the believers that they cast down their looks and guard their private parts; that is purer for them; verily, God is well aware of what they do
24|31|And say to the believing women that they cast down their looks and guard their private parts, and display not their ornaments, except those which are outside; and let them pull their kerchiefs over their bosoms and not display their ornaments save to their husbands and fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or what their right hands possess, or their male attendants who are incapable, or to children who do not note women's nakedness; and that they beat not with their feet that their hidden ornaments may be known;- but turn ye all repentant to God, O ye believers haply ye may prosper
24|32|And marry the single amongst you, and the righteous among your servants and your handmaidens. If they be poor, God will enrich them of His grace, for God both comprehends and knows
24|33|And let those who cannot find a match, until God enriches them of His grace, keep chaste. And such of those whom your right hands possess as crave a writing, write it for them, if ye know any good in them, and give them of the wealth of God which He has given you. And do not compel your slave girls to prostitution, if they desire to keep continent, in order to crave the goods of the life of this world; but he who does compel them, then, verily, God after they are compelled is forgiving, compassionate
24|34|Now have we sent down to you manifest signs, and the like of those who have passed away before you, and as an admonition to those who fear
24|35|God is the light of the heavens and the earth; His light is as a niche in which is a lamp, and the lamp is in a glass, the glass is as though it were a glittering star; it is lit from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the east nor of the west, the oil of which would well-nigh give light though no fire touched it,- light upon light!- God guides to His light whom He pleases; and God strikes out parables for men, and God all things doth know
24|36|In the houses God has permitted to be reared and His name to be mentioned therein - His praises are celebrated therein mornings and evenings
24|37|Men whom neither merchandize nor selling divert from the remembrance of God and steadfastness in prayer and giving alms, who fear a day when hearts and eyes shall be upset
24|38|that God may recompense them for the best that they have done, and give them increase of His grace; for God provides whom He pleases without count
24|39|But those who misbelieve, their works are like the mirage in a plain, the thirsty counts it water till when he comes to it he finds nothing, but he finds that God is with him; and He will pay him his account, for God is quick to take account
24|40|Or like darkness on a deep sea, there covers it a wave above which is a wave, above which is a cloud,- darknesses one above the other,- when one puts out his hand he can scarcely see it; for he to whom God has given no light, he has no light
24|41|Hast thou not seen that God,- all who are in the heavens and the earth celebrate His praises, and the birds too spreading out their wings; each one knows its prayer and its praise, and God knows what they do
24|42|Missing
24|43|Hast thou not seen that God drives the clouds, and then re-unites them, and then accumulates them, and thou mayest see the rain coming forth from their midst; and He sends down from the sky mountains with hail therein, and He makes it fall on whom He pleases, and He turns it from whom He pleases; the flashing of His lightning well-nigh goes off with their sight
24|44|God interchanges the night and the day; verily, in that is a lesson to those endowed with sight
24|45|And God created every beast from water, and of them is one that walks upon its belly, and of them one that walks upon two feet, and of them one that walks upon four. God creates what He pleases; verily, God is mighty over all
24|46|Now have we sent down manifest signs, and God guides whom He pleases unto the right way
24|47|They will say, 'We believe in God and in the Apostle, and we obey.' Then a sect of them turned their backs after that, and they are not believers
24|48|And when they are called to God and His Apostle to judge between them, lo! a sect of them do turn aside
24|49|But had the right been on their side they would have come to him submissively enough
24|50|Is there a sickness in their hearts, or do they doubt, or do they fear lest God and His Apostle should deal unfairly by them?- Nay, it is they who are unjust
24|51|The speech of the believers, when they are called to God and His Apostle to judge between them, is only to say, 'We hear and we obey;' and these it is who are the prosperous
24|52|for whoso obeys God and His Apostle and dreads God and fears Him, these it is who are the happy
24|53|They swear by God with their most strenuous oath that hadst Thou ordered them they would surely go forth. Say, 'Do not swear - reasonable obedience; verily, God knows what ye do
24|54|Say, 'Obey God and obey the Apostle; but if ye turn your backs he has only his burden to bear, and ye have only your burden to bear. But if ye obey him, ye are guided; but the Apostle has only his plain message to deliver
24|55|God promises those of you who believe and do right that He will give them the succession in the earth as He gave the succession to those before them, and He will establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them, and to give them, after their fear, safety in exchange.;- they shall worship me, they shall not associate aught with me: but whoso disbelieves after that, those it is who are the sinners
24|56|And be steadfast in prayer and give alms and obey the Apostle, haply ye may obtain mercy
24|57|Do not reckon that those who misbelieve can frustrate (God) in the earth, for their resort is the Fire, and an ill journey shall it be
24|58|O ye who believe! let those whom your right hands possess, and those amongst you who have not reached puberty, ask leave of you three times: before the prayer of dawn, and when ye put off your clothes at noon, and after the evening prayer;- three times of privacy for you: there is no crime on either you or them after these while ye are continually going one about the other. Thus does God explain to you His signs, for God is knowing, wise
24|59|And when your children reach puberty let them ask leave as those before them asked leave. Thus does God explain to you His signs, for God is knowing, wise
24|60|And those women who have stopped (child-bearing), who do not hope for a match, it is no crime on them that they put off their clothes so as not to display their ornaments; but that they abstain is better for them, for God both hears and knows
24|61|There is no hindrance to the blind, and no hindrance to the lame, and no hindrance to the sick, and none upon yourselves that you eat from your houses, or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the houses of your paternal uncles, or the houses of your paternal aunts, or the houses of your maternal uncles, or the houses of your maternal aunts, or what ye possess the keys of, or of your friend, there is no crime on you that ye eat all together or separately. And when ye enter houses then greet each other with a salutation from God, blessed and good. Thus does God explain to you His signs, haply ye may understand
24|62|Only those are believers who believe in God and His Apostle, and when they are with Him upon public business go not away until they have asked his leave; verily, those who ask thy leave they it is who believe in God and His Apostle. But when they ask thy leave for any of their own concerns, then give leave to whomsoever thou wilt of them, and ask pardon for them of God; verily, God is forgiving and merciful
24|63|Make not the calling of the Apostle amongst yourselves like your calling one to the other; God knows those of you who withdraw themselves covertly. And let those who disobey his order beware lest there befall them some trial or there befall them grievous woe
24|64|Ay, God's is what is in the heavens and the earth, He knows what ye are at; and the day ye shall be sent back to Him then He will inform you of what ye have done, for God all things doth know
25|1|Blessed be He who sent down the Discrimination to His servant that he might be unto the world a warner
25|2|whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and who has not taken to Himself a son, and who has no partner in His kingdom, and created everything, and then decreed it determinately
25|3|And they take beside Him gods who create not aught, but are themselves created, and cannot control for themselves harm or profit, and cannot control death, or life, or resurrection
25|4|And those who misbelieve say, 'This is nothing but a lie which he has forged, and another people hath helped him at it;' but they have wrought an injustice and a falsehood
25|5|And they say, 'Old folks' tales, which he has got written down while they are dictated to him morning and evening
25|6|Say, 'He sent it down who knows the secret in the heavens and the earth; verily, He is ever forgiving, merciful
25|7|And they say, 'What ails this prophet that he eats food and walks in the markets?- unless there be sent down to him an angel and be a warner with him
25|8|Or there be thrown to him a treasury or he have a garden to eat therefrom .... !' and the unjust say, 'Ye only follow an infatuated man
25|9|See how they strike out for thee parables, and err, and cannot find a way
25|10|Blessed be He who, if He please, can make for thee better than that, gardens beneath which rivers flow, and can make for thee castles
25|11|Nay, but they call the Hour a lie; but we have prepared for those who call the Hour a lie a blaze
25|12|when it seizes them from a far-off place they shall hear its raging and roaring
25|13|and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof, fastened together, they shall call there for destruction
25|14|Call not today for one destruction, but call, for many destructions
25|15|Say, 'Is that better or the garden of eternity which was promised to those who fear - which is ever for them a recompense and a retreat
25|16|They shall have therein what they please, to dwell therein for aye: that is of thy Lord a promise to be demanded
25|17|And the day He shall gather them and what they served beside God, and He shall say, 'Was it ye who led my servants here astray, or did they err from the way
25|18|They shall say, 'Celebrated be Thy praise, it was not befitting for us to take any patrons but Thee; but Thou didst give them and their fathers enjoyment until they forgot the Reminder and were a lost people
25|19|And now have they proved you liars for what ye say, and they cannot ward off or help. And he of you who does wrong we will make him taste great torment
25|20|We have not sent before thee any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets; but we have made some of you a trial to others: will ye be patient? thy Lord doth ever look
25|21|And those who do not hope to meet us say, 'Unless the angels be sent down to us, or we see our Lord....!' They are too big with pride in their souls and they have exceeded with a great excess
25|22|The day they shall see the angels,- no glad tidings on that day for the sinners, and they shall say, 'It is rigorously forbidden
25|23|And we will go on to the works which they have done, and make them like motes in a sunbeam scattered
25|24|The fellows of Paradise on that day shall be in a better abiding-place and a better noonday rest
25|25|The day the heavens shall be cleft asunder with the clouds, and the angels shall be sent down descending
25|26|The true kingdom on that day shall belong to the Merciful, and it shall be a hard day for the misbelievers
25|27|And the day when the unjust shall bite his hands and say, 'O, would that I had taken a way with the Apostle
25|28|O, woe is me! would that I had not taken such a one for a friend now
25|29|for he did lead me astray from the Reminder after it had come to me, for Satan leaves man in the lurch
25|30|The Apostle said, 'O my Lord! verily, my people have taken this Qur'an to be obsolete
25|31|Thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners; but thy Lord is good guide and helper enough
25|32|Those who misbelieve said, 'Unless the Qur'an be sent down to him all at once...!' - thus - that we may stablish thy heart therewith, did we reveal it piecemeal
25|33|Nor shall they come to thee with a parable without our bringing thee the truth and the best interpretation
25|34|They who shall be gathered upon their faces to hell,- these are in the worst place, and err most from the path
25|35|And we did give to Moses the Book, and place with him his brother Aaron as a minister
25|36|and we said, 'Go ye to the people who say our signs are lies, for we will destroy them with utter destruction
25|37|And the people of Noah, when they said the apostles were liars, we drowned them, and we made them a sign for men; and we prepared for the unjust a grievous woe
25|38|And 'Ad and Thamud and the people of ar Rass, and many generations between them
25|39|For each one have we struck out parables, and each one have we ruined with utter ruin
25|40|Why, they have come past the cities which were rained on with an evil rain; have they not seen them?- nay, they do not hope to be raised up again
25|41|And when they saw thee they only took thee for a jest, 'Is this he whom God has sent as an apostle
25|42|he well-nigh leads us astray from our gods, had we not been patient about them.' But they shall know, when they see the torment, who errs most from the path
25|43|Dost thou consider him who takes his lusts for his god? wilt thou then be in charge over him
25|44|or dost thou reckon that most of them will hear or understand? they are only like the cattle, nay, they err more from the way
25|45|Hast thou not looked to thy Lord how He prolongs the shadow? but had He willed He would have made it stationary; then we make the sun a guide thereto
25|46|then we contract it towards us with an easy contraction
25|47|And He it is who made the night for a garment; and sleep for repose, and made the day for men to rise up again
25|48|And He it is who sent the winds with glad tidings before His mercy; and we send down from the heavens pure water
25|49|to quicken therewith the dead country, and to give it for drink to what we have created,- the cattle and many folk
25|50|We have turned it in various ways amongst them that they may remember; though most men refuse aught but to misbelieve
25|51|But, had we pleased, we would have sent in every city a warner
25|52|So obey not the unbelievers and fight strenuously with them in many a strenuous fight
25|53|He it is who has let loose the two seas, this one sweet and fresh, that one bitter and pungent, and has made between them a rigorous prohibition
25|54|And he it is who has created man from water, and has made for him blood relationship and marriage relationship; for thy Lord is mighty
25|55|Yet they worship beside God what can neither profit them nor harm them; but he who misbelieves in his Lord backs up (the devil)
25|56|We have only sent thee to give glad tidings and to warn
25|57|Say, 'I ask you not for it a hire unless one please to take unto his Lord a way
25|58|And rely thou upon the Living One who dies not; and celebrate His praise, for He knows well enough about the thoughts of His servants
25|59|He who created the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, in six days, and then made for the throne; the Merciful One, ask concerning Him of One who is aware
25|60|And when it is said, ' Adore ye the Merciful!' they say, 'What is the Merciful? shall we adore what thou dost order us?' and it only increases their aversion
25|61|Blessed be He who placed in the heavens zodiacal signs, and placed therein the lamp and an illuminating moon
25|62|And He it is who made the night and the day alternating for him who desires to remember or who wishes to be thankful
25|63|And the servants of the Merciful are those who walk upon the earth lowly, and when the ignorant address them, say, 'Peace
25|64|And those who pass the night adoring their Lord and standing
25|65|and those who say, 'O our Lord! turn from us the torment of hell; verily, its torments are persistent
25|66|verily, they are evil as an abode and a station
25|67|And those who when they spend are neither extravagant nor miserly, but who ever take their stand between the two
25|68|and who call not upon another god with God; and kill not the soul which God has prohibited save deservedly; and do not commit fornication: for he who does that shall meet with a penalty
25|69|doubled for him shall be the torment on the resurrection day, and he shall be therein for aye despised
25|70|Save he who turns again and believes and does a righteous work; for, as to those, God will change their evil deeds to good, for God is ever forgiving, merciful
25|71|And he who turns again and does right, verily, he turns again to God repentant
25|72|And those who do not testify falsely; and when they pass by frivolous discourse, pass by it honourably
25|73|and those who when they are reminded of the signs of their Lord do not fall down thereat deaf and blind
25|74|and those who say, 'Our Lord! grant us from our wives and seed that which may cheer our eyes, and make us models to the pious
25|75|These shall be rewarded with a high place for that they were patient: and they shall meet therein with salutation and peace
25|76|to dwell therein for aye; a good abode and station shall it be
25|77|Say, 'My Lord cares not for you though you should not call (on Him); and ye have called (the Apostle) a liar, but it shall be (a punishment) which ye cannot shake off
26|1|M
26|2|Those are the signs of the perspicuous Book
26|3|haply thou art vexing thyself to death that they will not be believers
26|4|If we please we will send down upon them from the heaven a sign, and their necks shall be humbled thereto
26|5|But there comes not to them any recent Reminder from the Merciful One that they do not turn away from
26|6|They have called (thee) liar! but there shall come to them a message of that at which they mocked
26|7|Have they not looked to the earth, how we caused to grow therein of every noble kind
26|8|verily, in that is a sign; but most of them will never be believers
26|9|but, verily, thy Lord He is mighty and merciful
26|10|And when thy Lord called Moses (saying), 'Come to the unjust people
26|11|to the people of Pharaoh, will they not fear
26|12|Said he, 'My Lord! verily, I fear that they will call me liar
26|13|and my breast is straitened, and my tongue is not fluent; send then unto Aaron
26|14|for they have a crime against me, and I fear that they may kill me
26|15|Said He, 'Not so; but go with our signs, verily, we are with you listening
26|16|And go to Pharaoh and say, "Verily, we are the apostles of the Lord of the worlds
26|17|(to tell thee to) send with us the children of Israel
26|18|And he said, 'Did we not bring thee up amongst us as a child? and thou didst dwell amongst us for years of thy life
26|19|and thou didst do thy deed which thou hast done, and thou art of the ungrateful
26|20|Said he, 'I did commit this, and I was of those who erred
26|21|And I fled from you when I feared you, and my Lord granted me judgment, and made me one of His messengers
26|22|and this is the favour thou hast obliged me with, that thou hast enslaved the children of Israel
26|23|Said Pharaoh, 'Who is the Lord of the worlds
26|24|Said he, 'The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between the two, if ye are but sure
26|25|Said he to those about him, 'Do ye not listen
26|26|Said he, 'Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of yore
26|27|Said he, 'Verily, your apostle who is sent to you is surely mad
26|28|Said he, 'The Lord of the east and of the west, and of what is between the two, if ye had but sense
26|29|Said he, 'If thou dost take a god besides Me I will surely make thee one of the imprisoned
26|30|Said he, 'What, if I come to thee with something obvious
26|31|Said he, 'Bring it, if thou art of those who tell the truth
26|32|And he threw down his rod, and, behold, it was an obvious serpent
26|33|and he plucked out his hand, and, behold, it was white to the spectators
26|34|He said to the chiefs around him, 'Verily, this is a knowing sorcerer
26|35|he desires to turn you out of your land! what is it then ye bid
26|36|They said, 'Give him and his brother some hope, and send into the cities to collect
26|37|and bring to thee every knowing sorcerer
26|38|And the sorcerers assembled at the appointed time on a stated day
26|39|and it was said to the people, 'Are ye assembled
26|40|haply we may follow the sorcerers if we gain the upper hand
26|41|And when the sorcerers came they said to Pharaoh, 'Shall we, verily, have a hire if we gain the upper hand
26|42|Said he, 'Yes; and, verily, ye shall then be of those who are nigh (my throne)
26|43|And Moses said to them, 'Throw down what ye have to throw down
26|44|So they threw down their ropes and their rods and said, 'By Pharaoh's might, verily, we it is who shall gain the upper hand
26|45|And Moses threw down his rod, and, lo, it swallowed up what they falsely devised
26|46|And the sorcerers threw themselves down, adoring
26|47|Said they, 'We believe in the Lord of the worlds
26|48|the Lord of Moses and Aaron
26|49|Said he, 'Do ye believe in Him ere I give you leave? Verily, he is your chief who has taught you sorcery, but soon ye shall know. I will surely cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, and I will crucify you all together
26|50|They said, 'No harm; verily, unto our Lord do we return
26|51|verily, we hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, for we are the first of believers
26|52|And we inspired Moses, 'Journey by night with my servants; verily, ye are pursued
26|53|And Pharaoh sent into the cities to collect
26|54|Verily, these are a small company
26|55|And, verily, they are enraged with us
26|56|but we are a multitude, wary
26|57|Turn them out of gardens and springs
26|58|and treasuries, and a noble station
26|59|thus, - and we made the children of Israel to inherit them
26|60|And they followed them at dawn
26|61|and when the two hosts saw each other, Moses' companions said, 'Verily, we are overtaken
26|62|Said he, 'Not so; verily, with me is my Lord, He will guide me
26|63|And we inspired Moses, 'Strike with thy rod the sea;' and it was cleft asunder, and each part was like a mighty mountain
26|64|And then we brought the others
26|65|And we saved Moses and those with him all together
26|66|then we drowned the others
26|67|and that is a sign: but most of them will never be believers
26|68|And, verily, thy Lord He is mighty, merciful
26|69|And recite to them the story of Abraham
26|70|when he said to his father and his people, 'What do ye serve
26|71|They said, 'We serve idols, and we are still devoted to them
26|72|He said, 'Can they hear you when ye call
26|73|or profit you, or harm
26|74|They said, 'No; but we found our fathers doing thus
26|75|He said, 'Have ye considered what ye have been serving
26|76|ye and your fathers before you
26|77|Verily, they are foes to me, save only the Lord of the worlds
26|78|who created me and guides me
26|79|and who gives me food and drink
26|80|And when I am sick He heals me
26|81|He who will kill me, and then bring me to life
26|82|and who I hope will forgive me my sins on the day of judgment
26|83|Lord, grant me judgment, and let me reach the righteous
26|84|and give me a tongue of good report amongst posterity
26|85|and make me of the heirs of the paradise of pleasure
26|86|and pardon my father, verily, he is of those who err
26|87|and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised up again
26|88|the day when wealth shall profit not, nor sons
26|89|but only he who comes to God with a sound heart
26|90|And paradise shall be brought near to the pious
26|91|and hell shall be brought forth to those who go astray
26|92|and it shall be said to them, "Where is what ye used to worship
26|93|beside God? can they help you, or get help themselves
26|94|And they shall fall headlong into it, they and those who have gone astray
26|95|and the hosts of Iblis all together
26|96|They shall say, while they quarrel therein
26|97|By God! we were surely in an obvious error
26|98|when we made you equal to the Lord of the worlds
26|99|but it was only sinners who led us astray
26|100|But we have no intercessors
26|101|and no warm friend
26|102|but had we a turn we would be of the believers
26|103|Verily, in that is a sign, but most of them will never be believers
26|104|and, verily, thy Lord He is mighty and merciful
26|105|The people of Noah said the apostles were liars
26|106|when their brother Noah said to them, 'Will ye not fear
26|107|verily, I am a faithful apostle to you
26|108|then fear God and obey me
26|109|I do not ask you for it any hire; my hire is only with the Lord of the worlds
26|110|So fear God and obey me
26|111|They said, 'Shall we believe in thee, when the reprobates follow thee
26|112|He said, 'I did not know what they were doing
26|113|their account is only with my Lord, if ye but perceive
26|114|And I am not one to drive away the believers
26|115|I am only a plain warner
26|116|They said, 'Verily, if thou desist not, O Noah! thou shalt surely be of those who are stoned
26|117|Said he, 'My Lord! verily, my people call me liar
26|118|open between me and between them an opening, and save me and those of the believers who are with me
26|119|So we saved him and those with him in the laden ark
26|120|then we drowned the rest
26|121|verily, in that is a sign, but most of them will never be believers
26|122|and, verily, thy Lord He is mighty and merciful
26|123|And 'Ad called the apostles liars
26|124|when their brother Hud said to them, 'Will ye not fear
26|125|Verily, I am to you a faithful apostle
26|126|then fear God and obey me
26|127|I do not ask you for it any hire; my hire is only with the Lord of the worlds
26|128|Do ye build on every height a landmark in sport
26|129|and take to works that haply ye may be immortal
26|130|And when ye assault ye assault like tyrants
26|131|but fear God and obey me
26|132|and fear Him who hath
26|133|given you an extent of cattle and sons
26|134|and gardens and springs
26|135|Verily, fear for you the torment of a mighty day
26|136|They said, 'It is the same to us if thou admonish or art not of those who do admonish
26|137|this is nothing but old folks' fictions, for we shall not be tormented
26|138|And they called him liar
26|139|but we destroyed them. Verily, in that is a sign, but most of them will never be believers
26|140|And, verily, thy Lord is mighty, merciful
26|141|Thamud called the apostles liars
26|142|when their brother Zalih said to them, 'Do ye not fear
26|143|verily, I am to you a faithful apostle
26|144|so fear God and obey me
26|145|I do not ask you for it any hire; my hire is only with the Lord of the worlds
26|146|Shall ye be left here in safety
26|147|with gardens and springs
26|148|and corn-fields and palms
26|149|the spathes whereof are fine? and ye hew out of the mountains houses skillfully
26|150|But fear God and obey me
26|151|and obey not the bidding of the extravagant
26|152|who do evil in the earth and do not act aright
26|153|They said, 'Thou art only of the infatuated
26|154|thou art but mortal like ourselves; so bring us a sign, if thou be of those who speak the truth
26|155|He said, 'This she-camel shall have her drink and you your drink on a certain day
26|156|but touch her not with evil, or there will seize you the torment of a mighty day
26|157|But they hamstrung her, and on the morrow they repented
26|158|and the torment seized them; verily, in that is a sign; but most of them will never be believers
26|159|but verily, thy Lord He is mighty, merciful
26|160|The people of Lot called the apostles liars
26|161|when their brother Lot said to them, 'Do ye not fear
26|162|verily, I am to you a faithful apostle
26|163|then fear God and obey me
26|164|I do not ask you for it any hire; my hire is only with the Lord of the worlds
26|165|Do ye approach males of all the world
26|166|and leave what God your Lord has created for you of your wives? nay, but ye are people who transgress
26|167|They said, 'Surely, if thou dost not desist, O Lot! thou shalt be of those who are expelled
26|168|Said he, 'Verily, I am of those who hate your deed
26|169|my Lord! save me and my people from what they do
26|170|And we saved him and his people all together
26|171|except an old woman amongst those who lingered
26|172|Then we destroyed the others
26|173|and we rained down upon them a rain; and evil was the rain of those who were warned
26|174|Verily, in that is a sign; but most, of them will never be believers
26|175|And, verily, thy Lord He is mighty, merciful, compassionate
26|176|The fellows of the Grove called the apostles liars
26|177|Sho'haib said to them, 'Will ye not fear
26|178|verily, I am to you a faithful apostle
26|179|then fear God and obey me
26|180|I do not ask you for it any hire; my hire is only with the Lord of the worlds
26|181|Give good measure, and be not of those who diminish
26|182|and weigh with a fair balance
26|183|and do not cheat men of their goods; and waste not the land, despoiling it
26|184|and fear Him who created you and the races of yore
26|185|Said they, 'Thou art only of the infatuated
26|186|and thou art only a mortal like ourselves; and, verily, we think that thou art surely of the liars
26|187|so make a portion of the heaven to fall down upon us, if thou art of those who tell the truth
26|188|Said he, 'My Lord knows best what ye do
26|189|but they called him liar, and the torment of the day of the shadow seized them; for it was the torment of a mighty day
26|190|verily, in that is a sign; but most of them will never be believers
26|191|but, verily, thy Lord He is mighty, merciful
26|192|And, verily, it is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
26|193|the Faithful Spirit came down with it
26|194|upon thy heart, that thou shouldst be of those who warn
26|195|in plain Arabic language
26|196|and, verily, it is (foretold) in the scriptures of yore
26|197|Have they not a sign, that the learned men of the children of Israel recognise it
26|198|Had we sent it down to any barbarian
26|199|and he had read it to them, they would not have believed therein
26|200|Thus have we made for it a way into the hearts of the sinners
26|201|they will not believe therein until they see the grievous woe
26|202|and it shall come to them suddenly while they do not perceive
26|203|They will say, 'Shall we be respited
26|204|What! do they wish to hasten on our torment
26|205|What thinkest thou? if we let them enjoy themselves for years
26|206|and then there come to them what they are threatened
26|207|that will not avail them which they had to enjoy
26|208|But we do not destroy any city without its having warners
26|209|as a reminder, for we are never unjust
26|210|The devils did not descend therewith
26|211|it is not fit work for them; nor are they able to do it
26|212|Verily, they are deposed from listening
26|213|call not then with God upon other gods, or thou wilt be of the tormented
26|214|but warn thy clansmen who are near of kin
26|215|And lower thy wing to those of the believers who follow thee
26|216|but if they rebel against thee, say, 'Verily, I am clear of what ye do
26|217|and rely thou upon the mighty, merciful One
26|218|who sees thee when thou dost stand up
26|219|and thy posturing amongst those who adore
26|220|Verily, He both bears and knows
26|221|Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend
26|222|they descend upon every sinful liar
26|223|and impart what they have heard; but most of them are liars
26|224|And the poets do those follow who go astray
26|225|Dost thou not see that they wander distraught in every vale
26|226|and that they say that which they do not do
26|227|save those who believe, and do right, and remember God much, and defend themselves after they are wronged; but those who do wrong shall know with what a turn they shall be turned
27|1|Those are the signs of the Qur'an and the perspicuous Book
27|2|a guidance and glad tidings to the believers
27|3|who are steadfast at prayer, and give alms, and of the hereafter are sure
27|4|verily, those who believe not in the hereafter we have made seemly for them their works, and they shall wander blindly on
27|5|These are they who shall have an evil torment, and they in the hereafter shall be those who most lose
27|6|Verily, thou dost meet with this Qur'an from the wise, the knowing One
27|7|When Moses said to his people, 'Verily, I perceive a fire, I will bring you therefrom news; or I will bring you a burning brand; haply ye may be warned
27|8|But when he came to it he was called to, 'Blessed be He who is in the fire, and he who is about it! and celebrated be the praises of God, the Lord of the Worlds
27|9|O Moses! verily, I am God, the mighty, wise
27|10|throw down thy staff!' and when he saw it quivering, as though it were a snake, he turned back fleeing, and did not return. 'O Moses! fear not; verily, as for me - apostles fear not with me
27|11|save only those who have done wrong and then substitute good for evil; for, verily, I am forgiving, merciful
27|12|but put thy hand in thy bosom, it shall come forth white without hurt;- one of nine signs to Pharaoh and his people; verily, they are a people who act abominably
27|13|And when our signs came to them visibly, they said, 'This is obvious sorcery
27|14|and they gainsaid them - though their souls made sure of them - unjustly, haughtily; but, behold what was the end of the evildoers
27|15|And we gave David and Solomon knowledge; and they both said, 'Praise belongs to God, who hath preferred us over many of His servants who believe
27|16|And Solomon was David's heir; and said, 'O ye folk! we have been taught the speech of birds, and we have been given everything; verily, this is an obvious grace
27|17|And assembled for Solomon were his hosts of the ginns, and men, and birds, and they were marshalled
27|18|until they came upon the valley of the ants. Said an ant, 'O ye ants! go into your dwellings, that Solomon and his hosts crush you not while they do not perceive
27|19|And he smiled, laughing at her speech, and said, 'O Lord! excite me to be thankful for Thy favour, wherewith Thou hast favoured me and my parents, and to do righteousness which may please Thee; and make me enter into Thy mercy amongst Thy righteous servants
27|20|And he reviewed the birds, and said, 'How is it I see not the hoopoe? is he then amongst the absent
27|21|I will surely torment him with a severe torment; or I will surely slaughter him; or he shall bring me obvious authority
27|22|And he tarried not long, and said, 'I have compassed what ye compassed not; for I bring you from Seba a sure information
27|23|verily, I found a woman ruling over them, and she was given all things, and she had a mighty throne
27|24|and I found her and her people adoring the sun instead of God, for Satan had made seemly to them their works, and turned them from the path, so that they are not guided
27|25|Will they not adore God who brings forth the secrets in the heavens, and knows what they hide and what they manifest
27|26|God, there is no god but He, the Lord of the mighty throne
27|27|Said he, 'We will see whether thou hast told the truth, or whether thou art of those who lie
27|28|Go with this my letter and throw it before them, then turn back away from them, and see what they return
27|29|Said she, 'O ye chiefs! verily, a noble letter has been thrown before me
27|30|It is from Solomon, and, verily, it is, "In the name of the merciful and compassionate God
27|31|Do not rise up against me, but come to me resigned
27|32|She said, 'O ye chiefs! pronounce sentence for me in my affair. I never decide an affair until ye testify for me
27|33|They said, 'We are endowed with strength, and endowed with keen violence; but the bidding is thine, see then what it is that thou wilt bid
27|34|She said, 'Verily, kings when they enter a city despoil it, and make the mighty ones of its people the meanest; thus it is they do
27|35|So, verily, I am going to send to them a gift, and will wait to see with what the messengers return
27|36|And when he came to Solomon, he said, 'Do ye proffer me wealth, when what God has given me is better than what He has given you? nay, ye in your gifts rejoice
27|37|return to them, for we will surely come to them with hosts which they cannot confront; and we will surely drive them out therefrom mean and made small
27|38|Said he, 'O ye chiefs! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me resigned
27|39|Said a demon of the ginns, 'I will bring thee it before thou canst rise up from thy place, for I therein am strong and faithful
27|40|He who had the knowledge of the Book said, 'I will bring it to thee before thy glance can turn.' And when he saw it settled down beside him, he said, 'This is of my Lords grace, that He may try me whether I am grateful or ungrateful, and he who is grateful is only grateful for his own soul, and he who is ungrateful,- verily, my Lord is rich and generous
27|41|Said he, 'Disguise for her her throne; let us see whether she is guided, or whether she is of those who are not guided
27|42|And when she came it was said, 'Was thy throne like this?' She said, 'It might be it;' and we were given knowledge before her, but we were resigned
27|43|But that which she served beside God turned her away; verily, she was of the unbelieving people
27|44|And it was said to her, 'Enter the court;' and when she saw it, she reckoned it to be an abyss of water, and she uncovered her legs. Said he, 'Verily, it is a court paved with glass!' Said she, 'My Lord! verily, I have wronged myself, but I am resigned with Solomon to God the Lord of the worlds
27|45|And we sent unto Thamud their brother Zali'h, 'Serve God;' but behold, they were two parties who contended
27|46|Said he, 'O my people! why do ye hasten on evil acts before good deeds? why do ye not ask forgiveness of God? haply ye may obtain mercy
27|47|They said, 'We have taken an augury concerning thee and those who are with thee.' Said he, 'Your augury is in God's hands; nay, but ye are a people who are tried
27|48|And there were in the city nine persons who despoiled the land and did not right
27|49|Said they, 'Swear to each other by God, we will surely fall on him by night and on his people; then we will surely say unto his next of kin, " We witnessed not the destruction of his people, and we do surely tell the truth
27|50|And they plotted a plot, and we plotted a plot, but they did not perceive
27|51|Behold, how was the end of their plot, that we destroyed them and their people all together
27|52|Thus are their houses overturned, for that they were unjust; verily, in that is a sign to people who do know
27|53|But we saved those who believed and who did fear
27|54|And Lot when he said to his people, 'Do ye approach an abominable sin while ye can see
27|55|do ye indeed approach men lustfully rather than women? nay! ye are a people who are ignorant
27|56|But the answer of his people was only to say, 'Drive out Lot's family from your city! verily, they are a folk who would keep pure
27|57|But we saved him and his family except his wife, her we destined to be of those who lingered
27|58|and we rained down upon them rain, and evil was the rain of those who were warned
27|59|Say, 'Praise belongs to God; and peace be upon His servants whom He has chosen! Is God best, or what they associate with Him
27|60|He who created the heavens and the earth; and sends down upon you from the heaven water; and we cause to grow therewith gardens fraught with beauty; ye could not cause the trees thereof to grow! Is there a god with God? nay, but they are a people who make peers with Him
27|61|He who made the earth, settled, and placed amongst it rivers; and placed upon it firm mountains; and placed between the two seas a barrier; is there a god with God? nay, but most of them know not
27|62|He who answers the distressed when he calls upon Him and removes the evil; and makes you successors in the earth; is there a god with God? little is it that ye are mindful
27|63|He who guides you in the darkness, of the land and of the sea; and who sends winds as glad tidings before His mercy; is there a god with God? exalted be God above what they associate with Him
27|64|He who began the creation and then will make it return again; and who provides you from the heaven and the earth; is there a god with God? so bring your proofs if ye do speak the truth
27|65|Say, 'None in the heavens or the earth know the unseen save only God; but they perceive not when they shall be raised
27|66|nay, but their knowledge attains to somewhat of the hereafter; nay, but they are in doubt concerning it! nay, but they are blind
27|67|And those who disbelieved said, 'What! when we have become dust and our fathers too, shall we indeed be brought forth
27|68|We were promised this, we and our fathers before us, this is nothing but old folks' tales
27|69|Say, 'Journey on through the land and see how was the end of the sinners
27|70|and grieve not for them, and be not straitened at what they plot
27|71|They say, 'When shall this threat be if ye do tell the truth
27|72|Say, 'It may be that there is pressing close behind you a part of what ye would hasten on
27|73|But, verily, thy Lord is full of grace to men, but most of them will not be thankful
27|74|and, verily, thy Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they manifest
27|75|and there is no secret thing in the heaven or the earth, save that it is in the perspicuous Book
27|76|Verily, this Qur'an relates to the people of Israel most of that whereon they do dispute
27|77|and, verily, it is a guidance and a mercy to the believers
27|78|Verily, thy Lord decides between them by His judgment, for He is mighty, knowing
27|79|Rely thou then upon God, verily, thou art standing on obvious truth
27|80|Verily, thou canst not make the dead to hear, and thou canst not make the deaf to hear the call when they turn their backs on thee
27|81|nor art thou a guide to the blind, out of their error: thou canst only make to hear such as believe in our signs, and such as are resigned
27|82|And when the sentence falls upon them we will bring forth a beast out of the earth that shall speak to them, (and say) that, 'Men of our signs would not be sure
27|83|And the day when we will gather from every nation a troop of those who said our signs were lies; and they shall be marshalled
27|84|until they come, and He will say, 'Did ye say my signs were lies, when ye had compassed no knowledge thereof? or what is it that ye were doing
27|85|and the sentence shall fall upon them for that they did wrong, and they shall not have speech
27|86|Did they not see that we have made the night for them to rest in and the day to see by? verily, in that are signs to people who believe
27|87|And the day when the trumpet shall be blown and all who are in the heavens and the earth shall be startled, save whom God pleases! and all shall come abjectly to Him
27|88|And thou shalt see the mountains, which thou dost deem solid, pass away like the passing of the clouds;- the work of God who orders all things; verily, He is well aware of what ye do
27|89|He who brings a good deed shall have better than it; and from the alarm of that day they shall be safe
27|90|but those who bring an evil deed shall be thrown down upon their faces in the fire. Shall ye be rewarded save for what ye have done
27|91|I am bidden to serve the Lord of this country who has made it sacred, and whose are all things; and I am bidden to be of those who are resigned
27|92|and to recite the Qur'an; and he who is guided he is only guided for himself; and he who errs,- say, 'I am only of those who warn
27|93|And say, ' Praise be to God, He will show you His signs, and ye shall recognise them; for thy Lord is not heedless of what ye do
28|1|M
28|2|Those are the signs of the perspicuous Book
28|3|we recite to thee from the history of Moses and Pharaoh in truth unto a people who believe
28|4|Verily, Pharaoh was lofty in the land and made the people thereof sects; one party of them he weakened, slaughtering their sons and letting their women live. Verily, he was of the despoilers
28|5|And we wished to be gracious to those who were weakened in the earth, and to make them models, and to make them the heirs
28|6|and to establish for them in the earth; and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts what they had to beware of from them
28|7|And we inspired the mother of Moses, 'Suckle him; and when thou art afraid for him then throw him into the river, and fear not and grieve not; verily, we are going to restore him to thee, and to make him of the apostles
28|8|And Pharaoh's family picked him up that he might be for them a foe and a grief; verily, Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts were sinners
28|9|And Pharaoh's wife said, 'He is a cheering of the eye to me, and to thee. Kill him not; it may be that he will profit us, or that we may take him for a son;' for they did not perceive
28|10|And the heart of Moses' mother was void on the morrow; she well-nigh disclosed him, had it not been that we bound up her heart that she might be of the believers
28|11|And she said to his sister, 'Follow him up.' And she looked after him from afar, and they did not perceive
28|12|And we made unlawful for him the wet-nurses. And she said, 'Shall I guide you to the people of a house who will take care of him for you, and who will be sincere respecting him
28|13|So we restored him to his mother that her eye might be cheered, and that she might not grieve, and that she might know that the promise of God is true, though most of them know not
28|14|And when he reached puberty, and was settled, we gave him judgment and knowledge; for thus do we reward those who do well
28|15|And he entered into the city at the time the people thereof were heedless, and he found therein two men fighting; the one of his sect and the other of his foes. And he who was of his sect asked his aid against him who was of his foes; and Moses smote him with his fist and finished him. Said he, 'This is of the work of Satan, verily, he is a misleading obvious foe
28|16|Said he, 'My Lord! verily, I have wronged my soul, but forgive me.' So He forgave him; for He is forgiving and merciful
28|17|Said he, 'My Lord! for that Thou hast been gracious to me, I will surely not back up the sinners
28|18|And on the morrow he was afraid in the city, expectant. And behold, he whom he had helped the day before cried (again) to him for aid. Said Moses to Him, 'Verily, thou art obviously quarrelsome
28|19|And when he wished to assault him who was the enemy to them both, he said, 'O Moses! dost thou desire to kill me as thou didst kill a person yesterday? thou dost only desire to be a tyrant in the earth; and thou dost not desire to be of those who do right
28|20|And a man came from the remote parts of the city running, said he, 'O Moses! verily, the chiefs are deliberating concerning thee to kill thee; go then forth; verily, I am to you a sincere adviser
28|21|So he went forth therefrom, afraid and expectant. Said he, 'Lord, save me from the unjust people
28|22|And when he turned his face in the direction of Midian, he said, 'It may be that my Lord will guide me to a level path
28|23|And when he went down to the water of Midian he found thereat a nation of people watering their flocks. And he found beside them two women keeping back their flocks. Said he, 'What is your design?' They said, 'We cannot water our flocks until the herdsmen have finished; for our father is a very old man
28|24|So he watered for them; then he turned back towards the shade and said, 'My Lord! verily, I stand in need of what Thou sendest down to me of good
28|25|And one of the two came to him walking modestly; said she, 'Verily; my father calls thee, to reward thee with hire for having watered our flocks for us.' And when he came to him and related to him the story, said he, ' Fear not, thou art safe from the unjust people
28|26|Said one of them, 'O my sire! hire him; verily, the best of those whom thou canst hire is the strong and faithful
28|27|Said he, 'Verily, I desire to marry thee to one of these daughters of mine, on condition that thou dost serve me for hire eight years; and if thou shalt fulfil ten it is of thyself; for I do not wish to make it wretched for thee; thou wilt find me, if it please God, of the righteous
28|28|Said he, 'That is between you and me; whichever of the two terms I fulfil, let there be no enmity against me, for God over what we say keeps guard
28|29|And when Moses had fulfilled the appointed time, and was journeying with his people, he perceived from the side of the mountain a fire; said he to his people, 'Tarry ye here; verily, I have perceived a fire, haply I may bring you good news therefrom, or a brand of fire that haply ye may be warmed
28|30|And when he came to it he was called to, from the right side of the wady, in the blessed valley, out of the tree, 'O Moses! verily, I am God the Lord of the worlds
28|31|so throw down thy rod;' and when he saw it quivering as though it were a snake, he turned away and fled and did not return. 'O Moses! approach and fear not, verily, thou art amongst the safe
28|32|Thrust thy hand into thy bosom, it shall come out white, without hurt; and then fold again thy wing, that thou dost now stretch out through dread; for those are two signs from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs; verily, they are a people who work abomination
28|33|Said he, 'My Lord! verily, I have killed a person amongst them, and I fear that they will kill me
28|34|and my brother Aaron, he is more eloquent of tongue than I; send him then with me as a support, to verify me; verily, I fear that they will call me liar
28|35|Said He, 'We will strengthen thine arm with thy brother; and we will make for you both authority, and they shall not reach you in our signs; ye two and those who follow you shall gain the upper hand
28|36|And when Moses came to them with our manifest signs, they said, 'This is only sorcery devised; and we have not heard of this amongst our fathers of yore
28|37|Moses said, 'My Lord knows best who comes with guidance from Him, and whose shall be the issue of the abode. Verily, the unjust shall not prosper
28|38|And Pharaoh said, 'O ye chiefs! I do not know any god for you except me; then set fire, O Haman! to some clay and make for me a tower, haply I may mount up to the God of Moses; for, verity, I think he is of those who lie
28|39|And he grew big with pride, he and his armies in the land, without right; and they thought that they to us should not return
28|40|And we overtook him and his army, and we flung them into the sea; behold, then, how was the end of the unjust
28|41|But we made them models calling to the fire; and on the resurrection day they shall not be helped
28|42|and we followed them up in this world with a curse; and on the resurrection day they shall be abhorred
28|43|And we gave Moses the Book, after that we had destroyed the former generations, as an insight to men and a guidance and a mercy; haply they may be mindful
28|44|Thou wast not upon the western side when we decided for Moses, but afar off; nor wast thou of the witnesses
28|45|But we raised up (other) generations, and life was prolonged for them; and thou wast not staying amidst the people of Midian, reciting to them our signs; but we were sending our apostles
28|46|Nor wast thou by the side of the mountain when we called; but it is a mercy from thy Lord, that thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner has come before thee; haply they may be mindful
28|47|And lest there should befall them a mishap for what their hands have sent before, and they should say, 'Our Lord! why didst thou not send to us an apostle? for we would have followed thy signs and been of the believers
28|48|And when the truth comes to them from us they say, 'We are given the like of what Moses was given.' Did they not disbelieve in what Moses was given before?- they say, 'Two works of sorcery back up each other;' and they say, 'Verily, we do disbelieve in all
28|49|Say, 'Bring, then, a book from God which shall be a better guide than both, and I will follow it, if ye do tell the truth
28|50|And if they cannot answer thee, then know that they follow their own lusts; and who is more in error than he who follows his own lust without guidance from God? verily, God guides not an unjust people
28|51|And we caused the word to reach them, haply they may be mindful
28|52|Those to whom we gave the Book before it, they believe therein
28|53|and when it is recited to them they say, 'We believe in it as truth from our Lord; verily, we were resigned before it came
28|54|These shall be given their hire twice over, for that they were patient, and repelled evil with good, and of what we have bestowed upon them give alms
28|55|And when they hear vain talk, they turn away from it and say, 'We have our works, and ye have your works. Peace be upon you! we do not seek the ignorant
28|56|Verily, thou canst not guide whom thou dost like, but God guides whom He pleases; for He knows best who are to be guided
28|57|And they say, 'If we follow the guidance we shall be snatched away from the land.' Have we not established for them a safe sanctuary, to which are imported the fruits of everything as a provision from us? but most of them do not know
28|58|How many a city have we destroyed that exulted in its means of subsistence? These are their dwellings, never dwelt in after them, except a little; for we were the heirs
28|59|But thy Lord would never destroy cities until He sent to the metropolis thereof an apostle, to recite to them our signs; nor would we destroy cities unless their people were unjust
28|60|Whatever thing ye may be given, it is a provision for this world's life and the adornment thereof; but what is with God is better and more enduring; have ye then no sense
28|61|Is He to whom we have promised a goodly promise, which he shall meet with, like him to whom we have given the enjoyment of the life of this world, and who upon the resurrection day shall be of the arraigned
28|62|And on the day when He will call them and will say, 'Where are those associates which ye did pretend
28|63|And those against whom the sentence is due shall say, 'Our Lord! these are those whom we have seduced; we seduced them as we were seduced ourselves: but we clear ourselves to thee;- they ,did not worship us
28|64|And it will be said, 'Call upon your partners;' and they will call upon them, but they will not answer them, and they shall see the torment; would that they had been guided
28|65|And the day when He shall call them and shall say, 'What was it ye answered the apostles
28|66|and the history shall be blindly confusing to them on that day, and they shall not ask each other
28|67|But, as for him who turns again and believes and does right, it may be that he will be among the prosperous
28|68|For thy Lord creates what He pleases and chooses; they have not the choice! Celebrated be the praise of God! and exalted be He above what they associate with Him
28|69|Thy Lord knows what they conceal in their breasts and what they manifest
28|70|He is God, there is no god but He; to Him belongs praise, in the first and the last; and His is the judgment; and unto Him shall ye return
28|71|Have ye considered, if God were to make for you the night endless until the resurrection day, who is the god, but God, to bring you light? can ye not then hear
28|72|Say, 'Have ye considered, if God were to make for you the day endless until the day of judgment, who is the god, except God, to bring you the night to rest therein? can ye not then see
28|73|But of His mercy He has made for you the night and the day, that ye may rest therein, and crave of His grace, haply ye may give thanks
28|74|And the day when He shall call them and shall say, 'Where are my partners whom ye did pretend
28|75|And we will pluck from every nation a witness; and we will say, 'Bring your proof and know that the truth is God's;' and that which they had devised shall stray away from them
28|76|Verily, Korah was of the people of Moses, and he was outrageous against them; and we gave him treasuries of which the keys would bear down a band of men endowed with strength. When his people said to him, 'Exult not; verily, God loves not those who exult
28|77|but crave, through what God has given thee, the future abode; and forget not thy portion in this world, and do good, as God has done good to thee; and seek not evil doing in the earth; verily, God loves not the evildoers
28|78|Said he, 'I have only been given it for knowledge which I have!' did he not know that God had destroyed before him many generations of those who were stronger than he, and had amassed more? But the sinners need not to be asked concerning their crimes
28|79|And he went out amongst the people in his ornaments; those who desired the life of this world said, '0 would that we had the like of what Korah has been given! verily, he is endowed with mighty fortune
28|80|But those who had been given knowledge said, 'Woe to you! the reward of God is better for him who believes and does right; but none shall meet with it except the patient
28|81|And we clave the earth with him and with his house; and he had no troop to help him against God, nor was he of those who were helped
28|82|And on the morrow those who had yearned for his place the day before said, 'Ah, ah! God extends provision to whom He pleases of His servants, or He doles it out; had not God been gracious to us, the earth would have cleft open with us! Ah, ah! the unbelievers shall not prosper
28|83|That is the future abode; we make it for those who do not wish to be haughty in the earth, nor to do evil, and the end is for the pious
28|84|He who brings a good deed shall have better than it; and he who brings an evil deed - those who do evil deeds shall only be rewarded for that which they have done
28|85|Verily, He who hath ordained the Qur'an for thee will restore thee to thy returning place. Say, 'My Lord knows best who brings guidance, and who is in obvious error
28|86|nor couldst thou hope that the Book would be thrown to thee, save as a mercy from thy Lord! be not then a backer up of those who misbelieve
28|87|and let them not turn thee from the signs of God, after they have been sent down to thee; but call unto thy Lord and be not of the idolaters
28|88|and call not with God upon any other god; there is no god but He! everything is perishable, except His face; His is the judgment, and unto Him shall ye return
29|1|M
29|2|Do men then reckon that they will be left alone to say, 'We believe,' and not be tried
29|3|we did try those who were before them, and God will surely know those who are truthful, and He will surely know the liars
29|4|Do those who do evil reckon that they can outstrip us? evil is it that they judge
29|5|He who hopes for the meeting of God,- verily, God's appointed time will come; and He both hears and knows
29|6|And he who fights strenuously, fights strenuously only for his own soul; verily, God is independent of the worlds
29|7|Those who believe and do right, we will surely cover for them, their offences; and we will surely reward them with better than that which they have done
29|8|And we have enjoined on man kindness to his parents; and if they strive with thee that thou mayest join with me, what thou hast no knowledge of, then obey them not; to me is your return, and I will inform you of that which ye have done
29|9|But those who believe and do right, we will make them enter amongst the righteous
29|10|And there are those among men who say, 'We believe in God!' but when they are hurt in God's cause, they deem the trials of men like the torment of God; but if help come from thy Lord they will say, 'Verily, we were with you!' does not God know best what is in the breasts of the worlds
29|11|God will surely know those who believe, and will surely know the hypocrites
29|12|And those who misbelieved said to those who believed, 'Follow our path, we will bear your sins;' but they could not bear their sins at all; verily, they are liars
29|13|But they shall surely bear their own burdens, and burdens with their burdens; and they shall surely be asked upon the resurrection day concerning what they did devise
29|14|And we sent Noah to his people, and he dwelt among them for a thousand years save fifty years; and the deluge overtook them while they were unjust
29|15|but we saved him and the fellows of the ark, and we made it a sign unto the worlds
29|16|And Abraham when he said to his people, 'Serve God and fear Him, that is better for you if ye did but know
29|17|Ye only serve beside God idols and do create a lie; verily, those whom ye serve beside God cannot control for themselves provision; then crave provision with God, and serve Him, and give thanks to Him; unto Him shall ye return
29|18|And if ye say it is a lie, nations before you called (the apostles) liars too; but an apostle has only his plain message to preach
29|19|Have they not seen how God produces the creation, and then turns it back? verily, that to God is easy
29|20|Say, 'Journey ye on in the land, and behold how the creation appeared; then God produces another production: verily, God is mighty over all
29|21|He torments whom He will, and has mercy on whom He will; and unto Him shall ye be returned
29|22|Nor can ye make Him helpless in the earth, nor in the heavens; nor have ye beside God a patron or a helper
29|23|And those who disbelieve in God's signs and in meeting with Him, these shall despair of my mercy; and these, for them is grievous woe
29|24|But the answer of his people was only to say, 'Kill him or burn him!' But God saved him from the fire; verily, in that are signs unto a people who believe
29|25|He said, 'Verily, ye take beside God idols, through mutual friendship in the life of this world; then on the day of judgment ye shall deny each other, and shall curse each other, and your resort shall be the fire, and ye shall have none to help
29|26|And Lot believed him. And (Abraham) said, 'Verily, I flee unto my Lord! Verily, He is mighty, wise
29|27|and we granted him Isaac and Jacob; and we placed in his seed prophecy and the Book; and we gave him his hire in this world; and, verily, he in the next shall be among the righteous
29|28|And Lot when be said to his people, 'Verily, ye approach an abomination which no one in all the world ever anticipated you in
29|29|What! do ye approach men? and stop folks on the highway? and approach in your assembly sin?' but the answer of his people was only to say, 'Bring us God's torment, if thou art of those who speak the truth
29|30|Said he, ' My Lord! help me against a people who do evil
29|31|And when our messengers came to Abraham with the glad tidings, they said, 'We are about to destroy the people of this city. Verily, the people thereof are wrong-doers
29|32|Said he, 'Verily, in it is Lot;' they said, 'We know best who is therein; we shall of a surety save him and his people, except his wife, who is of those who linger
29|33|And when our messengers came to Lot, he was vexed for them, and his arm was straitened for them; and they said, 'Fear not, neither grieve; we are about to save thee and thy people, except thy wife, who is of those who linger
29|34|Verily, we are about to send down upon the people of this city a horror from heaven, for that they have sinned
29|35|and we have left therefrom a manifest sign unto a people who have sense
29|36|And unto Midian we sent their brother Sho'haib, and he said, 'My people, serve God, and hope for the last day; and waste not the land, despoiling it
29|37|But they called him liar; and the convulsion seized them, and on the morrow they lay in their dwellings prone
29|38|And 'Ad and Thamud - but it is plain to you from their habitations; for Satan made seemly to them their works, and turned them from the way, sagacious though they were
29|39|And Korah and Pharaoh and Haman - Moses did come to them with manifest signs, but they were too big with pride in the earth, although they could not outstrip us
29|40|And each of them we seized in his sin; and of them were some against whom we sent a sandstorm; and of them were some whom the noise seized; and of them were some with whom we cleaved the earth open; and of them were some we drowned: God would not have wronged them, but it was themselves they wronged
29|41|The likeness of those who take, beside God, patrons is as the likeness of a spider, that takes to himself a house; and, verily, the weakest of houses is a spider's house, if they did but know
29|42|Verily, God knows whatever thing they call upon beside Him; for He is the mighty, wise
29|43|These are parables which we have struck out for men; but none will understand them, save those who know
29|44|God created the heavens and the earth in truth; verily, in this is a sign unto believers
29|45|Recite what has been revealed to thee of the Book; and be steadfast in prayer; verily, prayer forbids sin and wrong; and surely the mention of God is greater; for God knows what ye do
29|46|And do not wrangle with the people of the Book, except for what is better; save with those who have been unjust amongst them and who say, 'We believe in what is sent down to us, And what has been sent down to you; our God and your God is one, and we are unto Him resigned
29|47|Thus did we send down to thee the Book; and every one to whom we have given the Book believes therein. But these will not believe therein; though none gainsay our signs except the misbelievers
29|48|Thou couldst not recite before this any book, nor write it with thy right hand, for in that case those who deem it vain would have doubted
29|49|Nay, but it is evident signs in the breasts of those who are endued with knowledge, and none but the unjust would gainsay our signs
29|50|They say, 'Unless there be sent down upon him signs from his Lord -;' say, 'Verily, signs are with God, and, verily, I am an obvious warner
29|51|Is it not enough for them that we have sent down to thee the Book which thou dost recite to them? verily, in that is a mercy and a reminder to a people who believe
29|52|Say, 'God is witness enough between me and you; He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and those who believe in falsehood and misbelieve in God, they shall be the losers
29|53|They will wish thee to hasten on the torment; but were it not for a stated and appointed time, the torment would have come upon them suddenly, while yet they did not perceive
29|54|They will wish thee to hurry on the torment, but, verily, hell encompasses the misbelievers
29|55|On the day when the torment shall cover them from above them and from beneath their feet, and He shall say, 'Taste that which ye have done
29|56|O my servants who believe! verily, my land is spacious enough; me therefore do ye worship
29|57|Every soul must taste of death, then unto us shall ye return
29|58|and those who believe and act aright, we will surely inform them of upper chambers in Paradise, beneath which rivers flow; to dwell therein for aye - pleasant is the hire of those who work
29|59|those who are patient and rely upon their Lord
29|60|How many a beast cannot carry its own provision! God provides for it and for you; He both hears and knows
29|61|And if thou shouldst ask them, 'Who created the heavens and the earth, and subjected the sun and the moon?' they will surely say, 'God!' how then can they lie
29|62|God extends provision to whomsoever He will of His servants, or doles it out to him; verily, God all things doth know
29|63|And if thou shouldst ask them, 'Who sends down from the heavens water and quickens therewith the earth in its death?' they will surely say, 'God!' say, 'And praise be to God!' nay, most of them have no sense
29|64|This life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play; but, verily, the abode of the next world, that is life,- if they did but know
29|65|And when they ride in the ship they call upon God, making their religion seem sincere to Him; but when He saves them to the shore, behold, they associate others with Him
29|66|that they may disbelieve in our signs; and that they may have some enjoyment: but soon they shall know
29|67|Have they not seen that we have made a safe sanctuary whilst people are being snatched away around them? is it then in falsehood that they will believe, and for the favours of God be ungrateful
29|68|But who is more unjust than he who devises against God a lie, or calls the truth a lie when it comes to him? Is there not in hell a resort for the misbelievers
29|69|but those who fight strenuously for us we will surely guide them into our way, for, verily, God is with those who do well
30|1|Missing
30|2|The Greeks are overcome
30|3|in the nighest parts of the land; but after being overcome they shall overcome
30|4|in a few years; to God belongs the order before and after; and on that day the believers shall rejoice
30|5|in the help of God;- God helps whom He will, and He is mighty, merciful
30|6|God's promise!- God breaks not His promise, but most men do not know
30|7|They know the outside of this world's life, but of the hereafter they are heedless
30|8|Have they not reflected in themselves, that God created not the heavens and the earth, and what is between the two except in truth, and for a stated and appointed time? but, verily, many men in the meeting of their Lord do disbelieve
30|9|Have they not journeyed on in the land and seen how was the end of those before them who were stronger than they, and who turned up the ground and cultivated it more than they do cultivate it? and there came to them their apostles with manifest signs; for God would never wrong them: it was themselves they wronged
30|10|Then evil was the end of those who did evil, in that they said the signs of God were lies and mocked thereat
30|11|God produces a creation, then He makes it go back again, then unto Him shall ye return
30|12|And on the day when the Hour shall rise, the sinners shall be confused
30|13|and they shall not have amongst their partners intercessors; and their partners shall they deny
30|14|And on the day when the Hour shall rise, on that day shall they be scattered apart
30|15|and as for those who believe and do right, they in the garden shall be joyful
30|16|and as for those who misbelieved and said our signs and the meeting of the hereafter were lies, they shall be in the torment arraigned
30|17|Celebrated be the praises of God, when ye are in the evening and when ye are in the morning
30|18|for to Him belongs praise in the heavens and the earth! and at the evening, and when ye are at noon
30|19|He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living; and He quickens the earth after its death, and thus shall ye too be brought forth
30|20|And of His signs is this, that He hath created you from dust; then, behold, ye are mortals who are spread abroad
30|21|And of His signs is this, that He hath created for you of yourselves wives with whom ye may cohabit; He has made between you affection and pity. Verily, in that are signs unto a people who reflect
30|22|And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your tongues and colours; verily, in that are signs unto the worlds
30|23|And of His signs is your sleep by night and by day; and your craving after His grace. Verily, in that are signs unto a people who do hear
30|24|And of His signs is this, that He shows you lightning for fear and hope; and sends down from the sky water, and quickens therewith the earth after its death; verily, in that are signs unto a people who have sense
30|25|And of His signs is this, that the heavens and the earth stand by His order; then when He calls you from the earth, lo! ye shall come forth
30|26|His are those who are in the heavens and the earth, and all to Him are devoted
30|27|And He it is who produces a creation and then makes it to go back again; for it is very easy to Him; and His are the loftiest similitudes in the heavens and the earth; and He is the mighty, wise
30|28|He has struck out for you a parable from yourselves; have ye of what your right hand possess partners in what we have bestowed upon you, so that ye share alike therein? do ye fear them as ye fear each other?- Thus do we detail the signs unto a people who have sense
30|29|Nay, when those who are unjust follow their lusts without knowledge,- and who shall guide him whom God has led astray? and they shall have none to help
30|30|Set thy face steadfast towards the religion as an 'Hanif, according to the constitution whereon God has constituted men; there is no altering the creation of God, that is the standard religion, though most men do not know
30|31|Turn repentant towards Him; and fear Him, and be steadfast in prayer; and be not of the idolaters
30|32|Of those who have divided their religion and become sects, every party in what they have, rejoice
30|33|And when distress touches men they call upon their Lord, repentant towards Him; then when He has made them taste mercy from Himself, behold! a party of them associate others with their Lord
30|34|that they may disbelieve in what we have brought them;- but enjoy yourselves; for hereafter ye shall know
30|35|Or have we sent down to them authority which speaks of what they do associate with Him
30|36|And when we have made men taste of mercy, they rejoice therein; and if there befall them evil for what their hands have sent before, behold! they are in despair
30|37|Have they not seen that God extends provision to whom He pleases, or doles it out? verily, in that are signs unto a people who believe
30|38|Then give to the kinsman his due, and to the poor and to the wayfarer; that is better for those who desire the face of God, and these it is who are prosperous
30|39|And what ye put out to usury that it may increase with the wealth of men, it shall not increase with God; but what ye put out in alms, desiring the face of God - these it is who shall gain double
30|40|It is God who created you and then provided for you; and then will make you die, and then will quicken you again; is there any of your partners who can do aught of that? Celebrated be His praises, and exalted be He above what they associate with Him
30|41|Trouble hath appeared in the land and the sea, for what men's hands have gained! to make them taste a part of that which they have done,- haply they may return
30|42|Say, 'Journey on in the land, and behold what was the end of those before you,- most of them were idolaters
30|43|Set thy face steadfast to the standard religion, before there come a day from God which there is no averting; on that day shall they be parted into two bands
30|44|He who misbelieves, upon him is his misbelief; but whoso does right, for themselves they are spreading couches
30|45|That He may reward those who believe and do right of His grace; verily, He loves not the misbelievers
30|46|And of His signs is this, that He sends forth the winds with glad tidings, to make you taste of His mercy, and to make the ships go on at His bidding, and that ye may crave of His grace, and haply ye may give thanks
30|47|We have sent before thee apostles unto their people, and they came to them with manifest signs: and we took vengeance upon those who sinned, but due from us it was to help the believers
30|48|God it is who sends forth the winds to stir up clouds; then He spreads them forth over the sky as he pleases; and He breaks them up and ye see the rain come forth from amongst them; and when He causes it to fall upon whom He pleases of His servants, behold they hail it with joy
30|49|although before it was sent down upon them they were before then confused
30|50|Look then to the vestiges of God's mercy, how He quickens the earth after its death; verily, that is the quickener of the dead, and He is mighty over all
30|51|But if we should send a wind and they should see it yellow, they would after that become misbelievers
30|52|But, verily, thou canst not make the dead to hear, nor canst thou make the deaf to hear the call, when they turn their backs and flee
30|53|nor hast thou to guide the blind out of their error; thou canst only make those to hear who believe in our signs and who are resigned
30|54|God it is who created you of weakness, then made for you after weakness strength; then made for you after strength, weakness and grey hairs: He creates what He pleases, for He is the knowing, the powerful
30|55|And on the day when the Hour shall rise, the sinners shall swear that they have not tarried save an hour; thus were they wont to lie
30|56|But those who are given knowledge and faith will say, 'We have tarried according to the Book of God, until the day of resurrection;' and this is the day of resurrection, but ye - ye do not know
30|57|And on that day their excuse shall profit not those who did wrong; nor shall they be asked to please God again
30|58|We have struck out to men in this Qur'an every kind of parable; but if thou shouldst bring them a sign then those who misbelieve will surely say, 'Ye are but followers of vanity
30|59|thus does God set a stamp upon the hearts of those who do not know
30|60|Be thou patient then; verily, God's promise is true! and let them not flurry thee who are not sure
31|1|M
31|2|These are the signs of the wise Book
31|3|a guidance and a mercy to those who do well
31|4|who are steadfast in prayer and give alms and who of the hereafter are sure
31|5|these are in Guidance from their Lord, and these are the prosperous
31|6|And amongst men is one who buys sportive legends, to lead astray from God's path, without knowledge, and to make a jest of it; these, for them is shameful woe
31|7|And when our signs are recited to him, he turns his back, too big with pride, as though he heard them not, - as if in his two ears were dullness. But give to him glad tidings of grievous woe
31|8|Verily, those who believe and do right, for them are gardens of pleasure
31|9|to dwell therein for aye;- God's promise in truth, and He is mighty, wise
31|10|He created the heavens without pillars that ye can see, and He threw upon the earth firm mountains lest it should move with you; and He dispersed thereon every sort of beast; and we send down from the heavens water, and we caused to grow therein of every noble kind
31|11|This is God's creation; show me what others beside Him have created; - nay, the unjust are in obvious error
31|12|We did give unto Loqman wisdom, saying, 'Thank God; for he who thanks God is only thankful for his own soul; and he who is ungrateful - verily, God is independent, worthy of praise
31|13|And when Loqman said to his son while admonishing him, 'O my boy! associate none with God, for, verily, such association is a mighty wrong
31|14|For we have commended his parents to man; his mother bore him with weakness upon weakness; and his weaning is in two years; - 'Be thankful to me and to thy parents; for unto me shall your journey be
31|15|But if they strive with thee that thou shouldst associate with me that which thou hast no knowledge of, then obey them not. But associate with them in the world with kindness, and follow the way of him who repentant unto me; then unto me is your return, and I will inform you of that which ye have done
31|16|O my son! verily, if there were the weight of a grain of mustard seed and it were (hidden) in the rock, or in the heaven, or in the earth, God would bring it (to light). Verily, God is subtle, well aware
31|17|O my son! be steadfast in prayer, and bid what is reasonable and forbid what is wrong; be patient of what befalls thee, verily, that is one of the determined affairs
31|18|And twist not thy cheek proudly, nor walk in the land haughtily; verily, God loves not every arrogant boaster
31|19|but be moderate in thy walk, and lower thy voice; verily, the most disagreeable of voices is the voice of asses
31|20|Have ye not seen that God has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and has poured down upon you His favours, outwardly and inwardly? but amongst men are those who wrangle about God, without knowledge, and without guidance, and without an illuminating book
31|21|And when it is said to them, 'Follow what God has sent down;' they say, 'Nay! we will follow what we found our fathers agreed upon;' - what! though Satan calls them to the torment of the blaze
31|22|But he who resigns his face unto God, and does good, he has grasped the firm handle; unto God is the issue of affairs
31|23|But he who misbelieves, let not his misbelief grieve thee; to us is their return, and we will inform them of what they do; - for, verily, God knows the nature of men's breasts
31|24|We will let them enjoy themselves a little; then we will force them to rigorous woe
31|25|And if thou shouldst ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will surely say, 'God.' Say, 'Praise be to God!' but most of them do not know
31|26|God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; verily, God, He is the independent, worthy of praise
31|27|And were the trees that are in the earth pens, and the sea (ink) with seven more seas to swell its tide, the words of God would not be spent; verily, God is mighty, wise
31|28|Your creation and your rising again are but as that of one soul; verily, God both hears and sees
31|29|Dost thou not see that God joins on the night to the day, and joins on the day to the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon, - each of them runs on unto an appointed time? and that God of what ye do is well aware
31|30|That is because God, He is true, and because what ye call on beside Him is falsehood, and because God, He is the high, the great
31|31|Dost thou not see that the ship rides on in the sea by the favour of God, that He may show you of His signs? verily, in that are signs to every grateful person
31|32|And when a wave like shadows covers them, they call on God, being sincere in their religion; and when He saves them to the shore, then amongst them are some who halt between two opinions. But none gainsays our signs save every perfidious misbeliever
31|33|O ye folk! fear your Lord and dread the day when the father shall not atone for his son, nor shall the child atone aught for its parent. Verily, the promise of God is true! Say, 'Let not the life of this world beguile you; and let not the beguiler beguile you concerning God
31|34|Verily, God, with Him is the knowledge of the Hour; and He sends down the rain; and He knows what is in the wombs; and no soul knows what it is that it shall earn to-morrow; and no soul knows in what land it shall die; verily, God is knowing, well aware
32|1|M
32|2|The revelation of the Book, there is no doubt therein, from the Lord of the worlds
32|3|Do they say, 'He has forged it?' Nay! it is the truth from thy Lord, that thou mayest warn a people, to whom no warner has come before thee, haply they may be guided
32|4|God it is who created the heavens and the earth and what is between the two in six days; then He made for the throne! ye have no patron beside Him and no intercessor; are ye not then mindful
32|5|He governs the affair from the heaven unto the earth; then shall it ascend to him in a day, the measure of which is as a thousand years of what ye number
32|6|That is He who knows the unseen and the visible; the mighty, the merciful
32|7|who has made the best of the creation of everything, and produced the creation of man from clay
32|8|then He made his stock from an extract of despicable water
32|9|then He fashioned him and breathed into him of His spirit, and made for you hearing and eyesight and hearts;- little is it that ye give thanks
32|10|And they say, 'When we are lost in the earth, shall we then become a new creation?' Nay! in the meeting of their Lord they disbelieve
32|11|Say, 'The angel of death shall take you away, he who is given charge of you; then unto your Lord shall ye be returned
32|12|And couldst thou see when the sinners hang down their heads before their Lord, 'O Lord! we have seen and we have heard; send us back then and we will do right. Verily, we are sure
32|13|Had we pleased we would have given to everything its guidance; but the sentence was due from me;-I will surely fill hell with the ginns and with men all together
32|14|So taste ye, for that ye forgat the meeting of this day of yours,- verily, we have forgotten you! and taste ye the torment of eternity for that which ye have done
32|15|They only believe in our signs who when they are reminded of them fall down adoring and celebrate the praises of their Lord, and are not too big with pride
32|16|As their sides forsake their beds, they call upon their Lord with fear and hope; and of what we have bestowed upon them do they give alms
32|17|No soul knows what is reserved for them of cheerfulness for eye, as a reward for that which they have done
32|18|Is he who is a believer like him who is a sinner? they shall not be held equal
32|19|As for those who believe and do right, for them are the gardens of resort, an entertainment for that which they have done
32|20|But as for those who commit abomination their resort is the Fire. Every time that they desire to go forth therefrom, we will send them back therein, and it will be said to them, 'Taste ye the torment of the fire which ye did call a lie
32|21|and we will surely make them taste of the torment of the nearer torment beside the greater torment, - haply they may yet return
32|22|Who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his Lord, and then turns away from them? Verily, we will take vengeance on the sinners
32|23|And we did give Moses the Book; be not then in doubt concerning the meeting with him; and we made it a guidance to the children of Israel
32|24|And we made amongst them high priests who guided by our bidding, since they were patient and were sure of our signs
32|25|Verily, thy Lord, he shall decide between them on the resurrection day concerning that whereon they do dispute
32|26|Is it not conspicuous to them how many generations we have destroyed before them? they walk over their dwellings! verily, in that are signs: do they not then hear
32|27|Have they not seen that we drive the water to the sterile land, and bring forth thereby corn from which their cattle and themselves do eat? do they not then see
32|28|And they say, 'When shall this decision come if ye do tell the truth
32|29|Say, 'On the day of the decision their faith shall not profit those who misbelieved, nor shall they be respited
32|30|turn then from them and wait; verily, they are waiting too
33|1|O thou prophet! fear God and obey not the misbelievers and hypocrites; verily, God is ever knowing, wise
33|2|But follow what thou art inspired with from thy Lord; verily, God of what you do is ever well aware
33|3|And rely upon God, for God is guardian enough
33|4|God has not made for any man two hearts in his inside; nor has He made your wives,- whom you back away from,- your real mothers; nor has He made your adopted sons your real sons. That is what ye speak with your mouths; but God speaks the truth and He guides to the path
33|5|Call them by their fathers' names; that is more just in God's sight; but if ye know not their fathers, then they are your brothers in religion and your clients. There is no crime against you for what mistakes ye make therein; but what your hearts do purposely - but God is ever forgiving and merciful
33|6|The prophet is nearer of kin to the believers than themselves, and his wives are their mothers. And blood relations are nearer in kin to each other by the Book of God than the believers and those who fled; only your doing kindness to your kindred, that is traced in the Book
33|7|And when we took of the prophets their compact, from thee and from Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus the son of Mary, and took of them a rigid compact
33|8|that He might ask the truth-tellers of their truth. But He has prepared for those who misbelieve a grievous woe
33|9|O ye who believe! remember God's favours towards you when hosts came to you and we sent against them a wind and hosts that ye could not see;- and God knew what ye were doing
33|10|When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when your eyesights were distracted and your hearts came up into your throats, and ye suspected God with certain suspicions
33|11|There were the believers tried and were made to quake with a severe quaking
33|12|And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said, 'God and His Apostle have only promised us deceitfully
33|13|And when a party of them said, 'O people of Yathreb; there is no place for you (here), return then (to the city).' And a part of them asked leave of the prophet (to return), saying, 'Verily, our houses are defenceless;' but they were not defenceless, they only wished for flight
33|14|But had they been entered upon from its environs and then been asked to show treason they would have done so; but they would only have tarried there a little while
33|15|They had covenanted with God before, that they would not turn their backs; and God's covenant shall be enquired of
33|16|Say, 'Flight shall avail you naught; if ye fly from death or slaughter, even then ye shall be granted enjoyment only for a little
33|17|Say, 'Who is it that can save you from God, if He wish you evil, or wish you mercy?' but they will not find beside God a patron or a helper
33|18|Say, 'God knows the hinderers amongst you, and those who say to their brethren, "Come along unto us," and show but little valour
33|19|covetous towards you.' When fear comes thou wilt see them looking towards thee, their eyes rolling like one fainting with death; but when the fear has passed away they will assail you with sharp tongues, covetous of the best. These have never believed, and God will make vain their works, for that is easy with God
33|20|They reckoned that the confederates would never go away; and if the confederates should come they would fain be in the desert with the Arabs, asking for news of you! and if they were amongst you they would fight but little
33|21|Ye had in the Apostle of God a good example for him who hopes for God and the last day, and who remembers God much
33|22|And when the believers saw the confederates they said, 'This is what God and His Apostle promised us; God and His Apostle are true!' and it only increased them in faith and resignation
33|23|Amongst the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with God, and there are some who have fulfilled their vow, and some who wait and have not changed with fickleness
33|24|That God might reward the truthful for their truth, and punish the hypocrites if He please, or turn again towards them;- verily, God is forgiving, merciful
33|25|And God drove back the misbelievers in their rage; they gat no advantage;- God was enough for the believers in the fight, for God is strong, mighty
33|26|And He drove down those of the people of the Book who had helped them from their fortresses and hurled dread into their hearts; a part ye slew and ye took captive a part
33|27|and He gave you their land, and their dwellings, and their property for an inheritance, and a land ye had not trodden, for God is ever mighty over all
33|28|O thou prophet! say to thy wives, 'If ye be desirous of the life of this world and its adornments, come, I will give you them to enjoy and I will let you range handsomely at large
33|29|But if ye be desirous of God and His Apostle and of the abode of the hereafter, verily, God has prepared for those of you who do good a mighty hire
33|30|O ye women of the prophet! whosoever of you commits manifest fornication, doubled shall be her torment twice; and that is easy unto God
33|31|But that one of you who is devoted to God and His Apostle and does right we will give her her hire twice over, and we have prepared for her a noble provision
33|32|O ye women of the prophet! ye are not like any other women; if ye fear God then be not too complaisant in speech, or he in whose heart is sickness will lust after you; but speak a reasonable speech
33|33|And stay still in your houses and show not yourselves with the ostentation of the ignorance of yore; and be steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and obey God and His Apostle;- God only wishes to take away from you the horror as people of His House and to purify you thoroughly
33|34|And remember what is recited in your houses of the signs of God and of wisdom; verily, God is subtle and aware
33|35|Verily, men resigned and women resigned, and believing men and believing women, and devout men and devout women, and truthful men and truthful women, and patient men and patient women, and humble men and humble women, and almsgiving men and almsgiving women, and fasting men and fasting women, and men who guard their private parts and women who guard their private parts, and men who remember God much, and women who remember Him,- God has prepared for them forgiveness and a mighty hire
33|36|It is not for a believing man or for a believing woman, when God and His Apostle have decided an affair, to have the choice in that affair; and whoso rebels against God and His Apostle has erred with an obvious error
33|37|And when thou didst say to him God had shown favour to and thou hadst shown favour to, 'Keep thy wife to thyself and fear God;' and thou didst conceal in thy soul what God was about to display; and didst fear men, though God is more deserving that thou shouldst fear Him; and when Zaid had fulfilled his desire of her we did wed thee to her that there should be no hindrance to the believers in the matter of the wives of their adopted sons when they have fulfilled their desire of them: and so God's bidding to be done
33|38|There is no hindrance to the prophet about what God has ordained for him;-(such was) the course of God with those who have passed away before,- and God's bidding is a decreed decree
33|39|Those who preach God's messages and fear Him and fear not any one except God,- but God is good enough at reckoning up
33|40|Mohammed is not the father of any of your men, but the Apostle of God, and the Seal of the Prophets; for God all things doth know
33|41|O ye who believe! remember God with frequent remembrance
33|42|and celebrate His praises morning and evening
33|43|He it is who prays for you and His angels too, to bring you forth out of the darkness into the light, for He is merciful to the believers
33|44|Their salutation on the day they meet Him shall be 'Peace!' and fie has prepared for them a noble hire
33|45|O thou prophet! verily, we have sent thee as a witness and a herald of glad tidings and a warner
33|46|and to call (men) unto God by His permission, and as an illuminating lamp
33|47|Give glad tidings then to the believers, that for them is great grace from God
33|48|And follow not the unbelievers and the hypocrites; but let alone their ill-treatment, and rely upon God, for God is guardian enough
33|49|O ye who believe! when ye wed believing women, and then divorce them before ye have touched them, ye have no term that ye need observe; so make them some provision, and let them go handsomely at large
33|50|O thou prophet! verily, we make lawful for thee thy wives to whom thou hast given their hire, and what thy right hand possesses out of the booty that God has granted thee, and the daughters of thy paternal uncle and the daughters of thy paternal aunts, and the daughters of thy maternal uncle and the daughters of thy maternal aunts, provided they have fled with thee, and any believing woman if she give herself to the prophet, if the prophet desire to marry her;- a special privilege this for thee, above the other believers. We knew what we ordained for them concerning their wives and what their right hands possess, that there should be no hindrance to thee, and God is forgiving, merciful
33|51|Put off whomsoever thou wilt of them and take to thyself whomsoever thou wilt, or whomsoever thou cravest of those whom thou hast deposed, and it shall be no crime against thee. That is nigher to cheering their eyes and that they should not grieve, and should be satisfied with what thou dost bring them all; but God knows best what is in their hearts; and God is knowing, clement
33|52|It is not lawful to thee to take women after (this), nor to change them for (other) wives, even though their beauty please thee; except what thy right hand possesses, for God is ever watchful over all
33|53|O ye who believe! do not enter the houses of the prophet, unless leave be given you, for a meal,- not watching till it is cooked! But when ye are invited, then enter; and when ye have fed, disperse, not engaging in familiar discourse. Verily, that would annoy the prophet and he would be ashamed for your sake, but God is not ashamed of the truth. And when ye ask them for an article, ask them from behind a curtain; that is purer for your hearts and for theirs. It is not right for you to annoy the prophet of God, nor to wed his wives after him ever; verily, that is with God a serious thing
33|54|If ye display a thing or conceal it, verily, God all things doth know
33|55|There is no crime against them, (if they speak unveiled) to their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers sons, or their sisters sons, or their women, or what their right hands possess; but let them fear God,- verily, God is witness over all
33|56|Verily, God and His angels pray for the prophet. O ye who believe! pray for him and salute him with a salutation
33|57|Verily, those who annoy God and His Apostle, God will curse them in this world and the next, and prepare for them shameful woe
33|58|And those who annoy the believers for what they have not earned, such have to bear (the guilt of) calumny and obvious sin
33|59|O thou prophet! tell thy wives and thy daughters, and the women of the believers, to let down over them their outer wrappers; that is nearer for them to be known and that they should not be annoyed; but God is forgiving, merciful
33|60|Surely if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a sickness and the insurrectionists in Medinah do not desist, we will surely incite thee against them. Then they shall not dwell near thee therein save for a little while
33|61|Cursed wherever they are found,- taken and slain with slaughter
33|62|God's course with those who have passed away before: and thou shalt never find in God's course any alteration
33|63|The folk will ask thee about the Hour; say, 'The knowledge thereof is only with God, and what is to make thee perceive that the Hour is haply nigh
33|64|Verily, God has cursed the misbelievers and has prepared for them a blaze
33|65|To dwell therein for ever and for aye; they shall not find a patron or a helper
33|66|On the day when their faces shall writhe in the fire they shall say, 'O, would that we had obeyed God and obeyed the Apostle
33|67|And they shall say, 'Our Lord! verily, we obeyed our chiefs and our great men and they led us astray from the path
33|68|Our Lord! give them double torment and curse them with a great curse
33|69|O ye who believe! be not like those who annoyed Moses; but God cleared him of what they said, and he was regarded in the sight of God
33|70|O ye who believe! fear God and speak a straightforward speech
33|71|He will correct for you your works, and pardon you your sins; for he who obeys God and His Apostle has attained a mighty happiness
33|72|Verily, we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear it, and shrank from it; but man bore it: verily, he is ever unjust and ignorant
33|73|That God may torment the hypocritical men and hypocritical women, and the idolaters and idolatresses; and that God may turn relenting towards the believing men and believing women; verily, God is ever forgiving, merciful
34|1|Praise belongs to God, whose is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth; His is the praise in the next world, and He is the wise and well aware
34|2|He knows what goes into the earth, and what comes forth therefrom, and what comes down from the sky, and what ascends thereto; for He is the merciful, forgiving
34|3|Those who misbelieve say, 'The Hour shall not come to us;' say, 'Yea, by my Lord it shall surely come to you! by Him who knows the unseen! nor shall there escape from it the weight of an atom, in the heavens or in the earth, or even less than that, or greater, save in the perspicuous Book
34|4|and that He may reward those who believe and do right; these,- for them is forgiveness and a noble provision
34|5|But those who strive concerning our signs to frustrate them; these,- for them is the torment of a grievous plague
34|6|And those to whom knowledge has been given see that what is sent down to thee from thy Lord is the truth, and guides unto the way of the mighty, the praiseworthy
34|7|And those who misbelieve say, 'Shall we guide you to a man who will inform you that when ye are torn all to pieces, then ye shall be a new creation
34|8|he has forged against God a lie, or there is a ginn in him;' - nay, those who believe not in the hereafter are in the torment and in the remote error
34|9|Have they not looked at what is before them and what is behind them of the heaven and the earth? if we pleased we would cleave the earth open with them, or we would make to fall upon them a portion of the heaven; verily, in that is a sign to every repentant servant
34|10|And we did give David grace from us, 'O ye mountains! echo (God's praises) with him, and ye birds!' and we softened for him iron
34|11|Make thou coats of mail and adapt the rings thereof, and do right; verily, I at what ye do do look
34|12|And to Solomon the wind; its morning journey was a month, and its evening journey was a month; and we made to flow for him a fountain of molten brass; and of the ginns some to work before him by the permission of his Lord; and whoso swerves amongst them from our bidding we will give him to taste the torment and the blaze
34|13|and they made for him what he pleased of chambers, and images, and dishes like troughs, and firm pots;- work, O ye family of David! thankfully; few is it of my servants who are thankful
34|14|And when we decreed for him death, naught guided them to his death save a reptile of the earth that ate his staff; and when he fell down it was made manifest to the ginns that, had they but known the unseen, they need not have tarried in the shameful torment
34|15|Seba had in their dwellings a sign; two gardens, on the right hand and on the left, 'Eat from the provision of your Lord; and give thanks to Him! a good country and a forgiving Lord
34|16|but they turned away, and we sent against them the flood of the dyke; and we changed for them their two gardens into two gardens that grew bitter fruit and tamarisk, and some few lote trees
34|17|This did we reward them with, for that they misbelieved; and do we so reward any but misbelievers
34|18|And we made between them and the cities which we had blessed (other) cities which were evident; and we measured out the journey: 'Journey ye thereto nights and days in safety
34|19|And they said, 'Our Lord! make a greater distance between our journeys;' and they wronged themselves, and we made them legends; and we tore them all to pieces; verily, in that are signs to every patient, grateful person
34|20|And Iblis verified his suspicion concerning them, and they followed him, save a party of the believers
34|21|Yet had he no authority over them, save that we might know who it was that believed in the hereafter from him who amongst them was in doubt; for thy Lord guards everything
34|22|Say, 'Call on those whom ye pretend beside God;' they cannot control the weight of an atom in the heavens or in the earth; nor have they any partnership in either; nor has He amongst them any supporter
34|23|nor is intercession of any avail with Him, except for him whom He permits; so that when fright is removed from their hearts they say, 'What is it that your Lord says?' they say, 'The truth; for He is the high, the great
34|24|Say, 'Who provides from the heavens and the earth?' Say, 'God.' And, verily, we or ye are surely in guidance or in an obvious error
34|25|Say, 'Ye shall not be asked about what we have sent, nor shall we be asked about what ye do
34|26|Our Lord shall assemble us together; then He shall open between us in truth, for He is the opener who knows
34|27|Say, 'Show me those whom ye have added to Him as partners; not so! nay, but He is God, the mighty, the wise
34|28|We have only sent thee to men generally as a herald of glad tidings and a warner; but most men do not know
34|29|And they say, 'When shall this promise be, if ye do speak the truth
34|30|say, 'For you is the appointment of a day of which ye shall not keep back an hour nor shall ye bring it on
34|31|And those who misbelieve say, 'We will never believe in this Qur'an or in what is before it;' but couldst thou see when the unjust are set before their Lord, they shall rebut each other in speech. Those who were thought weak shall say to those who were big with pride, 'Had it not been for you we should have been believers
34|32|Those who were big with pride shall say to those who were thought weak, 'Was it we who turned you away from the guidance after it came to you? nay, ye were sinners
34|33|And those who were thought weak shall say to those who were big with pride, 'Nay, but it was the plotting by night and day, when ye did bid us to disbelieve in God, and to make peers for Him!' and they shall display repentance when they see the torment; and we will put fetters on the necks of those who misbelieved. Shall they be rewarded except for that which they have done
34|34|We have not sent to any city a warner but the opulent thereof said, 'We, in what ye are sent with, disbelieve
34|35|And they say, 'We have more wealth and children, and we shall not be tormented
34|36|Say, 'Verily, my Lord extends provision to whom He pleases or doles it out, but most men do not know
34|37|but neither your wealth nor your children is that which will bring you to a near approach to us, save him who believes and does right; these, for them is a double reward for what they have done, and they in upper rooms shall be secure
34|38|And those who strive concerning our signs to frustrate them, these in the torment shall be arraigned
34|39|Verily, my Lord extends provision to whomsoever He will of His servants, or doles it out to him. And what ye expend in alms at all, He will repay it; for He is the best of providers
34|40|And on the day He will gather them all together, then He will say to the angels, 'Are these those who used to worship you
34|41|They shall say, 'Celebrated be thy praises! thou art our patron instead of them. Nay, they used to worship the ginns, most of them believe in them
34|42|But today they cannot control for each other, either profit or harm;' and we will say to those who have done wrong, 'Taste ye the torment of the fire wherein ye did disbelieve
34|43|And when our signs are recited to them they say, 'This is only a man who wishes to turn you from what your fathers served;' and they say, 'This is only a lie forged,' and those who misbelive will say of the truth when it comes to them, 'It is only obvious sorcery
34|44|But we have not brought them any book which they may study, and we have not sent to them before thee a warner
34|45|Those before them said it was a lie, and these have not reached a tithe of what we had given them. And they said my apostles were liars, and how great a change was then
34|46|Say, 'I only admonish you of one thing, that ye should stand up before God in twos or singly, and then that ye reflect that there is no ginn in your companion. He is only a warner to you before the keen torment
34|47|Say, 'I do not ask you for it a hire; that is for yourselves; my hire is only from God, and He is witness over all
34|48|Say, 'Verily, my Lord hurls forth the truth; and He well knows the unseen
34|49|Say, 'The truth has come, and falsehood shall vanish and shall not come back
34|50|Say, 'If I err I only err against myself; and if I am guided it is all what my Lord inspires me; verily, He is the hearing, the nigh
34|51|And couldst thou see when they are scared, and there shall be no escape, and they shall be taken from a place that is nigh
34|52|And they say, 'We believe in it.' But how can they partake of it from a distant place
34|53|They misbelieved before, and conjectured about the unseen from a distant place
34|54|And there shall be a barrier between them and that which they lust after; as we did with their fellow sectaries before; verily, they were in hesitating doubt
35|1|Praise belongs to God, the originator of the heavens and the earth; who makes the angels His messengers, endued with wings in pairs, or threes or fours; He adds to creation what He Pleases; verily, God is mighty over all
35|2|What God opens to men of His mercy there is none to withhold; and what He withholds, there is none can send it forth after Him; for He is the mighty, the wise
35|3|O ye folk! remember the favours of God towards you; is there a creator beside God, who provides you from the heavens and from the earth? There is no god but He; how then can ye lie
35|4|And if they call thee liar, apostles were called liars before thee, and unto God affairs return
35|5|O ye folk! verily, God's promise is true; then let not the life of this world beguile you, and let not the beguiler beguile you concerning God
35|6|Verily, the devil is to you a foe, so take him as a foe; he only calls his crew to be the fellows of the blaze
35|7|Those who misbelieve, for them is keen torment. But those who believe and do right, for them is forgiveness and a great hire
35|8|What! is he whose evil act is made seemly for him, so that he looks upon it as good,-? Verily, God leads astray whom He pleases and guides whom He pleases; let not thy soul then be wasted in sighing for them; verily, God knows what they do
35|9|It is God who sends the winds, and they stir up a cloud, and we irrigate therewith a dead country, and we quicken therewith the earth after its death; so shall the resurrection be
35|10|Whosoever desires honour - honour belongs wholely to God; to Him good words ascend, and a righteous deed He takes up; and those who plot evil deeds, for them is keen torment, and their plotting is in vain
35|11|God created you from earth, then from a clot; then lie made you pairs; and no female bears or is delivered, except by His knowledge; nor does he, who is aged reach old age, or is aught diminished from his life, without it is in the Book; verily, that is easy unto God
35|12|The two seas are not equal: one is sweet and fresh and pleasant to drink, and the other is salt and pungent; but from each do ye eat fresh flesh, and bring forth ornaments which ye wear; and thou mayest see the ships cleave through it, that ye may search after His grace, and haply ye may give thanks
35|13|He turns the night into day, and He turns the day into night; and He subjects the sun and the moon, each of them runs on to an appointed goal; that is God, your Lord! His is the kingdom; but those ye call on beside Him possess not a straw
35|14|If you call upon them they cannot hear your call, and if they hear they cannot answer you; and on the resurrection day they will deny your associating them with God; but none can inform thee like the One who is aware
35|15|O ye folk! ye are in need of God; but God, He is independent, praiseworthy
35|16|If He please He will take you off, and will bring a fresh creation
35|17|for that is no hard matter unto God
35|18|And no burdened soul shall bear the burden of another; and if a heavily laden one shall call for its load (to be carried) it shall not be carried for it at all, even though it be a kinsman!- thou canst only warn those who fear their Lord in the unseen and who are steadfast in prayer; and he who is pure is only pure for himself; and unto God the journey is
35|19|The blind is not equal with him who sees
35|20|nor the darkness with the light
35|21|nor the shade with the hot blast
35|22|nor are the living equal with the dead; verily, God causes whom He pleases to hear, and thou canst not make those who are in their graves hear
35|23|thou art but a warner
35|24|Verily, we have sent thee in truth a herald of glad tidings and a warner; and there is no nation but its warner has passed away with it
35|25|And if they called thee liar, those before thee called their apostles liars too, who came to them with manifest signs, and the Scriptures, and the illuminating Book
35|26|Then I seized those who misbelieved, and what a change it was
35|27|Dost thou not see that God has sent down from the heaven water, and has brought forth therewith fruits varied in hue, and on the mountains dykes, white and red, various in hue, and some intensely black
35|28|and men and beasts and cattle, various in hue? thus! none fear God but the wise among His servants; but, verily, God is mighty, forgiving
35|29|Verily, those who recite the Book of God, and are steadfast in prayer, and give alms of what we have bestowed in secret and in public, hope for the merchandise that shall not come to naught
35|30|that He may pay them their hire, and give them increase of His grace; verily, He is forgiving, grateful
35|31|What we have inspired thee with of the Book is true, verifying what was before it; verily, God of His servants is well aware and sees
35|32|Then we gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom we chose of our servants, and of them are some who wrong themselves, and of them are some who take a middle course, and of them are some who vie in good works by the permission of their Lord; that is great grace
35|33|Gardens of Eden shall they enter, adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments therein shall be silk
35|34|and they shall say, 'Praise belongs to God, who has removed from us our grief; verily, our Lord is forgiving, grateful
35|35|who has made us alight in an enduring abode of His grace, wherein no toil shall touch us, and there shall touch us no fatigue
35|36|But those who misbelieve, for them is the fire of hell; it shall not be decreed for them to die, nor shall aught of the torment be lightened from them; thus do we reward every misbeliever
35|37|and they shall shriek therein, 'O our Lord! bring us forth, and we will do right, not what we used to do!' - 'Did we not let you grow old enough for every one who would be mindful to be mindful? and there came to you a warner!- So taste it, for the unjust shall have none to help
35|38|verily, God knows the unseen things of the heavens and of the earth; verily, He knows the nature of men's breasts
35|39|He it is who made you vicegerents in the earth, and he who misbelieves, his misbelief is against himself; but their misbelief shall only increase the misbelievers in hatred with their Lord; and their misbelief shall only increase the misbelievers in loss
35|40|Say, 'Have ye considered your associates whom ye call on beside God?' show me what they created of the earth ; have they a share in the heavens, or have we given them a book that they rest on a manifest sign? nay the unjust promise each other naught but guile
35|41|Verily, God holds back the heavens and the earth lest they should decline; and if they should decline there is none to hold them back after Him; verily, He is clement, forgiving
35|42|They swore by God with their most strenuous oath, verily, if there come to them a warner they would be more guided than any one of the nations; but when a warner comes to them, it only increases them in aversion
35|43|and in being big with pride in the earth, and in plotting evil; but the plotting of evil only entangles those who practise it; can they then expect aught but the course of those of yore? but thou shalt not find any alteration in the course of God; and they shall not find any change in the course of God
35|44|Have they not journeyed on in the land and seen what was the end of those before them who were stronger than they? but God, nothing can ever make Him helpless in the heavens or in the earth; verily, He is knowing, powerful
35|45|Were God to catch men up for what they earn, He would not leave upon the back of it a beast; but He respites them until an appointed time. When their appointed time comes, verily, God looks upon His servants
36|1|S
36|2|By the wise Qur'an
36|3|verily, thou art of the apostles
36|4|upon a right way
36|5|The revelation of the mighty, the merciful
36|6|That thou mayest warn a people whose fathers were not warned, and who themselves are heedless
36|7|Now is the sentence due against most of them, for they will not believe
36|8|Verity, we will place upon their necks fetters, and they shall reach up to their chins, and they shall have their heads forced back
36|9|and we will place before them a barrier, and behind them a barrier; and we will cover them and they shall not see
36|10|and it is all, the same to them if thou dost warn them or dost warn them not, they will not believe
36|11|Thou canst only warn him who follows the reminder, and fears the Merciful in the unseen; but give him glad tidings of forgiveness and a noble hire
36|12|Verily, we quicken the dead, and write down what they have done before, and what vestiges they leave behind; and everything have we counted in a plain model
36|13|Strike out for them a parable: the fellows of the city when there came to it the apostles
36|14|when we sent those two and they called them both liars, and we strengthened them with a third; and they said, 'Verily, we are sent to you
36|15|They said, 'Ye are only mortals like ourselves, nor has the Merciful sent down aught; ye are naught but liars
36|16|They said, 'Our Lord knows that we are sent to you
36|17|and we have only our plain message to preach
36|18|They said, 'Verily, we have augured concerning you, and if ye do not desist we will surely stone you, and there shall touch you from us a grievous woe
36|19|Said they, 'Your augury is with you; what! if ye are reminded -? Nay, ye are an extravagant people
36|20|And there came from the remote part of the city a man hastening up. Said he, 'O my people! follow the apostles
36|21|follow those who do not ask you a hire, and who are guided
36|22|What ails me that I should not worship Him who originated me, and unto whom I must return
36|23|Shall I take gods beside Him? If the Merciful One desires harm for me, their intercession cannot avail me at all, nor can they rescue me
36|24|Verily, I should then be in obvious error
36|25|verily, I believe in your Lord, then listen ye to me
36|26|It was said, 'Enter thou into Paradise!' said he, 'O, would that my people did but know
36|27|for that my Lord has forgiven me, and has made me of the honoured
36|28|And we did send down upon his people no hosts from heaven, nor yet what we were wont to send down
36|29|it was but a single noise, and lo! they were extinct
36|30|Alas for the servants! there comes to them no apostle but they mock at him
36|31|Have they not seen how many generations we have, destroyed before them
36|32|verily, they shall not return to them; but all of them shall surely altogether be arraigned
36|33|And a sign for them is the dead earth which we have quickened and brought forth therefrom seed, and from it do they eat
36|34|and we made therein gardens and palms and grapes, and we have caused fountains to gush forth therein
36|35|that they may eat from the fruit thereof, and of what their hands have made; will they not then give thanks
36|36|Celebrated be the praises of Him who created all kinds, of what the earth brings forth, and of themselves, and what they know not of
36|37|And a sign to them is the night, from which we strip off the day, and lo! they are in the dark
36|38|and the sun runs on to a place of rest for it; that is the ordinance of the mighty, the wise
36|39|And the moon, we have ordered for it stations, until it comes again to be like an old dry palm branch
36|40|Neither is it proper for it to catch up the moon, nor for the night to outstrip the day, but each one floats on in its sky
36|41|And a sign for them is that we bear their seed in a laden ship
36|42|and we have created for them the like thereof whereon to ride
36|43|and if we please, we drown them, and there is none for them to appeal to; nor are they rescued
36|44|save by mercy from us, as a provision for a season
36|45|And when it is said to them, 'Fear what is before you and what is behind you, haply ye may obtain mercy
36|46|and thou bringest them not any one of the signs of their Lord, but they turn away therefrom
36|47|and when it is said to them, 'Expend in alms of what God has bestowed upon you,' those who misbelieve say to those who believe, 'Shall we feed him whom, if God pleased, He would feed? ye are only in an obvious error
36|48|They say, 'When shall this promise come to pass, if ye do tell the truth
36|49|They await but a single noise, that shall seize them as they are contending
36|50|And they shall not be able to make a bequest; nor to their people shall they return
36|51|but the trumpet shall be blown, and, behold, from their graves unto their Lord shall they slip out
36|52|They shall say, 'O, woe is us! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place? this is what the Merciful promised, and the apostles told the truth
36|53|It shall be but a single noise, and lo! they are all arraigned before us
36|54|And on that day no soul shall be wronged at all, nor shall ye be rewarded for aught but that which ye have done
36|55|Verily, the fellows of Paradise upon that day shall be employed in enjoyment
36|56|they and their wives, in shade upon thrones, reclining
36|57|therein shall they have fruits, and they shall have what they may call for
36|58|Peace!' - a speech from the merciful Lord
36|59|Separate yourselves today, O ye sinners
36|60|Did I not covenant with you, O children of Adam! that ye should not serve Satan? verily, he is to you an open foe
36|61|but serve ye me, this is the right way
36|62|But he led astray a numerous race of you; what! had ye then no sense
36|63|this is hell, which ye were threatened
36|64|broil therein today, for that ye misbelieved
36|65|On that day we will seat their mouths, and their hands shall speak to us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they earned
36|66|And if we please we could put out their eyes, and they would race along the road; and then how could they see
36|67|And if we pleased we would transform them in their places, and they should not be able to go on, nor yet to return
36|68|And him to whom we grant old age, we bow him down in his form; have they then no sense
36|69|We have not taught him poetry, nor was it proper for him; it is but a reminder and a plain Qur'an
36|70|to warn him who is living; but the sentence is due against the misbelievers
36|71|Have they not seen that we have created for them of what our hands have made for them, cattle, and they are owners thereof
36|72|and we have tamed them for them, and of them are some to ride, and of them are what they eat
36|73|and therein have they advantages and beverages; will they not then give thanks
36|74|But they take, beside God, gods that haply they may be helped
36|75|They cannot help them; yet are they a host ready for them
36|76|But let not their speech grieve thee: verily, we know what they conceal and what they display
36|77|Has not man seen that we have created him from a clot? and lo! he is an open opponent
36|78|and he strikes out for us a likeness; and forgets his creation; and says, 'Who shall quicken bones when they are rotten
36|79|Say, 'He shall quicken them who produced them at first, for every creation does He know
36|80|who has made for you fire out of a green tree, and lo! ye kindle therewith
36|81|Is not He who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like thereof? yea! He is the knowing Creator
36|82|His bidding is only, when He desires anything to say to it, 'BE,' and it is
36|83|Then celebrated be the praises of Him in whose hands is the kingdom of everything! and unto Him shall ye return
37|1|By the (angels) ranged in ranks
37|2|and the drivers driving
37|3|and the reciters of the reminder
37|4|Verily, your God is one
37|5|the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between the two, and the Lord of the sunrises
37|6|Verily, we have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the stars
37|7|and to preserve it from every rebellious devil
37|8|that they may not listen to the exalted chiefs; for they are hurled at from every side
37|9|driven off, and for them is lasting woe
37|10|save such as snatches off a word, and there follows him a darting flame
37|11|Ask them whether they are stronger by nature or (the angels) whom we have created? We have created them of sticky clay
37|12|Nay, thou dost wonder and they jest
37|13|and when they are reminded they will not remember
37|14|and when they see a sign they make a jest thereof
37|15|and say, 'This is naught but obvious sorcery
37|16|What! when we are dead, and have become earth and bones, shall we then be raised
37|17|what! and our fathers of yore
37|18|Say, 'Yes, and ye shall shrink up
37|19|and it shall only be one scare, and, behold, they shall look on
37|20|and they shall say, 'O, woe is us! this is the day of judgment
37|21|this is the day of decision, which ye did call a lie
37|22|Gather ye together, ye who were unjust, with their mates and what they used to serve
37|23|beside God, and guide them to the way of hell
37|24|and stop them; verily, they shall be questioned
37|25|Why do ye not help each other
37|26|nay, on that day they shall resign themselves
37|27|and some shall draw near to others, to question each other
37|28|and they shall say, 'Verily, ye came to us from the right
37|29|They shall say, 'Nay, ye were not believers
37|30|nor had we any authority over you; nay, ye were an outrageous people
37|31|And the sentence of our Lord shall be due for us; verily, we shall surely taste thereof
37|32|we did seduce you - verily, we were erring too
37|33|therefore, verily, on that day they shall share the torment
37|34|thus it is that we will do with the sinners
37|35|Verily, when it is said to them, 'There is no god but God,' they get too big with pride
37|36|and say, 'What! shall we leave our gods for an infatuated poet
37|37|Nay, he came with the truth, and verified the apostles
37|38|verily, ye are going to taste of grievous woe
37|39|nor shall ye be rewarded save for that which ye have done
37|40|Except God's sincere servants
37|41|these shall have a stated provision
37|42|of fruits, and they shall be honoured
37|43|in the gardens of pleasure
37|44|upon couches facing each other
37|45|they shall be served all round with a cup from a spring
37|46|white and delicious to those who drink
37|47|wherein is no insidious spirit, nor shall they be drunk therewith
37|48|and with them damsels, restraining their looks, large eyed
37|49|as though they were a sheltered egg
37|50|and some shall come forward to ask others
37|51|and a speaker amongst them shall say, 'Verily, I had a mate
37|52|who used to say, "Art thou verily of those who credit
37|53|What! when we are dead, and have become earth and bones, shall we be surely judged
37|54|He will say, 'Are ye looking down
37|55|and he shall look down and see him in the midst of hell
37|56|He shall say, 'By God, thou didst nearly ruin me
37|57|And had it not been for the favour of my Lord, I should have been among the arraigned
37|58|What! shall we not die save our first death
37|59|and shall we not be tormented
37|60|Verily, this is mighty bliss
37|61|for the like of this then let the workers work
37|62|Is that better as an entertainment, or the tree of Ez Zaqqum
37|63|Verily, we have made it a trial to the unjust
37|64|Verily, it is a tree that comes forth from the bottom of hell
37|65|its spathe is as it were the heads of devils
37|66|verily, they shall eat therefrom, and fill their bellies therefrom
37|67|Then shall they have upon it a mixture of boiling water
37|68|then, verily, their return shall be to hell
37|69|Verily, they found their fathers erring
37|70|and they hurried on in their tracks
37|71|but there had erred before them most of those of yore
37|72|and we had sent warners amongst them
37|73|Behold, then, what was the end of those who were warned
37|74|save God's sincere servants
37|75|Noah did call upon us, and a gracious answer did we give
37|76|and we saved him and his people from a mighty trouble
37|77|and we made his seed to be the survivors
37|78|and we left for him amongst posterity
37|79|peace upon Noah in the worlds
37|80|verily, thus do we reward those who do well
37|81|verily, he was of our believing servants
37|82|Then we drowned the others
37|83|And, verily, of his sect was Abraham
37|84|when he came to his Lord with a sound heart
37|85|when he said to his father and his people, 'What is it that ye serve
37|86|with a lie do ye desire gods beside God
37|87|What then is your thought respecting the Lord of the worlds
37|88|And he looked a look at the stars
37|89|and said, 'Verily, I am sick
37|90|and they turned their backs upon him fleeing
37|91|And he went aside unto their gods and said, 'Will ye not eat
37|92|What ails you that ye will not speak
37|93|And he went aside to them smiting with the right hand
37|94|And they rushed towards him
37|95|Said he, 'Do ye serve what ye hew out
37|96|when God has created you, and what ye make
37|97|Said they, 'Build for him a pyre, and throw him into the flaming hell
37|98|They desired to plot against him, but we made them inferior
37|99|Said he, 'Verily, I am going to my Lord, He will guide me
37|100|My Lord! grant me (a son), one of the righteous
37|101|and we gave him glad tidings of a clement boy
37|102|And when he reached the age to work with him, he said, 'O my boy! verily, I have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice thee, look then what thou seest right.' Said he, 'O my sire! do what thou art bidden; thou wilt find me, if it please God, one of the patient
37|103|And when they were resigned, and Abraham had thrown him down upon his forehead
37|104|we called to him, 'O Abraham
37|105|thou hast verified the vision; verily, thus do we reward those who do well
37|106|This is surely an obvious trial
37|107|And we ransomed him with a mighty victim
37|108|and we left for him amongst posterity
37|109|Peace upon Abraham
37|110|thus do we reward those who do well
37|111|verily, he was of our servants who believe
37|112|And we gave him glad tidings of Isaac, a prophet among the righteous
37|113|and we blessed him and Isaac;- of their seed is one who does well, and one who obviously wrongs himself
37|114|And we were gracious unto Moses and Aaron
37|115|We saved them and their people from mighty trouble
37|116|and we helped them and they had the upper hand
37|117|and we gave them both the perspicuous Book
37|118|and we guided them to the right way
37|119|and we left for them amongst posterity
37|120|Peace upon Moses and Aaron
37|121|verily, thus do we reward those who do well
37|122|verily, they were both of our servants who believe
37|123|And verily Elyas was of the apostles
37|124|when he said to his people, 'Will ye not fear
37|125|do ye call upon Baal and leave the best of Creators
37|126|God your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of yore
37|127|But they called him liar; verily, they shall surely be arraigned
37|128|save God's sincere servants
37|129|And we, left for him amongst posterity
37|130|Peace upon Elyasin
37|131|verily, thus do we reward those who do well
37|132|verily, he was of our servants who believe
37|133|And, verily, Lot was surely among the apostles
37|134|when we saved him and his people altogether
37|135|except an old woman amongst those who lingered
37|136|then we destroyed the others
37|137|verily, ye pass by them in the morning
37|138|and at night; have ye then no sense
37|139|And, verily, Jonah was amongst the apostles
37|140|when he ran away into the laden ship
37|141|and he cast lots and was of those who lost
37|142|and a fish swallowed him, for he was to be blamed
37|143|and had it not been that he was of those who celebrated God's praises
37|144|he would surely have tarried in the belly thereof to the day when men shall be raised
37|145|But we cast him on to the barren shore; and he was sick
37|146|and we made to grow over him a gourd tree
37|147|and we sent him to a hundred thousand or more
37|148|and they believed; and we gave them enjoyment for a season
37|149|Ask them, 'Has thy Lord daughters while they have sons
37|150|or have we created the angels females while they were witnesses
37|151|is it not of their lie that they say
37|152|God has begotten?' verily, they are liars
37|153|Has he preferred daughters to sons
37|154|what ails you? how ye judge
37|155|will ye not be mindful
37|156|or have ye obvious authority
37|157|then bring your Book if ye do speak the truth
37|158|And they made him to be related to the ginns, while the ginns know that they shall be arraigned
37|159|celebrated be God's praises from what they attribute
37|160|save God's sincere servants
37|161|Verily, ye and what ye worship
37|162|shall not try any one concerning him
37|163|save him who shall broil in hell
37|164|there is none amongst us but has his appointed place, and
37|165|verily, we are ranged, and
37|166|verily, we celebrate His praises
37|167|And yet they say
37|168|Had we a reminder from those of yore
37|169|we should surely have been of God's sincere servants
37|170|But they misbelieved in it; but soon shall they know
37|171|But our word has been passed to our servants who were sent
37|172|that they should be helped
37|173|that, verily, our hosts should gain mastery for them
37|174|Then turn thou thy back upon them for a time
37|175|and look upon them, for soon they too shall look
37|176|Would they hasten on our torment
37|177|but when it descends in their court, ill will the morning be of those who have been warned
37|178|But turn thy back upon them for a time
37|179|and look, for soon they too shall look
37|180|Celebrated be the praises of thy Lord, the Lord of glory, above what they attribute
37|181|and peace be upon the apostles
37|182|and praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds
38|1|By the Qur'an with its reminder
38|2|nay, but those who misbelieve are in pride, schism
38|3|How many a generation have we destroyed before them, and they cried out, but it was no time to escape
38|4|And they wonder that a warner has come from amongst themselves, and the misbelievers say, 'This is a magician, a liar
38|5|What! does he make the gods to be one God? verily, this is a wondrous thing
38|6|And the chiefs of them went away: 'Go on and persevere in your gods; this is a thing designed
38|7|we never heard this in any other sect; this is nothing but a fiction
38|8|Has a reminder come down upon him from amongst us?' nay, they are in doubt concerning my reminder; nay, they have not yet tasted of my torment
38|9|Have they the treasures of the mercy of thy mighty Lord, the giver
38|10|or have they the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth, and what is between the two?- then let them climb tip the ropes thereof
38|11|Any host whatever of the confederates shall there be routed
38|12|Before them did Noah's people, and 'Ad, and Pharaoh of the stakes call the apostles liars
38|13|and Thamud and the people of Lot, and the fellows of the Grove, they were the confederates too
38|14|They all did naught but call the apostles liars, and just was the punishment
38|15|Do these await aught else but one noise for which there shall be no pause
38|16|But they say, 'O our Lord, hasten for us our share before the day of reckoning
38|17|Be patient of what they say, and remember our servant David endowed with might; verily, he turned frequently to us
38|18|Verily, we subjected the mountains to celebrate with him our praises at the evening and the dawn
38|19|and the birds too gathered together, each one would oft return to him
38|20|and we strengthened his kingdom, and we gave him wisdom and decisive address
38|21|Has there come to thee the story of the antagonists when they scaled the chamber wall
38|22|when they entered in unto David, and he was startled at them, they said, 'Fear not, we are two antagonists; one of us has injured the other; judge then between us with the truth and be not partial, but guide us to a level way
38|23|Verily, this is my brother: be had ninety-nine ewes and I had one ewe; and he said, "Give her over to my charge;" and he overcame me in the discourse
38|24|Said he, 'He wronged thee in asking for thy ewe in addition to his own ewes. Verily, many associates do injure one another, except those who believe and do what is right, and very few are they!' And he thought that we were trying him; and he asked pardon of his Lord and fell down bowing, and did turn
38|25|and we pardoned him; for, verily, he has a near approach to us and an excellent resort
38|26|O David! verily, we have made thee a vicegerent, judge then between men with truth and follow not lust, for it will lead thee astray from the path of god. Verily, those who go astray from the path of God, for them is keen torment, for that they did forget the day of reckoning
38|27|And we have not created the heavens and the earth, and what is between the two, in vain. That is what those who misbelieved did think, but woe from the fire to those who misbelieve
38|28|Shall we make those who believe and do right like those who do evil in the earth? or shall we make the pious like the sinners
38|29|A blessed Book which we have sent down to thee that they may consider its verses, and that those endowed with minds may be mindful
38|30|And we gave to David, Solomon, an excellent servant; verily, he turned frequently to us
38|31|When there were set before him in the evening the steeds that paw the ground
38|32|and he said, 'Verily, I have loved the love of good things better than the remembrance of my Lord, until (the sun) was hidden behind the veil
38|33|bring them back to me;' and he began to sever their legs and necks
38|34|And we did try Solomon, and we threw upon his throne a form; then he turned repentant
38|35|Said he, 'My Lord, pardon me and grant me a kingdom that is not seemly for any one after me; verily, thou art He who grants
38|36|And we subjected to him the wind to run on at his bidding gently wherever he directed it
38|37|and the devils - every builder and diver
38|38|and others bound in fetters
38|39|this is our gift, so be thou lavish or withhold without account
38|40|And, verily, he had with us a near approach, and a good resort
38|41|And remember our servant Job when he called upon his Lord that 'the devil has touched me with toil and torment
38|42|Stamp with thy foot, this is a cool washing-place and a drink
38|43|And we granted him his family, and the like of them with them, as a mercy from us and a reminder to those endowed with minds
38|44|and take in thy hand a bundle, and strike therewith, and break not thy oath!' Verily, we found him patient, an excellent servant; verily, he turned frequently to us
38|45|And remember our servants Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, endowed with might and sight
38|46|verily, we made them sincere by a sincere quality - the remembrance of the abode
38|47|and, verily, they were with us of the elect, the best
38|48|And remember Ishmael and Elisha and Dhu-l-kifl, for each was of the righteous
38|49|This is a reminder! verily, for the pious is there an excellent resort
38|50|gardens of Eden with the doors open to them
38|51|reclining therein; calling therein for much fruit and drink
38|52|and beside them maids of modest glance, of their own age
38|53|This is what ye were promised for the day of reckoning
38|54|This is surely our provision, it is never spent
38|55|This!- and, verily, for the rebellious is there an evil resort
38|56|hell; they shall broil therein, and an ill couch shall it be
38|57|This,- so let them taste it!- hot water, and pus
38|58|and other kinds of the same sort
38|59|This is an army plunged in with you! there is no welcome for them! verily, they are going to broil in the fire
38|60|They shall say, 'Nay, for you too is there no welcome! it was ye who prepared it beforehand for us, and an ill resting-place it is
38|61|They shall say, 'Our Lord! whoso prepared this beforehand for us, give him double torment in the fire
38|62|And they shall say, 'What ails us that we do not see men whom we used to think amongst the wicked
38|63|whom we used to take for mockery? have our eyes escaped them
38|64|Verily, that is the truth; the contention of the people of the fire
38|65|Say, 'I am only a warner; and there is no god but God, the one, the victorious
38|66|the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what is between the two, the mighty, the forgiving
38|67|Say, 'It is a grand story
38|68|and yet ye turn from it
38|69|I had no knowledge of the exalted chiefs when they contended
38|70|I am only inspired that I am a plain warner
38|71|When thy Lord said to the angels, 'Verily, I am about to create a mortal out of clay
38|72|and when I have fashioned him, and breathed into him of my spirit, then fall ye down before him adoring
38|73|And the angels adored all of them
38|74|save Iblis, who was too big with pride, and was of the misbelievers
38|75|Said He, 'O Iblis! what prevents thee from adoring what I have created with my two hands? art thou too big with pride? or art thou amongst the exalted
38|76|Said he, 'I am better than he, Thou hast created me from fire, and him Thou hast created from clay
38|77|Said He, 'Then go forth therefrom, for, Verily, thou art pelted
38|78|and, verily, upon thee is my curse unto the day of judgment
38|79|Said be, 'My Lord! then respite me until the day when they are raised
38|80|Said He, 'Then thou art amongst the respited
38|81|until the day of the stated time
38|82|Said he, 'Then, by Thy might! I will surely seduce them all together
38|83|except Thy servants amongst them who are sincere
38|84|Said He, 'It is the truth, and the truth I speak
38|85|I will surely fill hell with thee and with those who follow thee amongst them all together
38|86|Say, 'I do not ask thee for it any hire, nor am I of those who take too much upon myself
38|87|It is but a reminder to the servants
38|88|and ye shall surely know its story after a time
39|1|The sending down of the Book from God, the mighty, the wise
39|2|Verily, we have sent down to thee the Book in truth, then serve God, being sincere in religion unto Him
39|3|Aye! God's is the sincere religion: and those who take beside Him patrons - 'We do not serve them save that they may bring us near to God - 'Verily, God will judge between them concerning that whereon they do dispute. Verily, God guides not him who is a misbelieving liar
39|4|Had God wished to take to Himself a child, He would have chosen what He pleased from what He creates;- celebrated be His praises! He is God, the one, the victorious
39|5|He created the heavens and the earth in truth! It is He who clothes the day with night; and clothes the night with day; and subjects the sun and the moon, each one runs on to an appointed time; aye! He is the mighty, the forgiving
39|6|He created you from one soul; then He made from it its mate; and He sent down upon you of the cattle four pairs! He creates you in the bellies of your mothers,- creation after creation, in three darknesses. That is God for you! His is the kingdom, there is no god but He; how then can ye be turned away
39|7|If ye be thankless, yet is God independent of you. He is not pleased with ingratitude in His servants; but if ye give thanks, He is pleased with that in you. But no burdened soul shall bear the burden of another; then unto your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of that which ye have done. Verily, He knows the natures of men's breasts
39|8|And when distress touches a man he calls his Lord, turning repentant to Him; then when He confers on him a favour from Himself he forgets what he had called upon Him for before, and makes peers for God to lead astray from His way! Say, 'Enjoy thyself in thy misbelief a little, verily, thou art of the fellows of the Fire
39|9|Shall he who is devout throughout the night, adoring and standing, cautious concerning the hereafter, and hoping for the mercy of his Lord . . . ? Say, 'Shall those who know be deemed equal with those who know not? only those will remember, who are endowed with minds
39|10|Say, 'O my servants who believe! fear your Lord! for those who do well in this world is good, and God's earth is spacious; verily, the patient shall be paid their hire without count
39|11|Say, 'Verily, I am bidden to serve God, being sincere in religion to Him
39|12|and I am bidden that I be the first of those resigned
39|13|Say, 'Verily, I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the torment of a mighty day
39|14|Say, 'God do I serve, being sincere in my relation to Him
39|15|serve then what ye will beside Him!' Say, 'Verily, the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the resurrection day. Aye, that is the obvious loss
39|16|They shall have over them shades of fire, and under them shades; with that does God frighten His servants: O my servants! then fear me
39|17|But those who avoid Taghut and serve them not, but turn repentant unto God, for them shall be glad tidings. Then give glad tidings to my servants
39|18|who listen to the word and follow the best thereof; they it is whom God guides, and they it is who are endowed with minds
39|19|Him against whom the word of torment is due,- canst thou rescue him from the fire
39|20|But for those who fear their Lord for them are upper chambers, and upper chambers above them built, beneath which rivers flow; God's promise! God does not fail in His promise
39|21|Hast thou not seen that God sends down from the heaven water, and conducts it into springs in the earth? then He brings forth therewith corn varied in kind, then it dries up, and ye see it grow yellow; then He makes it grit;- verily, in that is a reminder for those endowed with minds
39|22|Is he whose breast God has expanded for Islam, and who is in light from his Lord .... ? And woe to those whose hearts are hardened against a remembrance of God! those are in obvious error
39|23|God has sent down the best of legends, a book uniform and repeating; whereat the skins of those who fear their Lord do creep! then their skins and their hearts soften at the remembrance of God. That is the guidance of God! He guides therewith whom He will. But he whom God leads astray there is no guide for him
39|24|Shall he who must screen himself with his own face from the evil torment on the resurrection day. . . . ? And it shall be said of those who do wrong, taste what ye have earned
39|25|Those before them called the (prophets) liars, and the torment came to them from whence they perceived it not
39|26|and God made them taste disgrace in the life of this world. But surely the torment of the hereafter is greater, if they did but know
39|27|We have struck out for men in this Qur'an every sort of parable, haply they may be mindful
39|28|An Arabic Qur'an with no crookedness therein; haply they may fear
39|29|God has struck out a parable, a man who has partners who oppose each other and a man who is wholly given up to another; shall they be deemed equal in similitude? praise be to God! nay, but most of them know not
39|30|Verily, thou shalt die, and, verily, they shall die
39|31|then, verily, on the resurrection day before your Lord shall ye dispute
39|32|And who is more unjust than he who lies against God, and calls the truth a lie when it comes to him? Is there not in hell a resort for those who misbelieve
39|33|but whoso brings the truth and believes in it, these are they who fear
39|34|For them is what they please with their Lord, that is the reward of those who do well
39|35|that God may cover for them their offences which they have done, and may reward them with their hire for the best of that which they have done
39|36|Is not God sufficient for His servants? and yet they would frighten thee with those beside Him
39|37|But he whom God leads astray there is no guide for him; and he whom God guides there is none to lead him astray: is not God mighty, the Lord of vengeance
39|38|And if thou shouldst ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will surely say, 'God!' Say, 'Have ye considered what ye call on beside God? If God wished me harm, could they remove His harm? or did He wish me mercy, could they withhold His mercy?' Say, 'God is enough for me, and on Him rely those who rely
39|39|Say, 'O my people! act according to your power; I too am going to act; and ye shall know
39|40|He to whom the torment comes it shall disgrace him, and there shall alight upon him lasting torment
39|41|Verily, we have sent down to thee the Book for men in truth; and whosoever is guided it is for his own soul: but whoso goes astray it is against them, and thou art not a guardian for them
39|42|God takes to Himself souls at the time of their death; and those which do not die (He takes) in their sleep; and He holds back those on whom He has decreed death, and sends others back till their appointed time;- verily, in that are signs unto a people who reflect
39|43|Do they take besides God intercessors? Say, 'What! though they have no control over anything and have no sense
39|44|Say, 'God's is the intercession, all of it; His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; then unto Him shall ye be sent back
39|45|And when God alone is mentioned the hearts of those who believe not in the hereafter quake, and when those beside Him are mentioned, lo, they are joyful
39|46|Say, 'O God! originator of the heavens and the earth, who knowest the unseen and the visible, thou wilt judge between thy servants concerning that whereon they do dispute
39|47|And had those who do wrong all that is in the earth, and the like thereof with it, they would ransom themselves therewith from the evil of the torment on the resurrection day! but there shall appear to them from God that which they had not reckoned on
39|48|and the evils of what they have earned shall appear to them; but that shall close in on them at which they mocked
39|49|And when harm touches man he calls on us; then, when we grant him favour from us, he says, 'Verily, I am given it through knowledge!' nay, it is a trial,- but most of them do not know
39|50|Those before them said it too, but that availed them not which they had earned
39|51|and there befell them the evil deeds of what they had earned: and those who do wrong of these (Meccans), there shall befall them too the evil deeds of what they had earned, nor shall they frustrate Him
39|52|Have they not known that God extends His provision to whom He pleases, or doles it out? verily, in that are signs unto a people who believe
39|53|Say, 'O my servants! who have been extravagant against their own souls!' be not in despair of the mercy of God; verily, God forgives sins, all of them; verily, He is forgiving, merciful
39|54|But turn repentant unto your Lord, and resign yourselves to Him, before there comes on you torment! then ye shall not be helped
39|55|and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your Lord, before there come on you the torment suddenly, ere ye can perceive
39|56|Lest a soul should say, 'O my sighing! for what I have neglected towards God! for, verily, I was amongst those who did jest
39|57|or lest it should say, 'If God had but guided me, I should surely have been of those who fear
39|58|or lest it should say, when it sees the torment, 'Had I another turn I should be of those who do well
39|59|Yea! there came to thee my signs and thou didst call them lies, and wert too big with pride, and wert of those who misbelieved
39|60|And on the resurrection day thou shalt see those who lied against God, with their faces blackened. Is there not in hell a resort for those who are too big with pride
39|61|And God shall rescue those who fear Him, into their safe place; no evil shall touch them, nor shall they be grieved
39|62|God is the creator of everything, and He is guardian over everything
39|63|His are the keys of the heavens and the earth; and those who misbelieve in the signs of God, they it is who lose
39|64|Say, 'What! other than God would you bid me serve, O ye ignorant ones
39|65|When He has inspired thee and those before thee that, "If thou dost associate aught with Him, thy work will surely be in vain, and thou shalt surely be of those who lose
39|66|Nay, but God do thou serve, and be of those who do give thanks
39|67|And they do not value God at His true value; while the earth all of it is but a handful for Him on the resurrection day, and the heavens shall be rolled up in His right hand! Celebrated be His praise! and exalted be He above what they associate with Him
39|68|And the trumpet shall be blown, and those who are in the heavens and in the earth shall swoon, save whom God pleases. Then it shall be blown again, and, lo! they shall stand up and look on
39|69|And the earth shall beam with the light of its Lord, and the Book shall be set forth, and the prophets and martyrs shall be brought; and it shall be decreed between them in truth, and they shall not be wronged
39|70|And every soul shall be paid for what it has done, and He knows best that which they do
39|71|and those who misbelieve shall be driven to hell in troops; and when they come there, its doors shall be opened, and its keepers shall say to them, 'Did not apostles from amongst yourselves come to you to recite to you the signs of your Lord, and to warn you of the meeting of this day of yours?' They shall say, 'Yea, but the sentence of torment was due against the misbelievers
39|72|It shall be said, 'Enter ye the gates of hell, to dwell therein for aye! Hell is the resort of those who are too big with pride
39|73|But those who fear their Lord shall be driven to Paradise in troops; until they come there, its doors shall be opened, and its keepers shall say to them, 'Peace be upon you, ye have done well! so enter in to dwell for aye
39|74|and they shall say, ' Praise be to God, who hath made good His promise to us, and hath given us the earth to inherit! We establish ourselves in Paradise wherever we please; and goodly is the reward of those who work
39|75|And thou shalt see the angels circling round about the throne, celebrating the praise of their Lord; and it shall be decided between them in truth; and it shall be said, 'Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds
40|1|M
40|2|The sending down of the Book from God, the mighty, the knowing
40|3|the forgiver of sin and accepter of repentance, keen at punishment, longsuffering! there is no god but He! to whom the journey is
40|4|None wrangle concerning the signs of God but those who misbelieve; then let not their going to and fro in the cities deceive thee
40|5|The people of Noah before them called the prophets liars; and the confederates after them; and every nation schemed against their Apostle to catch him. And they wrangled with falsehood that they might refute the truth thereby, but I seized them, and how was my punishment
40|6|Thus was the sentence of thy Lord due against those who misbelieved, that they are the fellows of the Fire
40|7|Those who bear the throne and those around it celebrate the praise of their Lord, and believe in Him, and ask pardon for those who believe: 'Our Lord! thou dost embrace all things in mercy and knowledge, then pardon those who turn repentant and follow thy way, and guard them from the torment of hell
40|8|Our Lord! make them enter into gardens of Eden which thou hast promised to them, and to those who do well of their fathers, and their wives, and their seed; verily, thou art the mighty, the wise
40|9|and guard them from evil deeds, for he whom thou shalt guard from evil deeds on that day, thou wilt have had mercy on, and that is mighty bliss
40|10|Verily, those who misbelieve shall be cried out to, 'Surely, God's hatred is greater than your hatred of each other when ye were called unto the faith and misbelieved
40|11|They shall say, 'Our Lord! Thou hast killed us twice, and Thou hast quickened us twice; and we do confess our sins: is there then a way for getting out
40|12|That is because when God alone was proclaimed ye did disbelieve; but when partners were joined to Him ye did believe; but judgment belongs to God, the high, the great
40|13|He it is who shows you His signs, and sends down to you from heaven provision; but none is mindful except him who turns repentant
40|14|then call on God, being sincere in your religion to Him, averse although the misbelievers be
40|15|Exalted of degrees! The Lord of the throne! He throws the spirit by His bidding upon whom He will of His servants, to give warning of the day of meeting
40|16|The day when they shall be issuing forth, naught concerning them shall be hidden from God. Whose is the kingdom on that day?- God's, the one, the dominant
40|17|today shall every soul be recompensed for that which it has earned. There is no wrong today; verily, God is quick at reckoning up
40|18|And warn them of the day that approaches, when hearts are choking in the gullets; those who do wrong shall have no warm friend, and no intercessor who shall be obeyed
40|19|He knows the deceitful of eye and what men's breasts conceal
40|20|and God decides with truth; but those they call on beside Him do not decide at all: verily, God, He both hears and looks
40|21|Have, they not journeyed on in the earth and seen how was the end of those who journeyed on before them? They were stronger than them in might, and their vestiges are in the land, but God caught them up in their sins, and they had none to guard them against God
40|22|That is for that their apostles did come to them with manifest signs, and they misbelieved, and God caught them up; verily, He is mighty, keen to punish
40|23|And we did send Moses with our signs, and with obvious authority
40|24|unto Pharaoh and Haman and Qarun. They said, 'A lying sorcerer
40|25|and when they came to them with truth from us, they said, 'Kill the sons of those who believe with him, and let their women live!' but the stratagem of the misbelievers is only in error
40|26|And Pharaoh said, 'Let me kill Moses; and then let him call upon his Lord! verily, I fear that he will change your religion, or that he will cause evil doing to appear in the land
40|27|And Moses said, 'Verily, I take refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every one who is big with pride and believes not on the day of reckoning
40|28|And a believing man of Pharaoh's people, who concealed his faith, said, 'Will ye kill a man for saying, My Lord is God, when he has come to you with manifest signs from your Lord? and if he be a liar, against him is his lie; and if he be truthful, there will befall you somewhat of that which he threatens you; verily, God guides not him who is an extravagant liar
40|29|O my people! yours is the kingdom today, ye are eminent in the land, but who will help us against the violence of God, if it comes upon us?' Said Pharaoh, 'I will only show you what I see, and I will only guide you into the way of right direction
40|30|And he who believed said, 'O my people! verily, I fear for you the like of the day of the confederates
40|31|the like of the wont of the people of Noah and 'Ad and Haman, and of those after them; for God desires not injustice for His servants
40|32|O my people! verily, I fear for you the day of crying out
40|33|the day when ye shall turn your backs, fleeing, with no defender for you against God; for he whom God leads astray, for him there is no guide
40|34|And Joseph came to you before with manifest signs, but ye ceased not to doubt concerning what he brought you, until, when he perished, ye said, "God will not send after him an apostle;" thus does God lead astray him who is extravagant, a doubter
40|35|Those who wrangle concerning the signs of God without authority having come to them are greatly hated by God and by those who believe; thus does God set a stamp upon the heart of every tyrant too big with pride
40|36|And Pharaoh said, 'O Haman! build for me a tower, haply I may reach the tracts
40|37|the tracts of heaven, and may mount up to the God of Moses, for, verily, I think him a liar.' And thus was his evil deed made seemly to Pharaoh, and he was turned from the way; but Pharaoh's stratagem ended only in ruin
40|38|and he who believed said, 'O my people! follow me, I will guide you to the way of the right direction
40|39|O my people! verily, the life of this world is but a provision, but, verily, the hereafter, that is the abode of stability
40|40|Whoso does evil, he shall only be recompensed with the like thereof , and whoso does right, be it male or female and a believer, these shall enter into Paradise; they shall be provided therein without count
40|41|O my people! why should I call you to salvation, and you call me to the fire
40|42|Ye call on me to disbelieve in God, and to join with Him what I have no knowledge of; but I call you to the mighty forgiving One
40|43|no doubt that what ye call me to, ought not to be called on in this world or in the hereafter, and that we shall be sent back to God, and that the extravagant, they are the fellows of the Fire
40|44|But ye shall remember what I say to you; and I entrust my affair to God, verily, God looks upon His servants
40|45|And God guarded him from the evils of what they plotted, and there closed in upon Pharaoh evil woe
40|46|The fire - they shall be exposed to it morning and evening; and 'on the day the Hour shall arise,' enter, O people of Pharaoh! into the keenest torment
40|47|And when they argue together in the fire, and the weak say to those who were big with pride, 'Verily, we were followers of yours, can ye then avail us against a portion of the fire
40|48|Those who were big with pride shall say, 'Verily, we are all in it; verily, God has judged between His servants
40|49|And those who are in the fire shall say unto the keepers of hell, 'Call upon your Lord to lighten from us one day of the torment
40|50|They shall say, 'Did not your apostles come to you with manifest signs?' They shall say, 'Yea!' They shall say, 'Then call!- but the call of the misbelievers is only in error
40|51|Verily, we will help our apostles, and those who believe, in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses shall stand up
40|52|the day when their excuse shall not avail the unjust; but for them is the curse, and for them is an evil abode
40|53|And we did give Moses the guidance; and we made the children of Israel to inherit the Book
40|54|as a guidance and a reminder to those endowed with minds
40|55|Be thou patient, then; verily, God's promise is true: and ask thou forgiveness for thy sins, and celebrate the praise of thy Lord in the evening and in the morn
40|56|Verily, those who wrangle concerning the signs of God without authority having come to them, there is naught in their breasts but pride; but they shall not attain it: do thou then seek refuge in God; verily, He both hears and looks
40|57|Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of man: but most men know it not
40|58|The blind and the seeing shall not be deemed alike, nor those who believe and do right and the evildoer; little is it that they remember
40|59|Verily, the Hour will surely come; there is no doubt therein; but most men do not believe
40|60|And your Lord said, 'Call upon me, I will answer you; verily, those who are too big with pride to worship shall enter into hell, shrinking up
40|61|God it is who has made for you the night to repose therein, and the day to see by; verily, God is Lord of grace to men, but most men give no thanks
40|62|There is God for you! your Lord the creator of everything! there is no god but He, how then can ye lie
40|63|Thus did those lie who gainsaid the signs of God
40|64|God it is who has made for you the earth as a resting-place, and a heaven as building, and has formed you and made excellent your forms; and has provided you with good things! there is God for you!- your Lord! then blessed be God, the Lord of the worlds
40|65|He is the living One, there is no god but He! then call on Him, being sincere in your religion to Him; praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds
40|66|Say, 'Verily, I am forbidden to serve those whom ye call on beside God, since there have come to me manifest signs from my Lord, and I am bidden to be resigned unto the Lord of the worlds
40|67|He it is who created you from the earth, then from a clot, then from congealed blood, then He brings you forth a child; then ye reach to puberty; then do ye become old men,- though of you there are some who are taken away before,- that ye may reach an appointed time, and haply ye may have some sense
40|68|He it is who quickens and kills, and when He decrees a matter, then He only says to it, 'BE,' and it is
40|69|Hast thou not seen those who wrangle concerning the signs of God how they are turned away
40|70|Those who call the Book, and what we have sent our apostles with, a lie, soon shall they know
40|71|when the fetters are on their necks and the chains, as they are dragged
40|72|into hell!- then in the fire shall they be baked
40|73|Then it shall be said to them, 'Where is what ye did associate
40|74|beside God?' They shall say, 'They have strayed away from us; nay, we did not call before upon anything!' - thus does God lead the misbelievers astray
40|75|There! for 'that ye did rejoice in the land without right; and for that ye did exult
40|76|enter ye the gates of hell, to dwell therein for aye; for evil is the resort of those who are too big with pride
40|77|But be thou patient; verily, the promise of God is true; and whether we show thee a part of what we promised them, or whether we surely take thee to ourself, unto us shall they be returned
40|78|And we did send apostles before thee: of them are some whose stories we have related to thee, and of them are some whose stories we have not related to thee; and no apostle might ever bring a sign except by the permission of God; but when God's bidding came it was decided with truth, and there were those lost who deemed it vain
40|79|God it is who has made for you cattle, that ye may ride on some of them;- and of them ye eat
40|80|and ye have in them advantages;- and that ye may attain thereon a want which is in your breasts; upon them and upon ships are ye borne
40|81|He shows you His signs; which sign then of your Lord do ye deny
40|82|Have they not journeyed on in the land and seen how was the end of those before them, who were more numerous than they and stronger in might, and in their vestiges which are still in the land? but of no avail to them was that which they had earned
40|83|And when there came to them their apostles with manifest signs they rejoiced in what knowledge they had; but there closed in upon them that whereat they had mocked
40|84|And when they saw our violence they said, 'We believe in God alone, and we disbelieve in what we once associated with Him
40|85|But their faith was of no avail to them when they saw our violence - the course of God with His servants in time past, and there the misbelievers lose
41|1|M
41|2|A revelation from the merciful, the compassionate
41|3|a book whose signs are detailed; an Arabic Qur'an for a people who do know
41|4|a herald of glad tidings and a warning. But most of them turn aside and do not hear
41|5|and say, 'Our hearts are veiled from what thou dost call us to, and in our ears is dullness, and between us and thee there is a veil. Act thou; verily, we are acting too
41|6|Say, 'I am but a mortal like yourselves, I am inspired that your God is one God; then go straight to Him, and ask forgiveness of Him; and woe to the idolaters
41|7|who give not alms, and in the hereafter disbelieve
41|8|Verily, those who believe and do right, for them is a hire that is not grudged
41|9|Say, 'What! do ye really misbelieve in Him who created the earth in two days, and do ye make peers for Him?- that is the Lord of the worlds
41|10|And He placed thereon firm mountains above it and blessed it, and apportioned therein its foods in four days alike for those who ask
41|11|Then He made for the heaven and it was but smoke, and He said to it and to the earth, 'Come, ye two, whether ye will or no!' They said, 'We come willingly
41|12|And He decreed them seven heavens in two days, and inspired every heaven with its bidding: and we adorned the lower heaven with lamps and guardian angels; that is the decree of the mighty, the knowing One
41|13|But if they turn aside, then say, 'I have warned you of a thunder-clap like the thunder-clap of 'Ad and Thamud
41|14|when their apostles came to them from before them and from behind them (saying), "Serve ye none but God."' They said, 'If our Lord pleased He would send down angels; so we in what ye are sent with disbelieve
41|15|And as for 'Ad, they were big with pride in the land, without right, and said, 'Who is stronger than us in might?' Did they not see that God who created them He was stronger than they in might? But they did gainsay our signs
41|16|And we sent upon them a cold blast in unfortunate days, that we might make them taste the torment of disgrace in the life of this world;- but the torment of the hereafter is more disgraceful, and they shall not be helped
41|17|And as for Thamud we guided them; but they preferred blindness to guidance, and the thunder-clap of the torment of abasement caught them for what they had earned
41|18|but we saved those who believed and who did fear
41|19|And the day when the enemies of God shall be gathered together into the fire, marshalled along
41|20|until when they come to it, their hearing and their eyesight and their skins shall bear witness against them of that which they have done
41|21|And they shall say to their skins, 'Why have ye borne witness against us?' they shall say, 'God gave us speech who has given speech to everything; He created you at first, and unto Him shall ye be returned
41|22|and ye could not conceal yourselves that your hearing and your eyesight should not be witness against you, nor your skins; but ye thought that God did not know much of what ye do
41|23|And that thought of yours which ye thought concerning your Lord has destroyed you, and ye have now become of those who lose
41|24|And if they are patient, still the fire is a resort for them; and if they ask for favour again, they shall not be taken into favour
41|25|We will allot to them mates, for they have made seemly to them what was before them and what was behind them; and due against them was the sentence on the nations who passed away before them; both of ginns and of mankind; verily, they were the losers
41|26|Those who misbelieve say, 'Listen not to this Qur'an, but talk foolishly about it, haply ye may gain the upper hand
41|27|But we will make those who misbelieve taste keen torment; and we will recompense them with the worst of that which they have done
41|28|That is, the recompense of the enemies of God,- the fire! for them is an eternal abode therein: a recompense for that they did gainsay our signs
41|29|And those who misbelieved say, 'Our Lord, show us those who have led us astray amongst the ginns and mankind; we will place them beneath our feet, and they shall both be amongst those who are put down
41|30|Verily, those who say, 'Our Lord is God,' and then go straight, the angels descend upon them - 'fear not and be not grieved, but receive the glad tidings of Paradise which ye were promised
41|31|we are your patrons in the life of this world and in the next, and ye shall have therein what your souls desire, and ye shall have therein what ye call for
41|32|an entertainment from the forgiving, the merciful
41|33|And who speaks better than he who calls to God and does right, and says, 'Verily, I am of those resigned
41|34|Good and evil shall not be deemed alike; repel (evil) with what is best, and lo! He between whom and thyself was enmity is as though he were a warm patron
41|35|But none shall meet with it save those who are patient; and none shall meet with it save those who are endowed with mighty good fortune
41|36|And if an incitement from the devil incites you, then seek refuge in God; verily, He both hears and knows
41|37|And of His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Adore ye not the sun, neither the moon; but adore God who created you, if it be Him ye serve
41|38|But if they be too big with pride - yet those who are with thy Lord celebrate His praises by night and day, and they are never weary
41|39|And of His signs (is this), that thou mayest see the earth drooping, and when we send down water upon it it stirs and swells; verily, He who quickens it will surely quicken the dead; verily, He is mighty over all
41|40|Verily, those who are inclined to oppose our signs are not hidden from us. Is he who is cast into the fire better, or he who comes safe on the resurrection day? Do what ye will: verily, He on what ye do doth look
41|41|Verily, those who misbelieve in the reminder when it comes to them - and, verily, it is a glorious Book
41|42|falsehood shall not come to it, from before it, nor from behind it - a revelation from the wise, the praiseworthy One
41|43|Naught is said to thee but what was said to the apostles before thee, 'Verily, thy Lord is Lord of forgiveness and Lord of grievous torment
41|44|And had we made it a foreign Qur'an, they would have said, 'Unless its signs be detailed. .. . What! foreign and Arabic?' Say, 'It is, for those who believe, a guidance and a healing. But those who believe not, in their ears is dullness, and it is blindness to them; these are called to from a far-off place
41|45|And we gave Moses the Book, and it was disputed about; but had it not been for thy Lord's word already passed it would have been decided between them, for, verily, they were in hesitating doubt thereon
41|46|Whoso does right it is for his soul, and whoso does evil it is against it, for thy Lord is not unjust towards His servants
41|47|To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour: and no fruits come forth from their husks, and no female conceives, or is delivered, save with His knowledge. And the day when He shall call to them, 'Where are the partners ye did join with me
41|48|they shall say, 'We do own to thee there is no witness amongst us!' and that on which they used to call before shall stray away from them, and they shall think there is no escape for them
41|49|Man is never tired of praying for good, but if evil touch him, then he is despairing and hopeless
41|50|But if we make him taste mercy from us after distress has touched him he will surely say, 'This is for me, and I do not think the Hour is imminent; and if I be brought back to my Lord, verily, I shall surely have good with Him;' but we will inform those who misbelieve of what they have done, and we will surely make them taste wretched torment
41|51|And when we have been gracious to man, he turns away and goes aside; but when evil touches him he is one of copious prayer
41|52|Say, 'Let us see now! if it be from God and ye disbelieve in it, who is more in error than he who is in a remote schism
41|53|We will show them our signs in the regions and in themselves, until it is plain to them that it is the truth. Is it not enough for thy Lord that He is witness over all
41|54|Ay, verily, they are in doubt about the meeting of their Lord! Ay, verily, He encompasses all
42|1|M
42|2|Q
42|3|Thus does God, the mighty, the wise, inspire thee and those before thee
42|4|His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and He is the high, the mighty
42|5|The heavens well-nigh cleave asunder from above them; and the angels celebrate the praises of their Lord, and ask forgiveness for those who are on the earth. Ay, verily, God, He is the forgiving and merciful
42|6|but those who take beside Him patrons, God watches over them, and thou hast not charge over them
42|7|Thus have we revealed an Arabic Qur'an, that thou mayest warn the Mother of cities and all around it; and warn them of a day of gathering, there is no doubt therein;- a part in Paradise and a part in the blaze
42|8|But had God pleased He would have made them one nation; but He makes whom He will enter into His mercy; and the unjust have neither patron nor help
42|9|Do they take other patrons besides Him, when God He is the patron, and He quickens the dead and He is mighty over all
42|10|But whatsoever ye dispute about, the judgment of it is God's. There is God for you!- my Lord! upon Him do I rely, and unto Him I turn repentant
42|11|The originator of the heavens and the earth, He has made for you from yourselves wives; and of the cattle mates; producing you thereby. There is naught like Him, for He both hears and sees
42|12|His are the keys of the heavens and the earth, He extends provision to whom He will, or doles it out; verily, He knows everything
42|13|He has enjoined upon you for religion what He prescribed to Noah and what we inspired thee with, and what we inspired Abraham and Moses and Jesus,- to be steadfast in religion, and not to part into sects therein - a great thing to the idolaters is that which ye call them to! God elects for Himself whom He pleases and guides unto Himself him who turns repentant
42|14|But they did not part into sects until after the knowledge had come to them, through mutual envy; and had it not been for thy Lord's word already passed for an appointed time, it would surely have been decided between them; but, verily, those who have been given the Book as an inheritance after them, are in hesitating doubt concerning it
42|15|Wherefore call thou, and go straight on as thou art bidden, and follow not their lusts; and say, 'I believe in the Book which God has sent down; and I am bidden to judge justly between you. God is our Lord and your Lord; we have our works and ye have your works; there is no argument between us and you. God will assemble us together and unto Him the journey is
42|16|But those who argue about God after it has been assented to, their arguments shall be rebutted before their Lord; and upon them shall be wrath, and for them shall be keen torment
42|17|God it is who has sent down the Book with truth, and the balance; and what shall make thee know whether haply the Hour be nigh
42|18|Those who believe not would hurry it on; and those who believe shrink with terror at it and know that it is true. Ay, verily, those who dispute concerning the Hour are in remote error
42|19|God is kind to His servants; He Provides whom He will, and He is the mighty, the glorious
42|20|He who wishes for the tilth of the next world, we will increase for him the tilth; and he who desires the tilth of this world, we will give him thereof: but in the next he shall have no portion
42|21|Have they associates who have enjoined any religion on them which God permits not?- but were it not for the word of decision it would have been decreed to them. Verily, the unjust,- for them is grievous woe
42|22|Thou shalt see the unjust shrink with terror from what they have gained as it falls upon them; and those who believe and do right, in meads of Paradise, they shall have what they please with their Lord;- that is great grace
42|23|That is what God gives glad tidings of to His servants who believe and do righteous acts. Say, 'I do not ask for it a hire - only the love of my kinsfolk.' And he who gains a good action we will increase good for him thereby; verily, God is forgiving and grateful
42|24|Or will they say he has forged against God a lie? But if God pleased He could set a seal upon thy heart; but God will blot out falsehood and verify truth by His word; verily, He knows the nature of men's breasts
42|25|He it is who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons their offences and knows that which ye do
42|26|And He answers the prayer of those who believe and do right, and gives them increase of His grace; but the misbelievers,- for them is keen torment
42|27|And if God were to extend provision to His servants they would be wanton in the earth. But He sends down by measure what He pleases; verily, of His servants He is well aware and sees
42|28|He it is who sends down the rain after they have despaired; and disperses His mercy, for He is the praiseworthy patron
42|29|And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and what He hath spread abroad therein of beasts; and He is able to collect them when He will
42|30|And what misfortunes befall you it is for what your hands have earned; but He pardons much
42|31|yet ye cannot make Him helpless in the earth, nor have ye, besides God, either a patron or a helper
42|32|And of His signs are the ships that sail like mountains in the sea
42|33|If He will, He calms the wind, and they become motionless on the back thereof: verily, in that are signs to every patient, grateful person
42|34|or He makes them founder for what they have earned; but He pardons much
42|35|But let those who wrangle about our signs know that they shall have no escape
42|36|And whatever ye are given it is but a provision of the life of this world; but what is with God is better and more lasting for those who believe and who upon their Lord rely
42|37|and those who avoid great sins and abominations, and who when they are wroth forgive
42|38|and who assent to their Lord, and are steadfast in prayer, and whose affairs go by counsel amongst themselves, and who of what we have bestowed on them give alms
42|39|and who, when wrong befalls them, help themselves
42|40|For the recompence of evil is evil like unto it; but he who pardons and does well, then his reward is with God; verily, He loves not the unjust
42|41|And he who helps himself after he has been wronged, for these - there is no way against them
42|42|The way is only against those who wrong men and are wanton in the earth without right; these - for them is grievous woe
42|43|But surely he who is patient and forgives,- verily, that is a determined affair
42|44|But whomsoever God leads astray he has no patron after Him; and thou mayest see the unjust when they see the torment say, 'Is there no way to avert this
42|45|and thou mayest see them exposed to it, humbled with abasement, looking with a stealthy glance. And those who believe shall say, 'Verily the losers are they who have lost themselves and their family's too upon the resurrection day!' Ay, verily, the unjust are in lasting torment
42|46|And they shall have no patrons to help them beside God, and whomsoever God leads astray, there is no way for him
42|47|Assent to your Lord before the day comes of which there is no averting from God; there is no refuge for you on that day; and for you there is no denial
42|48|But if they turn aside, we have not sent thee to them as a guardian, thou hast only thy message to preach. And, verily, when we have made man taste of mercy from us he rejoices therein; but if there befall them an evil for what their hands have done before - then, verily, man is ungrateful
42|49|God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, He creates what He pleases, He grants to whom He pleases females, and He grants to whom He pleases males, or He gives them in pairs, males and females
42|50|and He makes whom He pleases barren; verily, He is knowing, powerful
42|51|It is not for any mortal that God should speak to him, except by inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by sending an apostle and inspiring, by His permission, what He pleases; verily, He is high and wise
42|52|And thus have we inspired thee by a spirit at our bidding; thou didst not know what the Book was, nor the faith: but we made it a light whereby we guide whom we will of our servants. And, verily, thou shalt surely be guided into the right way
42|53|the way of God, whose is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Ay, to God affairs do tend
43|1|M
43|2|By the perspicuous Book
43|3|verily, we have made it an Arabic Qur'an; haply ye will have some sense
43|4|And it is in the Mother of the Book with us,- high and wise
43|5|Shall we then push aside from you the Reminder, because ye are a people who are extravagant
43|6|How many prophets have we sent amongst those of yore
43|7|and there never came to them a prophet but they did mock at him
43|8|then we destroyed them - more valiant than these; and the example of those of yore passed away
43|9|And if thou shouldst ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will surely say, 'The mighty, the knowing One created them
43|10|who made for you the earth a couch and placed for you therein roads, haply ye may be guided
43|11|and who sent down from the heaven water in due measure; and we raised up thereby a dead country; thus shall ye too be brought forth
43|12|and who has created all species; and has made for you the ships and the cattle whereon to ride
43|13|that ye may settle yourselves on their backs; then remember the favour of your Lord when ye settled thereon, and say, 'Celebrated be the praises of Him who hath subjected this to us! We could not have got this ourselves
43|14|and, verily, unto our Lord shall we return
43|15|Yet they make for Him of His servants offspring; verily, man is surely obviously ungrateful
43|16|Has He taken of what He creates daughters, and chosen sons for you
43|17|Yet when the tidings are given any one of that which he strikes out as a similitude for the Merciful One, his face grows black and he is choked
43|18|What! one brought up amongst ornaments, and who is always in contention without obvious cause
43|19|And have they made the angels, who are the servants of the Merciful One, females? Were they witnesses of their creation? their witness shall be written down, and they shall be questioned
43|20|and they say, 'Had the Merciful pleased we should never have worshipped them.' They have no knowledge of that, they only conjecture
43|21|Have we given them a book before it to which they might hold
43|22|Nay; they say, 'We found our fathers (agreed) upon a religion, and, verily, we are guided by their traces
43|23|Thus, too, did we never send before thee to a city any warner, but the affluent ones thereof said, 'Verily, we found our fathers (agreed) upon a religion, and, verily, we are led by their traces
43|24|Say, 'What! if I come to you with what is a better guide than what ye found your fathers agreed upon?' and they will say, 'Verily, we, in what ye are sent with disbelieve
43|25|Then we took vengeance on them, and see how was the end of those who called the (apostles) liars
43|26|When Abraham said to his father and his people, 'Verily, I am clear of all that ye serve
43|27|except Him who created me; for, verily, He will guide me
43|28|and he made it a word remaining among his posterity, that haply they might return
43|29|Nay; but I let these (Meccans) and their fathers have enjoyment until the truth came to them, and an apostle
43|30|And when the truth came to them they said, 'This is magic, and we therein do disbelieve
43|31|And they say, 'Unless this Qur'an were sent down to a man great in the two cities
43|32|Is it they who distribute the mercy of thy Lord? We distribute amongst them their livelihood in the life of this world, and we exalt some of them above others in degrees, that some may take others into subjection; but the mercy of thy Lord is better than that which they amass
43|33|And but that men would then have been one nation, we would have made for those who misbelieve in the Merciful One roofs of silver for their houses, and steps up thereto which they might mount
43|34|and to their houses doors, and bedsteads on which they might recline
43|35|and gilding,- for, verily, all that is a provision of the life of this world, but the hereafter is better with thy Lord for those who fear
43|36|And whosoever turns from the reminder of the Merciful One, we will chain to him a devil, who shall be his mate
43|37|and, verily these shall turn them from the path while they reckon that they are guided
43|38|until when he comes to us he shall say, 'O, would that between me and thee there were the distance of the two orients, for an evil mate (art thou)
43|39|But it shall not avail you on that day, since ye were unjust; verily, in the torment shall ye share
43|40|What! canst thou make the deaf to hear, or guide the blind, or him who is in obvious error
43|41|Whether then we take thee off we will surely take vengeance on them
43|42|or whether we show thee that which we have promised them; for, verily, we have power over them
43|43|Say, 'Dost thou hold to what is inspired thee?' verily, thou art in the right way
43|44|and, verily, it is a reminder to thee and to thy people, but in the end they shall be asked
43|45|And ask those whom we have sent before thee amongst the prophets, 'Did we make gods beside the Merciful One for them to serve
43|46|We did send Moses with our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs, and he said, 'Verily, I am the apostle of the Lord of the worlds
43|47|but when he came to them with our signs, lo, they laughed at them
43|48|And we did not show them a sign, but it was greater than its fellow; and we seized them with the torment, haply they might turn
43|49|And they said, 'O thou magician! pray for us to thy Lord, as He has engaged with thee: verily, we are guided
43|50|And when we removed from them the torment, behold they broke their word
43|51|And Pharaoh proclaimed amongst his people; said he, 'O my people! is not the kingdom of Egypt mine? and these rivers that flow beneath me? What! can ye then not see
43|52|Am I better than this fellow, who is contemptible, who can hardly explain himself
43|53|Unless then bracelets of gold be cast upon him, or there come with him angels as his mates
43|54|And he taught his people levity; and they obeyed him: verily, they were an abominable people
43|55|And when they had annoyed us we took vengeance on them, and we drowned them all together
43|56|and we made them a precedent and an example to those after them
43|57|And when the son of Mary was set forth as a parable, behold thy people turned away from him
43|58|and said, 'Are our gods better, or is he?' They did not set it forth to thee save for wrangling. Nay, but they are a contentious people
43|59|He is but a servant whom we have been gracious to, and we have made him an example for the children of Israel
43|60|And if we please we can make of you angels in the earth to succeed you
43|61|And, verily, he is a sign of the Hour. Doubt not then concerning it, but follow this right way
43|62|and let not the devil turn you away; verily, he is to you an open foe
43|63|And when Jesus came with manifest signs he said, 'I am come to you with wisdom, and I will explain to you something of that whereon ye did dispute, then fear God, obey me
43|64|verily, God, He is my Lord and your Lord, serve Him then, this is the right way
43|65|But the confederates disputed amongst themselves; and woe to those who are unjust from the torment of a grievous day
43|66|Do they expect aught but that the Hour will come upon them suddenly while they do not perceive
43|67|Friends on that day shall be foes to each other, save those who fear
43|68|O my servants! there is no fear for you on that day; nor shall ye be grieved
43|69|who believe in our signs and who are resigned
43|70|Enter ye into Paradise, ye and your wives, happy
43|71|Dishes of gold and pitchers shall be sent round to them; therein is what souls desire, and eyes shall be delighted, and ye therein shall dwell for aye
43|72|for that is Paradise which ye are given as an inheritance for that which ye have done
43|73|Therein shall ye have much fruit whereof to eat
43|74|Verily, the sinners are in the torment of hell to dwell for aye
43|75|It shall not be intermitted for them, and they therein shall be confused
43|76|We have not wronged them, but it was themselves they wronged
43|77|And they shall cry out, 'O Malik! let thy lord make an end of us;' he shall say, 'Verily, ye are to tarry here
43|78|We have brought you the truth, but most of you are averse from the truth
43|79|Have they arranged the affair? then will we arrange it too
43|80|Or do they reckon that we did not hear their secrets and their whispering? Nay, but our messengers are with them writing down
43|81|Say, 'If the Merciful One has a son then am I the first to worship him
43|82|Celebrated be the praise of the Lord of the heavens and the earth! the Lord of the throne, above all they attribute to Him
43|83|But leave them to ponder and to play until they meet that day of theirs which they are promised
43|84|He it is who is in the heaven a God and in the earth a God! and He is the wise, the knowing
43|85|And blessed be he whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and what is between both, and His is the knowledge of the Hour, and unto Him shall ye be brought back
43|86|And those they call on beside Him shall not possess intercession except those only who bear witness for the truth and who do know
43|87|And if thou shouldst ask them who created them they shall surely say, 'God!' How then can they lie
43|88|And what he says, 'O Lord, verily, these are a people who do not believe
43|89|shun them then and say, "Peace!" for they at length shall know
44|1|M
44|2|By the perspicuous Book
44|3|verily, we have sent it down on a blessed night;- verily, we had given warning
44|4|wherein is decided every wise affair
44|5|as an order from us. Verily, we were sending (apostles)
44|6|a mercy from thy Lord; verily, He both hears and knows
44|7|from the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between the two, if ye were but sure
44|8|There is no god but He, He quickens and He kills - your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of yore
44|9|Nay, they in doubt do play
44|10|But expect thou the day when the heaven shall bring obvious smoke
44|11|to cover men - this is grievous torment
44|12|Our Lord! remove from us the torment; verily, we are believers
44|13|How can they have the reminder (now), when they have had a plain apostle
44|14|and when they turned their backs away from him and said, 'Taught! mad
44|15|Verily, we will remove the torment a little, (but) ye will surely return
44|16|On the day when we will assault with the great assault, verily, we will take vengeance
44|17|And we already tried the people of Pharaoh when there came to them a noble apostle
44|18|Send back to me God's servants; verily, I am to you a faithful apostle
44|19|and, 'Exalt not yourselves above God; verily, I come to you with obvious authority
44|20|And, verily, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord, that ye stone me not
44|21|And if ye believe not in me then let me alone
44|22|Then he called upon his Lord, 'Verily, these are a sinful people
44|23|So journey with my servants by night - verily, ye will be pursued
44|24|But leave the sea in quiet - verily, they are a host to be drowned
44|25|How many gardens and springs have they left
44|26|and corn lands and a noble place
44|27|and comfort wherein they did enjoy themselves
44|28|Thus - and we gave them for an inheritance to another people
44|29|And the heaven wept not for them, nor the earth, nor were they respited
44|30|But we saved the children of Israel from shameful woe
44|31|from Pharaoh; verily, he was haughty, one of the extravagant
44|32|And we did choose them, wittingly, above the worlds
44|33|and we gave them signs wherein was an obvious trial
44|34|Verily, these say
44|35|It is but our first death
44|36|so bring our fathers, if ye do speak the truth
44|37|Are they better than the people of Tubbah, and those before them? We destroyed them - verily, they were sinners
44|38|Nor did we create the heavens and the earth, and what is between the two in sport
44|39|we did but create them in truth, though most of them know it not
44|40|Verily, the day of separation is their appointed term
44|41|the day when master shall not avail client at all, nor shall they be helped
44|42|save whomsoever God shall have mercy on; verily, He is the mighty, the merciful
44|43|Verily, the Zaqqum tree
44|44|(shall be) the food of the sinful
44|45|as it were melting, shall it boil in their bellies
44|46|like the boiling of hot water
44|47|Take him and hale him into the midst of hell
44|48|then pour over his head the torment of hot water
44|49|Taste! verily, thou art the mighty, the honourable
44|50|Verily, this is that whereon ye did dispute
44|51|Verily, the pious shall be in a safe place
44|52|in gardens and springs
44|53|they shall be clad in satin and stout silk face to face
44|54|Thus!- and we will wed them to bright and large-eyed maids
44|55|They shall call therein for every fruit in safety
44|56|They shall not taste therein of death save their first death, and we will keep them from the torment of hell
44|57|Grace from thy Lord, that is the grand bliss
44|58|And we have only made it easy for thy tongue, that haply they may be mindful
44|59|Then watch thou; verily, they are watching too
45|1|M
45|2|A revelation of the Book from God, the mighty, the wise
45|3|Verily, in the heavens and the earth are signs to those who believe
45|4|and in your creation and the beasts that are spread abroad are signs to a people who are sure
45|5|and in the alternation of night and day, and the provision that God has sent down from heaven and quickened thereby the earth after its death, and in the veering of the winds are signs unto a people who have sense
45|6|These are the signs of God which we recite to thee in truth; and in what new story after God and His signs will they believe
45|7|Woe to every sinful liar
45|8|who hears God's signs sent to him, then persists in being big with pride as though he heard them not - so give him the glad-tidings of grievous woe
45|9|and when he knows something of our signs takes them for a jest! These,- for them is shameful woe
45|10|behind them is hell, and what they have earned shall not avail them aught, nor what they have taken besides God for patrons; and for them is mighty woe
45|11|This is a guidance, and those who misbelieve in the signs of their Lord, for them is torment of a grievous plague
45|12|God it is who subjects to you the sea that the ships may sail thereon at his bidding, and that ye may crave of His grace, and that haply ye may give thanks
45|13|and He has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth,- all from Him; verily, in that are signs unto a people who reflect
45|14|Say to those who believe that they pardon those who hope not for God's days, that He may reward a people for that which they have earned
45|15|Whosoever acts aright it is for his own soul, and whosoever does evil it is against it; then unto your Lord shall ye be returned
45|16|And we did bring the children of Israel the Book and judgment and prophecy, and we provided them with good things, and preferred them above the worlds
45|17|And we brought them manifest proofs of the affair, and they disputed not until after knowledge had come to them, through mutual envy. Verily, thy Lord will decide between them on the resurrection day concerning that whereon they did dispute
45|18|Then we did set thee over a law concerning the affair: follow it then, and follow not the lusts of those who do not know
45|19|Verily, they shall not avail thee against God at all; and, verily, the wrong-doers are patrons of each other, but God is the patron of those who fear
45|20|This is an insight for men and a guidance and a mercy to a people who are sure
45|21|Do those who commit evil deeds count that we will make them like those who, believe and work righteous deeds, equal in their life and their death?- ill it is they judge
45|22|And God created the heavens and the earth in truth; and every soul shall be recompensed for that which it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
45|23|Hast thou considered him who takes his lusts for his god, and God leads him astray wittingly, and has set a seal upon his hearing and his heart, and has placed upon his eyesight dimness? who then shall guide him after God? Will they not then mind
45|24|They say, 'It is only our life in this world, we die and we live, and naught destroys us but time!' But they have no knowledge of this; they do but suspect
45|25|And when our signs are rehearsed to them with evidences their only argument is to say, 'Bring our fathers, if ye speak the truth
45|26|Say, 'God quickens you, then He kills you, then He will gather you unto the resurrection day, there is no doubt therein; but most men do not know
45|27|God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and on the day when the Hour shall arise on that day shall those who call it vain be losers
45|28|And thou shalt see each nation kneeling, each nation summoned to its book, 'Today are ye rewarded for that which ye have done
45|29|This is our Book that speaketh to you with truth; verily, we have written down what ye have done
45|30|But as to those who believe and do righteous deeds their Lord will make them enter into His mercy, that is the obvious bliss
45|31|And as for those who misbelieve,- were not my signs recited to you and ye were too big with pride and ye were a sinful people
45|32|And when it was said, 'Verily, the promise of God is true, and the Hour there is no doubt therein;' ye said, 'We know not what the Hour is, we only suspect, and we are not sure
45|33|But there shall appear to them the evils of what they have done, and that shall encompass them at which they have been mocking
45|34|And it shall be said, 'Today will we forget you as ye forgat the meeting of this day of yours, and your resort shall be the fire, and ye shall have no helpers
45|35|That is because ye took the signs of God for a jest and the life of this world deceived you; wherefore today ye shall not be brought forth therefrom, neither shall ye be taken back into favour
45|36|God's then is the praise, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, the Lord of the worlds
45|37|His is the grandeur in the heavens and the earth, and He is the mighty and the wise
46|1|M
46|2|The revelation of the Book from God the mighty, the wise
46|3|We have only created the heavens and the earth and what is between the two in truth and for an appointed time; but those who misbelieve from being warned do turn aside
46|4|Say, 'Have ye considered what ye call on beside God?' Show me what they have created of the earth? or have they share in the heavens? Bring me a book before this or a vestige of knowledge, if ye do tell the truth
46|5|But who is more in error than he who calls beside God on what will never answer him until the resurrection day and who are heedless of their calling
46|6|and when men are gathered together are enemies of theirs and do deny their service
46|7|And when our evident signs are recited to them, those who misbelieve say of the truth when it comes to them, 'This is obvious magic
46|8|Or do they say, 'He has forged it?' Say, 'If I have forged ye cannot obtain for me aught from God; He knows best what ye utter concerning it; He is witness enough between me and you, and He is the forgiving, the merciful
46|9|Say, 'I am not an innovator among the apostles; nor do I know what will be done with me or with you if I follow aught but what I am inspired with; nor am I aught but a plain warner
46|10|Say, 'Have ye considered, if it is from God and ye have disbelieved therein, and a witness from the children of Israel testifies to the conformity of it, and he believes while ye are too big with pride? Verily, God guides not the unjust people
46|11|And those who misbelieve say of those who believe, 'If it had been good, they would not have been beforehand with us therein;' and when they are not guided thereby, then will they say, 'This is an old-fashioned lie
46|12|But before it was the Book of Moses, a model and a mercy; and this is a book confirming it in Arabic language, to warn those who do wrong and as glad tidings to those who do well
46|13|Verily, those who say, 'Our Lord is God,' and then keep straight, there is no fear for them, and they shall not be grieved
46|14|These are the fellows of Paradise to dwell therein for aye, a recompence for that which they have done
46|15|We have prescribed for man kindness towards his parents. His mother bore him with trouble and brought him forth with trouble; and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months; until, when he reaches puberty, and reaches forty years, he says, 'Lord! stir me up that I may be thankful for thy favours wherewith thou hast favoured me and my parents; and that I may do right to please Thee; and make it right for me in my offspring; verily, I turn repentant unto Thee, and, verily, I am of those resigned
46|16|There are those from whom we accept the best of what they have done, and we pass over their offences - amongst the fellows of Paradise; the promise of truth which they have been promised
46|17|But he who says to his parents, 'Fie upon you! Do ye promise me that I shall be brought forth when generations have passed away before me?' - then shall they both cry to God for help. Woe to thee! Believe! Verily, the promise of God is true. Then says he, 'This is but old folks' tales
46|18|There are those against whom the sentence was due amongst the nations who have passed away before them of ginns and men; verily, they have been the losers
46|19|and for all are degrees of what they have done, so that He may repay them their works, and they shall not be wronged
46|20|And the day when those who misbelieve shall be exposed to the fire: 'Ye made away with your good things in your worldly life, and ye enjoyed them; wherefore today shall ye be rewarded with the torment of disgrace, for that ye were big with pride in the earth without the right, and for that ye did abomination
46|21|Remember too the brother of 'Ad when he warned his people at El A'hqaf,- though warners have passed away before him and after him,- 'Serve not other than God; verily, I fear for you the torment of a mighty day
46|22|They said, 'Hast thou come to us to turn us from our gods? then bring us what thou dost threaten us with, if thou art of those who speak the truth
46|23|Said he, 'Knowledge is only with God: but I will preach to you that which I am sent with, though I see you are a people who are ignorant
46|24|And when they saw a traversing cloud approaching their valleys they said, 'This is a cloud to give us rain.' 'Nay, but it is what ye sought to hasten on - a wind in which is grievous torment
46|25|it will destroy everything at the order of its Lord!' And in the morning naught was seen save their dwellings. Thus do we reward the sinful people
46|26|We had established them in what we have established you, and we made for them hearing and eyesight and hearts; but neither their hearing nor their eyesight nor their hearts availed them aught, since they did gainsay the signs of God, and that encompassed them whereat they had mocked
46|27|And we destroyed the cities that are around you:- and we turned about the signs that haply they might return
46|28|Why did not those help them, whom beside God they took for gods that could draw nigh to Him? Nay! they strayed away from them; for that was their lie and what they had forced
46|29|And when we turned towards thee some of the ginn listening to the Qur'an, and when they were present at (the reading of) it, they said, 'Be silent!' and when it was over they turned back to their people, warning them
46|30|Said they, 'O our people! verily, we have heard a book sent down after Moses, verifying what came before it, guiding to the truth, and unto the right way
46|31|O our people! respond to God's crier and believe in Him, and He will pardon you your sins and will deliver you from grievous woe
46|32|And whoso responds not to God's crier shall not frustrate Him in the earth, and shall not have any patrons beside Him:- these are in obvious error
46|33|Did they not see that God who created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied with creating them, is able to quicken the dead?- nay, verily, He is mighty over all
46|34|And the day when those who misbelieve shall be exposed to the fire,- 'Is not this the truth?' they shall say, 'Yea, by our Lord!' He shall say, 'Then taste the torment for that ye did misbelieve
46|35|Then do thou be patient, as the apostles endowed with a purpose were patient, and hasten not on (their, punishment). It shall be to them, on the day they see what they are threatened with, as though they had tarried but an hour of the day. A preaching this! Shall any perish but the people who work abomination
47|1|Those who misbelieve and turn folk from God's way, He will make their works go wrong
47|2|But those who believe and do right and believe in what is revealed to Mohammed,- and it is the truth from their Lord,- He will cover for them their offences and set right their mind
47|3|That is because those who misbelieve follow falsehood, and those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus does God set forth for men their parables
47|4|And when ye meet those who misbelieve - then striking off heads until ye have massacred them, and bind fast the bonds! Then either a free grant (of liberty) or a ransom until the war shall have laid down its burdens. That!- but if God please He would conquer them - but (it is) that He may try some of you by the others. And those who are slain in God's cause, their works shall not go wrong
47|5|He will guide them and set right their mind
47|6|and will make them enter into Paradise which He has told them of
47|7|O ye who believe! if ye help God, He will help you, and will make firm your footsteps
47|8|But as for those who misbelieve - confound them! and He will make their works go wrong
47|9|That is because they were averse from what God has revealed; but their works shall be void
47|10|Have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them? God destroyed them; and for the misbelievers is the like thereof
47|11|That is because God is the patron of those who believe, and because the misbelievers have no patron
47|12|Verily, God causes those who believe and do right to enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow; but those who misbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as the cattle eat; but the fire is the resort for them
47|13|How many a city, stronger than thy city which has driven thee out, have we destroyed, and there was none to help them
47|14|Is he who rests upon a manifest sign from his Lord like him, the evil of whose works is made seemly to him, and who follow their lusts
47|15|The similitude of Paradise which is promised to the pious,- in it are rivers of water without corruption, and rivers of milk, the taste whereof changes not, and rivers of wine delicious to those who drink; and rivers of honey clarified; and there shall they have all kinds of fruit and forgiveness from their Lord! (Is that) like him who dwells in the fire for aye? and who are given to drink boiling water that shall rend their bowels asunder
47|16|Some of them there are who listen to thee, until when they go forth from thee they say to those who have been given the knowledge, 'What is this which he says now?' These are those on whose hearts God his set a stamp and who follow their lusts
47|17|But those who are guided, He guides them the more, and gives them the due of their piety
47|18|Do they wait for aught but the Hour, that it should come to them suddenly? The conditions thereof have come already; how, when it has come on them, can they have their reminder
47|19|Know thou that there is no god but God; and ask pardon for thy sin and for the believers, men and women; for God knows your return and your resort
47|20|Those who misbelieve say, 'Why has not a surah been revealed?' but when a decisive surah is revealed and fighting is mentioned therein, thou mayest see those in whose heart is sickness looking towards thee with the look of one fainting in death
47|21|Preferable for them were obedience and a reasonable speech! But when the matter is determined on, then if they believed God it were better for them
47|22|Would ye perhaps, if ye had turned back, have done evil in the land and severed the bonds of kinship
47|23|It is these whom God has cursed, and has made them deaf, and has blinded their eyesight
47|24|Do they not peruse the Qur'an? or are there locks upon their hearts
47|25|Verily, those who turn their backs after the guidance that has been manifested to them - Satan induces them, but (God) lets them go on for a time
47|26|That is for that they say to those who are averse from what God has revealed, 'We will obey you in part of the affair!' but God knows their secrets
47|27|How will it be when the angels take their souls, smiting their faces and their backs
47|28|This is because they follow what angers God and are averse from His goodwill; and their works are void
47|29|Do those in whose hearts is sickness reckon that God will not bring their malice forth
47|30|But did we please we would show thee them, and thou shouldst know them by their cognisances. But thou shalt know them by their distorting their speech, and God knows their works
47|31|But we will try you until we know those among you who fight strenuously and the patient; and we will try the reports concerning you
47|32|Verily, those who misbelieve and turn folks off God's path, and break with the Apostle after the guidance that has been manifested to them, cannot harm God at all, and their works shall be void
47|33|O ye who believe! obey God, and obey the Apostle; and make not your works vain
47|34|Verily, those who misbelieve and turn folks off God's path, and then die misbelievers, God will not pardon them
47|35|Then faint not, nor cry for peace while ye have the upper hand; for God is with you and will not cheat you of your works
47|36|The life of this world is but a play and a sport; but if ye believe and fear God, He will give you your hire
47|37|He does not ask you for (all) your property; if He were to ask you for it and to press you, ye would be niggardly, and he would bring your malice out
47|38|Here are ye called upon to expend in God's cause, and among you are some who are niggardly; and he who is niggardly is but niggardly against his own soul: but God is rich and ye are poor, and if ye turn your backs He will substitute another people in your stead, then they will not be like you
48|1|Verily, we have given thee an obvious victory
48|2|that God may pardon thee thy former and later sin, and may fulfil His favour upon thee, and guide thee in a right way
48|3|and that God may help thee with a mighty help
48|4|It is He who sent down His shechina into the hearts of the believers that they might have faith added to their faith;- and God's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and God is knowing, wise
48|5|to make the believers, men and women, enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; and to cover for them their offences; for that with God is a grand bliss
48|6|and to torment the hypocrites, men and women, and the idolaters, men and women, who think evil thoughts of God;- over them is a turn of evil fortune, and God will be wrath with them and curse them, and has prepared for them hell, and an evil journey shall it be
48|7|God's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and God is mighty, wise
48|8|Verily, we have sent thee as a witness, and a herald of glad tidings, and a warner
48|9|that ye may believe in God and His Apostle, and may aid Him and revere Him and celebrate His praises morning and evening
48|10|Verily, those who swear allegiance to thee do but swear allegiance to God;- God's hand is above their hands and whoso perjures himself does but perjure himself against himself; but he who fulfils what he has covenanted with God, God shall bring him mighty hire
48|11|The desert Arabs who were left behind shall say, 'Our wealth and our people occupied us; ask pardon then for us!' - they speak with their tongues what is not in their hearts! Say, 'Who can control for you aught from God, if He wish you harm or wish you advantage?' Nay, God of what ye do is well aware
48|12|Nay, ye thought that the Apostle and the believers would not ever return again to their families; that was made seemly in your hearts! and ye thought evil thoughts, and ye were a corrupt people
48|13|Whoso believes not in God and His Apostle - we have prepared for the unbelievers a blaze
48|14|God's is the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth. He pardons whom He pleases, and torments whom He pleases; and God is forgiving, merciful
48|15|Those who were left behind shall say when ye have gone forth to spoils that ye may take, 'Let us follow you;' they wish to change God's words. Say, 'Ye shall by no means follow us; thus did God say before!' They will say, 'Nay! but ye envy us!' Nay! they did not understand save a little
48|16|Say to those desert Arabs who were left behind, 'Ye shall be called out against a people endowed with vehement valour, and shall fight them or they shall become Muslims. And if ye obey, God will give you a good hire; but if ye turn your backs, as ye turned your backs before, He will torment you with grievous woe
48|17|There is no compulsion on the blind, and no compulsion on the lame, and no compulsion on the sick, but whoso obeys God and His Apostle, He will make him enter gardens beneath which rivers flow; but whoso turns his back He will torment with grievous woe
48|18|God was well pleased with the believers when they did swear allegiance to thee beneath the tree; and He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down His shechina upon them and rewarded them with a victory nigh at hand
48|19|and many spoils for them to take; for God is mighty, wise
48|20|God promised you many spoils and hastened this on for you, and restrained men's hands from you; and it may be a sign for the believers and guide you in a right way
48|21|and other (spoils) which ye could not gain; but God has encompassed them; for God is mighty over all
48|22|And had those who misbelieved fought you, they would have turned their backs; then they would have found neither patron nor helper
48|23|God's course which has been followed before, and thou shalt find no change in the course of God
48|24|He it was who restrained their hands from you, and your hands from them in the mid-valley of Mecca after He had given you the victory over them; for God on what ye do doth look
48|25|Those who misbelieved and turned (you) away from the Sacred Mosque, and (turned away) the offering, kept from arriving at its destined place; and had it not been for believing men and believing women whom ye knew not, whom ye might have trampled on, and so a crime might have occurred to you on their account without your knowledge - that God may make whomsoever He pleases enter into His mercy. Had they been distinct from one another, we would have tormented those of them who misbelieved with grievous woe
48|26|When those who misbelieved put in their hearts pique - the pique of ignorance - and God sent down His shechina upon His Apostle and upon the believers, and obliged them to keep to the word of piety, and they were most worthy of it and most suited for it; for God all things doth know
48|27|God truly verified for His Apostle the vision that ye shall verity enter the Sacred Mosque, if God please, in safety with shaven heads or cut hair, ye shall not fear; for He knows what ye know not, and He has set for you, beside that, a victory nigh at hand
48|28|He it is who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of truth to set it above all religion; for God is witness enough
48|29|Mohammed is the Apostle of God, and those who are with Him are vehement against the misbelievers,- compassionate amongst themselves; thou mayest see them bowing down, adoring, craving grace from God and His goodwill,- their marks are in their faces from the effects of adoration;- that is their similitude in the law and their similitude in the gospel; as a seedling puts forth its sprouts and strengthens it, and grows stout, and straightens itself upon its stem, delighting the sower!- that the misbelievers may be angry at them;- God has promised those of them who believe and do right - forgiveness and a mighty hire
49|1|O ye who believe! do not anticipate God and His Apostle, but fear God; verily, God both hears and knows
49|2|O ye who believe! raise not your voices above the voice of the prophet, and do not speak loud to him as ye speak loud to one another, lest your works become vain, while ye do not perceive
49|3|Verily, those who lower their voice before the Apostle of God, they are those whose hearts God has proved for piety, for them is forgiveness and a mighty hire
49|4|Verily, those who cry out to thee from behind the inner chambers, most of them have no sense
49|5|but did they wait until thou come out to them, it were better for them;- but God is forgiving, merciful
49|6|O ye who believe! if there come to you a sinner with an information, then discriminate, lest ye fall upon a people in ignorance and on the morrow repent of what ye have done
49|7|And know that among you is the Apostle of God; if he should obey you in many a matter ye would commit a sin; God has made faith beloved by you, and has made it seemly in your hearts, and has made misbelief and iniquity and rebellion hateful to you.- These are the rightly directed
49|8|grace from God and favour! and God is knowing, wise
49|9|And if the two parties of the believers quarrel, then make peace between them; and if one of the twain outrages the other, then fight the party that has committed the outrage until it return to God's bidding; and if it do return then make peace between them with equity, and be just; verily, God loves the just
49|10|The believers are but brothers, so make peace between your two brethren and fear God, haply ye may obtain mercy
49|11|O ye who believe! let not one class ridicule another who are perchance better than they; nor let women ridicule other women who are perchance better than they; and do not defame each other, nor call each other bad names - an ill name is iniquity after faith
49|12|O ye who believe! carefully avoid suspicion; verily, some suspicion is a sin. And do not play the spy, nor backbite each other; would one of you like to eat his dead brother's flesh?- why! ye would abhor it! then fear God; verily, God is relentant, compassionate
49|13|O ye folk! verily, we have created you of male and female, and made you races and tribes that ye may know each other. Verily, the most honourable of you in the sight of God is the most pious of you; verily, God is knowing, aware
49|14|The desert Arabs say, 'We believe.' Say, 'Ye do not believe; but say, "We have become Muslims;" for the faith has not entered into your hearts: but if ye obey God and His Apostle He will not defraud you of your works at all: verily, God is forgiving, compassionate
49|15|The believers are only those who believe in God and His Apostle, and then doubt not, but fight strenuously with their wealth and persons in God's cause - these are the truth-tellers
49|16|Say, 'Will ye teach God your religion?' when God knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and God all things doth know
49|17|They deem that they oblige thee by becoming Muslims. Say, 'Nay! deem not that ye oblige me by your becoming Muslims! God obliges you, by directing you to the faith, if ye do speak the truth
49|18|Verily, God knows the unseen things of the heavens and the earth, and God on what ye do doth look
50|1|By the glorious Qur'an
50|2|nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner from amongst themselves; and the misbelievers say, 'This is a wondrous thing
50|3|What, when we are dead and have become dust?- that is a remote return
50|4|We well know what the earth consumes of them, for with, us is a book that keeps (account)
50|5|Nay, they call the truth a lie when it comes to them, and they are in a confused affair
50|6|Do not they behold the heaven above them, how we have built it and adorned it, and how it has no flaws
50|7|And the earth, we have stretched it out and thrown thereon firm mountains, and caused to grow thereon every beautiful kind
50|8|An insight and a reminder to every servant who repents
50|9|And we sent down from the heaven water as a blessing, and caused to grow therewith gardens and the harvest grain
50|10|And the tall palm trees having piled up spathes
50|11|for a provision to (our) servants; and we quickened thereby a dead land; thus shall the resurrection be
50|12|Before them the people of Noah and the fellows of ar Rass and Thamud
50|13|and 'Ad and Pharaoh called the apostles liars; and the brethren of Lot
50|14|and the fellows of the Grove and the people of Tubbah all called the prophets liars, and the threat was duly executed
50|15|Were we then fatigued with the first creation? nay! but they are in obscurity concerning the new creation
50|16|But we created man, and we know what his soul whispers; for we are nigher to him than his jugular vein
50|17|When the two meeters meet, sitting the one on the right and the other on the left
50|18|not a word does he utter, but a watcher is by him ready
50|19|And the agony of death shall come in truth!- 'that is what thou didst shun
50|20|And the trumpet shall be blown!- that is the threatened day
50|21|And every soul shall come - with it a driver and a witness
50|22|Thou wert heedless of this, and we withdrew thy veil from thee, and today is thine eyesight keen
50|23|And his mate shall say, 'This is what is ready for me (to attest)
50|24|Throw into hell every stubborn misbeliever
50|25|who forbids good, a transgressor, a doubter
50|26|who sets other gods with God - and throw him, ye twain, into fierce torment
50|27|His mate shall say, 'Our Lord! I seduced him not, but he was in a remote error
50|28|He shall say, 'Wrangle not before me; for I sent the threat to you before
50|29|The sentence is not changed with me, nor am I unjust to my servants
50|30|On the day we will say to hell, 'Art thou full?' and it will say, 'Are there any more
50|31|And Paradise shall be brought near to the pious,- not far off
50|32|This is what ye are promised, to every one who turns frequently (to God) and keeps His commandments
50|33|who fears the Merciful in secret and brings a repentant heart
50|34|Enter into it in peace: this is the day of eternity
50|35|They shall have what they wish therein, and increase from us
50|36|How many a generation have we destroyed before them, mightier than they in prowess! Pass through the land, is there any refuge
50|37|Verily, in that is a reminder to whomsoever has a heart, or, gives ear, and is a witness thereto
50|38|We did create the heavens and the earth and what is between the two in six days, and no weariness touched us
50|39|Be thou patient then of what they say, and celebrate the praises of thy Lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting
50|40|And through (some) of the night celebrate His praise and the additional adorations
50|41|And listen for the day when the crier shall cry from a near place
50|42|the day when they shall hear the shout in truth - that is the day of coming forth
50|43|Verily, we quicken and we kill, and unto us the journey is
50|44|On the day when the earth shall be cleft asunder from them swiftly;- that is a gathering together which is easy to us
50|45|We know what they say; nor art thou over them one to compel. Wherefore remind, by the Qur'an, him who fears the threat
51|1|By the scatterers who scatter
51|2|and by those pregnant with their burden
51|3|and by those running on easily
51|4|and by the distributors of affairs
51|5|verily, what ye are threatened with is surely true
51|6|And, verily, the judgment will surely take place
51|7|By the heaven possessed of paths
51|8|verily, ye are at variance in what ye say
51|9|He is turned from it who is turned
51|10|Slain be the liars
51|11|who are heedless in a flood (of ignorance)
51|12|They will ask, 'When is the day of judgment
51|13|The day when at the fire they shall be tried
51|14|Taste your trial! this is what we wished to hasten on
51|15|Verily, the pious are in gardens and springs
51|16|taking what their Lord brings them. Verily, they before that did well
51|17|But little of the night they slept
51|18|and at the dawn they asked forgiveness
51|19|And in their wealth was what was due to him who asked, and him who was kept back from asking
51|20|And in the earth are signs to those who are sure
51|21|and in yourselves,- what! do ye not then see
51|22|And in the heaven is your provision and that which ye are promised
51|23|But by the Lord of the heaven and the earth! verily, it is the truth,- like that which ye do utter
51|24|Has the tale of Abraham's honoured guests reached thee
51|25|When they entered in unto him and said, 'Peace!' he said, 'Peace!-a people unrecognised
51|26|And he went aside unto his people and fetched a fat calf
51|27|and brought it nigh unto them; said he, 'Will ye then not eat
51|28|And he felt a secret fear of them: said they, Fear not.' And they gave him glad tidings of a knowing boy
51|29|And his wife approached with a noise, and smote her face, and said, 'An old woman, barren
51|30|Said they, 'Thus says thy Lord, He is knowing, wise
51|31|Said he, 'And about what is your errand, O ye messengers
51|32|They said, 'Verily, we are sent unto a sinful people
51|33|to send upon them stones of clay
51|34|marked from thy Lord for the extravagant
51|35|And we sent out therefrom such as were in it of the believers
51|36|but we only found therein one house of Muslims
51|37|And we left therein a sign to those who fear the grievous woe
51|38|And in Moses; when we sent him to Pharaoh with obvious authority
51|39|But he turned his back towards his column and said, 'A sorcerer or mad
51|40|And we seized him and his hosts and hurled them into the sea; for he was to be blamed
51|41|And in 'Ad, when we sent against them a desolating wind
51|42|that left naught on which it came without making it ashes
51|43|And in Thamud, when it was said to them, 'Enjoy yourselves for a season
51|44|But they revolted against the bidding of their Lord; and the noise caught them as they looked on
51|45|And they could not stand upright, and they were not helped
51|46|And the people of Noah of yore; verily, they were an abominable people
51|47|And the heaven - we have built it with might, and, verily, we do surely give it ample space
51|48|And the earth - we have spread it out; and how well we lay it out
51|49|And of everything have we created pairs, haply ye may be mindful
51|50|Flee then to God; verily, I am a plain warner from Him to you
51|51|And do not set with God another god; verily, I am a plain warner from Him to you
51|52|Thus there came no apostle to those before them, but they said, 'A sorcerer, mad
51|53|Do they bequeath it to each other? Yea, they are an outrageous people
51|54|So turn thy back upon them, so thou wilt not be to blame
51|55|And remind; for, verily, the reminder shall profit the believers
51|56|And I have not created the ginn and mankind save that they may worship me
51|57|I do not desire any provision from them, and I do not wish them to feed me
51|58|Verily, God, He is the provider, endowed with steady might
51|59|Verily, for those who injure (the Apostle) shall be a portion like the portion of their fellows, but let them not hurry Me
51|60|Then woe to those who misbelieve from their day which they are threatened
52|1|By the mount
52|2|by the Book inscribed
52|3|upon an outstretched vellum
52|4|by the frequented house
52|5|by the elevated roof
52|6|by the swelling sea
52|7|verily, the torment of thy Lord will come to pass
52|8|there is none to avert it
52|9|The day when the heavens shall reel about
52|10|and the mountains shall move about
52|11|then woe upon that day to those who call (the apostles) liars
52|12|who plunge into discussion for a sport
52|13|On the day when they shall be thrust away into the fire of hell
52|14|This is the fire, the which ye used to call a lie
52|15|Is it magic, this? or can ye not see
52|16|broil ye therein, and be patient thereof or be not patient, it is the same to you: ye are but rewarded for that which ye did do
52|17|Verily, the pious (shall be) in gardens and pleasure
52|18|enjoying what their Lord has given them; for their Lord will save them from the torment of hell
52|19|Eat and drink with good digestion, for that which ye have done
52|20|Reclining on couches in rows; and we will wed them to large-eyed maids
52|21|And those who believe and whose seed follows them in the faith, we will unite their seed with them; and we will not cheat them of their work at all;- every man is pledged for what he earns
52|22|And we will extend to them fruit and flesh such as they like
52|23|They shall pass to and fro therein a cup in which is neither folly nor sin
52|24|And round them shall go boys of theirs, as though they were hidden pearls
52|25|And they shall accost each other and ask questions
52|26|and shall say, 'Verily, we were before amidst our families shrinking with terror
52|27|but God has been gracious to us and saved us from the torment of the hot blast
52|28|Verily, we used to call on Him before; verily, He is the righteous, the compassionate
52|29|Wherefore do thou remind them: for thou art, by the favour of thy Lord, neither a soothsayer nor mad
52|30|Will they say, 'A poet; we wait for him the sad accidents of fate
52|31|Say, 'Wait ye then; for I too am of those who wait
52|32|Do their dreams bid them this? or are they an outrageous people
52|33|Or will they say, 'He has invented it?' - nay, but they do not believe
52|34|But let them bring a discourse like it, if they tell the truth
52|35|Or were they created of nothing, or were they the creators
52|36|Or did they create the heavens and the earth? - nay, but they are not sure
52|37|Or have they the treasures of thy Lord? or are they the governors supreme
52|38|Or have they a ladder whereon they can listen?- then let their listener bring obvious authority
52|39|Has He daughters, while ye have sons
52|40|Or dost thou ask them a hire, while they are borne down by debt
52|41|Or have they the unseen, so that they write it down
52|42|Or do they desire a plot? - but those who misbelieve it is who are plotted against
52|43|Or have they a god beside God? celebrated be God's praises above what they join with Him
52|44|But if they should see a fragment of the sky falling down, they would say, 'Clouds in masses
52|45|But leave them till they meet that day of theirs whereon they shall swoon
52|46|the day when their plotting shall avail them naught, and they shall not be helped
52|47|And, verily, there is a torment beside that for those who do wrong; but most of them do not know
52|48|But wait thou patiently for the judgment of thy Lord, for thou art in our eyes. And celebrate the praises of thy Lord what time thou risest
52|49|and in the night, and at the fading of the stars
53|1|By the star when it falls
53|2|your comrade errs not, nor is he deluded
53|3|nor speaks he out of lust
53|4|It is but an inspiration inspired
53|5|One mighty in power taught him
53|6|endowed with sound understanding, and appeared
53|7|he being in the loftiest tract
53|8|Then drew he near and hovered o'er
53|9|until he was two bows length off or nigher still
53|10|Then he inspired his servant what he inspired him
53|11|the heart belies not what he saw
53|12|What, will ye dispute with him on what he saw
53|13|And he saw him another time
53|14|by the lote tree none may pass
53|15|near which is the garden of the Abode
53|16|When there covered the lote tree what did cover it
53|17|The sight swerved not nor wandered
53|18|He saw then the greatest of the signs of his Lord
53|19|Have ye considered Allat and Al 'Huzza
53|20|and Manat the other third
53|21|Shall there be male offspring for Him and female for you
53|22|That were an unfair division
53|23|They are but names which ye have named, ye and your fathers! God has sent down no authority for them! They do but follow suspicion and what their souls lust after!- And yet there has come to them guidance from their Lord
53|24|Shall man have what he desires
53|25|But God's is the hereafter and the present
53|26|How many an angel in the heaven!- their intercession avails not at all, save after God has given permission to whomsoever He will and is pleased with
53|27|Verily, those who believe not in the hereafter do surely name the angels with female names
53|28|but they have no knowledge thereof; they do but follow suspicion, and, verily, suspicion shall not avail against the truth at all
53|29|But turn aside from him who turns his back upon our remembrance and desires naught but this world's life
53|30|This is their sum of knowledge; verily, thy Lord knows best who has erred from His way, and He knows best who is guided
53|31|God's is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, that He may reward those who do evil for what they have done; and may reward those who do good with good
53|32|those who shun great sins and iniquities,- all but venial faults,- verily, thy Lord is of ample forgiveness; He knows best about you, when He produced you from the earth, and when ye were embryos in the wombs of your mothers. Make not yourselves out, then, to be pure; He knows best who it is that fears
53|33|Hast thou considered him who turns his back
53|34|who gives but little and then stops
53|35|Has he then the knowledge of the unseen, so that he can see
53|36|Has he not been informed of what is in the pages of Moses
53|37|and Abraham who fulfilled his word
53|38|that no burdened soul shall bear the burden of another
53|39|and that man shall have only that for which he strives
53|40|and that his striving shall at length be seen
53|41|Then shall he be rewarded for it with the most full reward
53|42|and that unto thy Lord is the limit
53|43|and that it is He who makes men laugh and weep
53|44|and that it is He who kills and makes alive
53|45|and that He created pairs, male and female
53|46|from a clot when it is emitted
53|47|and that for Him is the next production
53|48|and that he enriches and gives possession
53|49|and that He is the Lord of the Dog-star
53|50|and that He it was who destroyed 'Ad of yore
53|51|and Thamud, and left none of them
53|52|and the people of Noah before them,- verily, they were most unjust and outrageous
53|53|And the overthrown (cities) He threw down
53|54|and there covered them what did cover them
53|55|Which then of your Lord's benefits do ye dispute
53|56|This is a warner, one of the warners of yore
53|57|The approaching day approaches
53|58|there, is none to discover it but God
53|59|At this new discourse then do ye wonder
53|60|and do ye laugh and not weep
53|61|and ye divert yourselves the while
53|62|But adore God and serve (Him)
54|1|The Hour draws nigh, and the moon is split asunder
54|2|But if they see a sign they turn aside and say, 'Magic, continuous
54|3|And they call it a lie and follow their lusts; but every matter is settled
54|4|There has come to them some information with restraint in it
54|5|wisdom far-reaching - but warners avail not
54|6|But turn thy back on them! The day when the caller shall call to an awkward thing
54|7|Humbly casting down their looks shall they come forth from their graves, as though they were locusts scattered abroad
54|8|Hurrying forwards to the caller! the misbelievers shall say, 'This is a difficult day
54|9|Noah's people before them called (the apostles) liars; they called our servant a liar; and they said, 'Mad!' and he was rejected
54|10|And he called upon his Lord, 'Verily, I am overcome, come then to my help
54|11|And we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down
54|12|And we made the earth burst forth in springs, and the waters met at a bidding already decreed
54|13|But we bore him on the thing of planks and nails
54|14|sailing on beneath our eyes, a reward for him who had been disbelieved
54|15|And we left it a sign;- but is there any one who will mind
54|16|Not identifiable
54|17|Not identifiable
54|18|Ad called the apostles liars, and how was my punishment and my warning
54|19|Verily, we sent on them a cold storm wind on a day of continuous ill-luck
54|20|It reft men away as though they had been palm stumps torn up
54|21|Not identifiable
54|22|We have made the Qur'an easy as a reminder - but is there any one who will mind
54|23|Thamud called the warnings lies
54|24|and said, 'A mortal, one of us, alone, shall we follow him? then indeed were we in error and excitement
54|25|Is the warning cast on him alone among us? nay, he is an insolent liar
54|26|They shall know to-morrow about the insolent liar
54|27|Verily, we are about to send the she-camel as a trial for them, then watch them and have patience
54|28|and inform them that the water is shared between them (and her); each draught shall be sought by turns
54|29|Then they called their companion, and he plied (a knife) and hamstrung her
54|30|Then how was my punishment and my warning
54|31|Verily, we sent against them one noise, and they were like the dry sticks of him who builds a fold
54|32|We have made the Qur'an easy as a reminder - but is there any one who will mind
54|33|Lot's people called the apostles liars
54|34|verily, we sent against them a heavy sand storm; all, save Lot's family, we saved them at the dawn
54|35|As a favour from us; so do we reward him who gives thanks
54|36|He indeed had warned them of our assault, but they doubted of the warning
54|37|And they desired his guest, and we put out their eyes.- 'So taste ye my torment and warning
54|38|And there overtook them on the morning a settled punishment
54|39|So taste ye my torment and warning
54|40|We have made the Qur'an easy as a reminder - but is there any one who will mind
54|41|The warning came to Pharaoh's people
54|42|they called, our signs all lies, and we seized on them with the seizing of a mighty powerful one
54|43|Are your misbelievers better than they? or have ye an exemption in the Scriptures
54|44|Or do they say we are a victorious company
54|45|The whole shall be routed and shall turn their backs in flight
54|46|Nay, the Hour is their promised time! and the Hour is most severe and bitter
54|47|Verily, the sinners are in error and excitement
54|48|On the day when they shall be dragged to the fire upon their faces!- 'Taste ye the touch of hell
54|49|Verily, everything have we created by decree
54|50|and our bidding is but one (word), like the twinkling of an eye
54|51|We have destroyed the like of you - but is there any who will mind
54|52|And everything they do is in the books
54|53|and everything small and great is written down
54|54|Verily, the pious shall be amid gardens and rivers
54|55|in the seat of truth, with the powerful king
55|1|The Merciful
55|2|taught the Qur'an
55|3|He created man
55|4|taught him plain speech
55|5|The sun and the moon have their appointed time
55|6|The herbs and the trees adore
55|7|And the heavens, He raised them and set the balance
55|8|that ye should not be outrageous in the balance
55|9|But weigh ye aright, and stint not the balance
55|10|And the earth He has set it for living creatures
55|11|therein are fruits and palms, with sheaths
55|12|and grain with chaff and frequent shoots
55|13|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|14|He created men of crackling clay like the potters
55|15|And He created the ginn from smokeless fire
55|16|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|17|The Lord of the two easts and the Lord of the two wests
55|18|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|19|He has let loose the two seas that meet together
55|20|between them is a barrier they cannot pass
55|21|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|22|He brings forth from each pearls both large and small
55|23|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|24|His are the ships which rear aloft in the sea like mountains
55|25|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|26|Every one upon it is transient
55|27|but the face of thy Lord endowed with majesty and honour shall endure
55|28|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|29|Of Him whosoever is in the heaven and the earth does beg; every day He is in (some fresh) business
55|30|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|31|We shall be at leisure for you, O ye two weighty ones
55|32|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|33|O assembly of ginns and mankind! if ye are able to pass through the confines of heaven and earth then pass through them!- ye cannot pass through save by authority
55|34|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|35|There shall be sent against you a flash or fire, and molten copper, and ye shall not be helped
55|36|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|37|And when the heaven is rent asunder and become rosy red - (melting) like grease
55|38|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|39|On that day neither man nor ginn shall be asked about his crime
55|40|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|41|The sinners shall be known by their marks, and shall be seized by the forelock and the feet
55|42|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|43|This is hell, which the sinners did call a lie
55|44|they shall circulate between it and water boiling quite
55|45|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|46|But for him who fears the station of his Lord are gardens twain
55|47|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|48|Both furnished with branching trees
55|49|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|50|In each are flowing springs
55|51|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|52|In each are, of every fruit, two kinds
55|53|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|54|Reclining on beds the linings of which are of brocade, and the fruit of the two gardens within reach to cull
55|55|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|56|Therein are maids of modest glances whom no man nor ginn has deflowered before
55|57|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|58|As though they were rubies and pearls
55|59|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|60|Is the reward of goodness aught but goodness
55|61|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|62|And besides these, are gardens twain
55|63|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|64|With dark green foliage
55|65|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|66|In each two gushing springs
55|67|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|68|In each fruit and palms and pomegranates
55|69|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|70|In them maidens best and fairest
55|71|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|72|Bright and large-eyed maids kept in their tents
55|73|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|74|Whom no man nor ginn has deflowered before them
55|75|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|76|Reclining on green cushions and beautiful carpets
55|77|Then which of your Lord's bounties will ye twain deny
55|78|Blessed be the name of thy Lord possessed of majesty and honour
56|1|When the inevitable happens
56|2|none shall call its happening a lie
56|3|abasing - exalting
56|4|When the earth shall quake, quaking
56|5|and the mountains shall crumble, crumbling
56|6|and become like motes dispersed
56|7|And ye shall be three sorts
56|8|And the fellows of the right hand - what right lucky fellows
56|9|And the fellows of the left hand - what unlucky fellows
56|10|And the foremost foremost
56|11|These are they who are brought nigh
56|12|In gardens of pleasure
56|13|A crowd of those of yore
56|14|And a few of those of the latter day
56|15|And gold-weft couches
56|16|reclining on them face to face
56|17|Around them shall go eternal youths
56|18|with goblets and ewers and a cup of flowing wine
56|19|no headache shall they feel therefrom, nor shall their wits be dimmed
56|20|And fruits such as they deem the best
56|21|And flesh of fowl as they desire
56|22|And bright and large-eyed maids
56|23|like hidden pearls
56|24|A reward for that which they have done
56|25|They shall hear no folly there and no sin
56|26|Only the speech, 'Peace, Peace
56|27|And the fellows of the right - what right lucky fellows
56|28|Amid thornless lote trees
56|29|And tall trees with piles of fruit
56|30|And outspread shade
56|31|And water out-poured
56|32|And fruit in abundance
56|33|neither failing nor forbidden
56|34|And beds upraised
56|35|Verily, we have produced them a production
56|36|And made them virgins
56|37|darlings of equal age (with their spouses)
56|38|for the fellows of the right
56|39|A crowd of those of yore
56|40|and a crowd of those of the latter day
56|41|And the fellows of the left - what unlucky fellows
56|42|In hot blasts and boiling water
56|43|And a shade of pitchy smoke
56|44|Neither cool nor generous
56|45|Verily, they were affluent ere this
56|46|and did persist in mighty crime
56|47|and used to say, 'What, when we die and have become dust and bones, shall we then indeed be raised
56|48|or our fathers of yore
56|49|Say, 'Verily, those of yore and those of the latter day
56|50|shall surely be gathered together unto the tryst of the well-known day
56|51|Then ye, O ye who err! who say it is a lie
56|52|shall eat of the Zaqqum tree
56|53|and fill your bellies with it
56|54|and drink thereon of boiling water
56|55|and drink as drinks the thirsty camel
56|56|This is their entertainment on the judgment day
56|57|We created you, then why do ye not credit
56|58|Have ye considered what ye emit
56|59|Do we create it, or are we the creators
56|60|We have decreed amongst you death; but we are not forestalled
56|61|from making the likes of you in exchange, or producing you as ye know not of
56|62|Ye do know the first production - why then do ye not mind
56|63|Have ye considered what ye till
56|64|Do ye make it bear seed, or do we make it bear seed
56|65|If we pleased we could make it mere grit, so that ye would pause to marvel
56|66|Verily, we have got into debt
56|67|and we are excluded
56|68|Have ye considered the water which ye drink
56|69|Do ye make it come down from the clouds, or do we make it come down
56|70|If we pleased we could make it pungent - why then do ye not give thanks
56|71|Have ye considered the fire which ye strike
56|72|Do ye produce the tree that gives it, or do we produce it
56|73|We have made it a memorial and a chattel for the traveller of the waste
56|74|Then celebrate the grand name of thy Lord
56|75|So I will not swear by the positions of the stars
56|76|and, verily, it is a grand oath if ye did but know
56|77|that, verily, this is the honourable Qur'an
56|78|in the laid-up Book
56|79|Let none touch it but the purified
56|80|A revelation from the Lord of the worlds
56|81|What! this new discourse will ye despise
56|82|And make for your provision, that you call it a lie
56|83|Why then - when it comes up to the throat
56|84|and ye at that time look on
56|85|though we are nearer to him than you are, but ye cannot see
56|86|why, if ye are not to be judged
56|87|do ye not send it back, if ye do tell the truth
56|88|But either, if he be of those brought nigh to God
56|89|then rest and fragrance and the garden of pleasure
56|90|Or, if he be of the fellows of the right
56|91|then 'Peace to thee!' from the fellows of the right
56|92|Or, if he be of those who say it is a lie,- who err
56|93|then an entertainment of boiling water
56|94|and broiling in hell
56|95|Verily, this is surely certain truth
56|96|So celebrate the grand name of thy Lord
57|1|Whatever is in the heavens and the earth celebrates the praises of God, for He is the mighty, the wise
57|2|His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth: He quickens and He kills, and He is mighty over all
57|3|He is the first and the last; and the outer and the inner; and He all things doth know
57|4|He it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He made for the throne; and He knows what goes into the earth and what goes forth therefrom, and what comes down from the sky and what goes up therein, and He is with you wheresoe'er ye be: for God on what ye do doth look
57|5|His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and unto God affairs return
57|6|He makes the night succeed the day, and makes the day succeed the night; and He knows the nature of men's breasts
57|7|Believe in God and His Apostle, and give alms of what He has made you successors of. For those amongst you who believe and give alms - for them is mighty hire
57|8|What ails you that ye do not believe in God and His Apostle? He calls on you to believe in your Lord; and He has taken a compact from you, if ye be believers
57|9|He it is who sends down upon His servants manifest signs, to bring you forth from the darkness into the light; for, verily, God to you is kind, compassionate
57|10|What ails you that ye give not alms in God's cause? for God's is the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. Not alike amongst you is he who gives alms before the victory and fights,- they are grander in rank than those who give alms afterwards and fight. But to all does God promise good; and God of what ye do is well aware
57|11|Who is there who will lend a good loan to God? for He will double it for him, and for him is a generous reward
57|12|On the day when thou shalt see believers, men and women, with their light running on before them and on their right hand,- 'Glad tidings for you today.- Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; that is the grand bliss
57|13|On the day when the hypocrites, men and women, shall say to those who believe, 'Wait for us that we may kindle at your light.' It will be said, 'Get ye back, and beg a light.' And there shall be struck out between them a wall with a door; within it shall be mercy, and outside before it torment
57|14|They shall cry out to them, 'We were not with you!' they shall say, 'Yea, but ye did tempt yourselves, and did wait, and did doubt; and your vain hopes beguiled you; and the beguiler beguiled you about God
57|15|Wherefore today there shall not be taken from you a ransom, nor from those who misbelieved. Your resort is the fire; it is your sovereign, and an ill journey will it be
57|16|Is the time come to those who believe, for their hearts to be humbled at the remembrance of God, and of what He has sent down in truth? and for them not to, be like those who were given the Scriptures before, And over whom time was prolonged, but their hearts grew hard, and many of them were workers of abomination
57|17|Know that God quickens the earth after its death!- we have manifested to you the signs; haply ye may have some sense
57|18|Verily, those who give in charity, men and women, who have lent to God a goodly loan,- it shall be doubled for them, and for them is a generous hire
57|19|And those who believe in God and His Apostle, they are the confessors and the martyrs with their Lord; for them is their hire and their light! But those who misbelieve and call our signs lies, they are the fellows of hell
57|20|Know that the life of this world is but a sport, and a play, and an adornment, and something to boast of amongst yourselves; and the multiplying of children is like a rain-growth, its vegetation pleases the misbelievers; then they wither away, and thou mayest see them become yellow; then they become but grit. But in the hereafter is a severe woe, and forgiveness from God and His goodwill; but the life of this world is but a chattel of guile
57|21|Race towards forgiveness from your Lord and Paradise, whose breadth is as the breadth of the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His apostles! and God's grace, He gives it to whom He pleases, for God is Lord of mighty grace
57|22|No accident befalls in the earth, or in yourselves, but it was in the Book, before we created them verily, that is easy unto God
57|23|That ye may not vex yourselves for what ye miss, nor be overjoyed at what He gives you; for God loves no arrogant boaster
57|24|who are niggardly and bid men be niggardly: but whoso turns his back, verily, God is rich, praiseworthy
57|25|We did send our apostles with manifest signs; and we did send down among you the Book and the balance, that men might stand by justice; and we sent down iron in which is both keen violence and advantages to men; and that God might know who helps Him and His apostles in secret; verily, God is strong and mighty
57|26|And we sent Noah and Abraham; and placed in their seed prophecy and the Book; and some of them are guided, though many of them are workers of abomination
57|27|Then we followed up their footsteps with our apostles; and we followed them up with Jesus the son of Mary; and we gave him the gospel; and we placed in the hearts of those who followed him kindness and compassion.- But monkery, they invented it; we only prescribed to them the craving after the goodwill of God, and they observed it not with due observance. But we gave to those who believe amongst them their hire; though many amongst them were workers of abomination
57|28|O ye who believe! fear God, and believe in His Apostle: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and will make for you a light for you to walk in, and will forgive you; for God is forgiving, compassionate
57|29|That the people of the Book may know that they cannot control aught of God's grace; and that grace is in God's hands, He gives it to whom He will; for God is Lord of mighty grace
58|1|GOD has heard the speech of her who wrangled with you about her husband, and complained to God; and God hears your gossip; verily, God both hears and sees
58|2|Those among you who back out of their wives they are not their mothers: their mothers are only those who gave them birth; and, verily, they speak a wrong speech and a false. Verily, God both pardons and forgives
58|3|But those who back out of their wives and then would recall their speech,- then the manumission of a captive before they touch each other; that is what ye are admonished, and God of what ye do is well aware
58|4|But he who finds not (the means):- then a fast for two months consecutively, before they touch each other; and he who cannot endure that:- then the feeding of sixty poor folk. That is that ye may believe in God and His Apostle; and these are the bounds of God; and for the misbelievers is grievous woe
58|5|Verily, those who oppose God and His Apostle shall be upset, as those before them were upset. We have sent down manifest signs: for the misbelievers is shameful woe
58|6|on the day when God shall raise them all together, and shall inform them of what they have done. God has taken account of it, but they forget it; for God is witness over all
58|7|Dost thou not see that God knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth? and that there cannot be a privy discourse of three but He makes the fourth? nor of five but He makes the sixth? nor less than that nor more, but that He is with them wheresoe'er they be? then He will inform them of what they have done upon the resurrection day; verily, God all things doth know
58|8|Dost thou not look at those who were prohibited from privy talk, and then returned to that they were forbidden? and they too discourse together with sin and enmity and rebellion against the Apostle; and when they come to thee they greet thee with what God greets thee not; and they say in themselves, Why does not God torment us for what we say? Hell is enough for them! they shall broil therein, and an ill journey shall it be
58|9|O ye who believe! when ye discourse together, then discourse not in sin and enmity and rebellion against the Apostle; but discourse together in righteousness and piety: and fear God, for unto Him ye shall be gathered
58|10|Privy talk is only from the devil, and those who do believe may grieve: it cannot hurt them at all, except by the permission of God: and upon God let the believers rely
58|11|O ye who believe! when it is said to you, 'Make room in your assemblies,' then make room; God will make room for you; and when it is said to you, 'Rise up,' then rise up; God will raise all you who believe, as well as those who are given knowledge, in rank; for God of what ye do is well aware
58|12|O ye who believe! when ye address the Apostle, then give in charity before addressing him; that is better for you, and more pure. But if ye find not the means,- then God is forgiving, compassionate
58|13|What! do ye shrink from giving in charity before addressing him? then if ye do it not, and God relents towards you, then be steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and fear God and His Apostle; for God is well aware of what ye do
58|14|Dost thou not look at those who take for patrons a people God is wrath with? they are neither of you nor of them, and they swear to you a lie the while they know
58|15|for them God has prepared severe torment; verily, evil is it they have done
58|16|They take their faith for a cloak; and they turn men aside from the path of God; and for them is shameful woe
58|17|Their wealth shall not avail them, nor their children at all, against God; they are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for aye
58|18|On the day when God raises them all together, then will they swear to Him as they swore to you; and they will think that they rest on somewhat.- Ay, verily, they are liars
58|19|Satan hath overridden them, and made them forget the remembrance of God: they are the crew of Satan; ay, the crew of Satan, they are the losers
58|20|Verily, those who oppose God and His Apostle are amongst the most vile
58|21|God has written, 'I will surely prevail, I and my apostles;' verily, God is strong and mighty
58|22|Thou shalt not find a people who believe in God and the last day loving him who opposes God and His Apostle, even though it be their fathers, or their sons, or their brethren, or their clansmen. He has written faith in their hearts, and He aids them with a spirit from Him; and will make them enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye! God is well pleased with them, and they well pleased with Him: they are God's crew; ay, God's crew, they shall prosper
59|1|What is in the heavens and in the earth celebrates God's praises; He is the mighty, the wise
59|2|He it was who drove those of the people of the Book who misbelieved forth from their houses, at the first emigration; ye did not think that they would go forth, and they thought that their fortresses would defend them against God; but God came upon them from whence they did not reckon, and cast dread into their hearts! They ruined their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers; wherefore take example, O ye who are endowed with sight
59|3|Had it not been that God had prescribed for them banishment, He would have tormented them in this world; but for them in the next shall be the torment of the Fire
59|4|that is because they opposed God and His Apostle: and whoso opposes God, verily, God is keen to punish
59|5|What palm trees ye did cut down or what ye left standing upon their roots was by God's permission, and to disgrace the workers of abomination
59|6|and as for the spoils that God gave to His Apostle from these (people) ye did not press forward after them with horse or riding camel; but God gives His Apostle authority over whom He pleases, for God is mighty over all
59|7|What God gave as spoils to His Apostle of the people of the cities is God's, and the Apostle's, and for kinsfolk, orphans, and the poor, and the wayfarer, so that it should not be circulated amongst the rich men of you. And what the Apostle gives you, take; and what he forbids you, desist from; and fear God, verily, God is keen to punish
59|8|And (it is) for the poor who fled, who were driven forth from their houses and their wealth, who crave grace from God and His goodwill, and help God and the Apostle; they are the truthful
59|9|And those who were settled in the abode and the faith before them, love those who fled to them; and they do not find in their breasts a need of what has been given to them; preferring them to themselves, even though there be poverty amongst them; and whoso is preserved from his own covetousness, these are the prosperous
59|10|And those who came after them say, 'Our Lord, forgive us and our brethren who were beforehand with us in the faith, and place not in our hearts ill-will towards those who believe - our Lord! verily, thou art kind, compassionate
59|11|Dost thou not look on those who were hypocritical, saying to their brethren who misbelieved amongst the people of the Book, 'If ye be driven forth we will go forth with you; and we will never obey any one concerning you; and if ye be fought against we will help you.' But God bears witness that they are surely liars
59|12|If they be driven forth, these will not go forth with them; and if they be fought against, these will not help them; or if they do help them, they will turn their backs in flight;- then shall they not be helped
59|13|Ye indeed are a keener source of fear in their hearts than God; that is because they are a people who do not understand
59|14|They will not fight against you in a body save in fortified cities, or from behind walls; their valour is great amongst themselves;- thou dost reckon them as one body, but their hearts are separated. This is because they are a people who have no sense
59|15|Like unto those before them, recently they tasted the evil result of their affair, and for them is grievous woe
59|16|Like unto the devil when he said to man, 'Disbelieve.' But when he disbelieved, he said, 'Verily, I am clear of thee! Verily, I fear God the Lord of the worlds
59|17|And the end of them both shall be that they shall both be in the Fire, to dwell therein for aye! for that is the reward of the unjust
59|18|O ye who believe! fear God; and let each soul look to what it sends on for the morrow; and fear God; verily, God is well aware of what ye do
59|19|And be ye not like those who forget God, and He makes them forget themselves; they are the workers of abomination
59|20|Not deemed alike shall be the fellows of the Fire and the fellows of Paradise: the fellows of Paradise they are the blissful
59|21|Had we sent down this Qur'an upon a mountain, thou wouldst have seen it humbling itself, splitting asunder from the fear of God! These parables do we strike out for men; haply they may reflect
59|22|He is God than whom there is no god; who knows the unseen and the visible; He is the merciful, the compassionate
59|23|He is God than whom there is no god; the King, the Holy, the Peace-Giver, the Faithful, the Protector, the Mighty, the Repairer, the Great!- celebrated be the praises of God above what they join with Him
59|24|He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the excellent names! His praises whatever are in the heavens and the earth do celebrate; for God is the mighty, the wise
60|1|O ye who believe! take not my enemy and your enemy for patrons, encountering them with love for they misbelieve in the truth that is to come to you; they drive out the Apostle and you for that ye believe in God your Lord! If ye go forth fighting strenuously in my cause and craving my good pleasure, and secretly show love for them, yet do I know best what ye conceal and what ye display! and he of you who does so has erred from the level path
60|2|If they find you they will be enemies to you, and they will stretch forth against you their hands and their tongues for evil, and would fain that ye should disbelieve
60|3|neither your kindred nor your children shall profit you upon the resurrection day; it will separate you! but God on what ye do doth look
60|4|Ye had a good example in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, 'Verily, we are clear of you and of what ye serve beside God. We disbelieve in you: and between us and you is enmity and hatred begun for ever, until ye believe in God alone!' But not the speech of Abraham to his father, 'Verily, I will ask forgiveness for thee, though I cannot control aught from God!' O our Lord! on thee do we rely! and unto thee we turn! and unto thee the journey is
60|5|Our Lord! make us not a trial for those who misbelieve; but forgive us! Our Lord! verily, thou art mighty, wise
60|6|Ye had in them a good example for him who would hope in God and the last day. But whoso turns his back, verily, God, He is rich and to be praised
60|7|Mayhap that God will place love between you and between those of them ye are hostile towards: for God is powerful, and God is forgiving, compassionate
60|8|God forbids you not respecting those who have not fought against you for religion's sake, and who have not driven you forth from your homes, that ye should act righteously and justly towards them; verily, God loves the just
60|9|He only forbids you to make patrons of those who have fought against you for religion's sake, and driven you forth from your homes, or have aided in your expulsion; and whoever makes patrons of them, they are the unjust
60|10|O ye who believe! when there come believing women who have fled, then try them: God knows their faith. If ye know them to be believers do not send them back to the misbelievers;- they are not lawful for them, nor are the men lawful for these; - but give them what they have expended, and it shall be no crime against you that ye marry them, when ye have given them their hire. And do not ye retain a right over misbelieving women; but ask for what ye have spent, and let them ask for what they have spent. That is God's judgment: He judges between you, for God is knowing, wise
60|11|And if any of your wives escape from you to the misbelievers, and your turn comes, then give to those whose wives have gone away the like of what they have spent; and fear God, in whom it is that ye believe
60|12|O thou prophet! when believing women come to thee and engage with thee that they will not associate aught with God, and will not steal, and will not fornicate, and will not kill their children, and will not bring a calumny which they have forged between their hands and feet, and that they will not rebel against thee in what is reasonable, then engage with them and ask forgiveness for them of God;- verily, God is forgiving, compassionate
60|13|O ye who believe! take not for patrons a people whom God is wroth against; they despair of the hereafter, as the misbelievers despair of the fellows of the tombs
61|1|What is in the heavens and what is in the earth celebrates the praises of God, for He is the mighty, the wise
61|2|O ye who believe! say not what ye do not
61|3|It is most hateful to God that ye say what ye do not
61|4|Verily, God loves those who fight in His cause in ranks as though they were a compact building
61|5|When Moses said to his people, 'O my people! why do ye hurt me, when ye know that I am the apostle of God to you?' and when they swerved, God made their hearts to swerve; for God guides not the people who work abomination
61|6|And when Jesus the son of Mary said, 'O children of Israel! verily, I am the apostle of God to you, verifying the law that was before me and giving you glad tidings of an apostle who shall come after me, whose name shall be Ahmed!' - but when he did come to them with manifest signs, they said, 'This is manifest sorcery
61|7|And who is more unjust than he who forges against God a lie when called unto Islam? but God guides not the unjust people
61|8|They desire to put out the light of God with their mouths; but God will perfect His light, averse although the misbeliever be
61|9|He it is who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of truth to set it above all religion; averse although the idolaters may be
61|10|O ye who believe! shall I lead you to a merchandise which will save you from grievous woe
61|11|To believe in God and His Apostle, and to fight strenuously in God's cause with your property and your persons; that is better for you if ye did but know
61|12|He will pardon you your sins, and bring you into gardens beneath which rivers flow, and goodly dwellings in gardens of Eden;- that is the mighty bliss
61|13|And other things which ye love,- help from God and victory nigh! so do thou give the glad tidings unto the believers
61|14|O ye who believe! be ye the helpers of God! as Jesus son of Mary said to the apostles, 'Who are my helpers for God?' Said the apostles, 'We are God's helpers!' And a party of the children of Israel believed, and a party misbelieved. And we aided those who believed against their enemies, and they were on the morrow superior
62|1|What is in the heavens and what is in the earth celebrates the praises of God the King, the holy? the mighty, the wise
62|2|He it is who sent unto the Gentiles a prophet amongst themselves to recite to them His signs and to purify them, and to teach them the Book and the wisdom, although they were before in obvious error
62|3|And others of them have not yet overtaken them; but He is the mighty, the wise
62|4|That is God's grace, He gives it to whomsoever He will; for God is Lord of mighty grace
62|5|The likeness of those who were charged with the law and then bore it not is as the likeness of an ass bearing books: sorry is the likeness of the people who say God's signs are lies! but God guides not an unjust people
62|6|Say, 'O ye who are Jews! if ye pretend that ye are the clients of God, beyond other people; then wish for death if ye do speak the truth
62|7|But they never wish for it, through what their hands have sent before! but God knows the unjust
62|8|Say, 'Verily, the death from which ye flee will surely meet you; then shall ye be sent back to Him who knows the unseen and the visible, and He will inform you of that which ye have done
62|9|O ye who believe! when the call to prayer is made upon the Congregation Day, then hasten to the remembrance of God, and leave off traffic; that is better for you, if ye did but know
62|10|And when prayer is performed, then disperse abroad in the land, and crave of God's grace; and remember God much; haply ye may prosper
62|11|But when they see merchandise or sport they flock to it and leave thee standing! Say, 'What is with God is better than sport and than merchandise, for God is the best of providers
63|1|When the hypocrites come to thee, they say, 'We bear witness that thou art surely the Apostle of God;' but God knows that thou art His Apostle: and God bears witness that the hypocrites are liars
63|2|They take their faith for a cloak, and then they turn folks from God's way: - evil is that which they have done
63|3|That is because they believed and then disbelieved, wherefore is a stamp set on their hearts so that they do not understand
63|4|And when thou seest them, their persons please thee; but if they speak, thou listenest to their speech: they are like timber propped up: they reckon every noise against them! They are the foe, so beware of them!- God fight against them, how they lie
63|5|And when it is said to them, 'Come, and the Apostle of God will ask forgiveness for you!' they turn away their heads, and thou mayest see them turning away since they are so big with pride
63|6|It is the same to them whether thou dost ask forgiveness for them, or whether thou dost not ask forgiveness for them,- God will not forgive them; verily, God guides not a people who work abomination
63|7|They it is who say, 'Expend not in alms upon those who are with the Apostle of God, in order that they may desert him!' - but God's are the treasures of the heavens and the earth; but the hypocrites have no sense
63|8|They say, 'If we return to el Medinah, the mightier will surely drive out the meaner therefrom;' but to God belongs the might, and to His Apostle and to the believers; but the hypocrites do not know
63|9|O ye who believe! let not your property nor your children divert you from the remembrance of God, - for whosoever does that, they are those who lose
63|10|But expend in alms of what we have bestowed upon you before death come on any one of you, and he says, 'My Lord! wouldst thou but have respited me till an appointed time nigh at hand, then would I surely give in charity and be among the righteous
63|11|But God will never respite a soul when its appointed time has come: and God of what ye do is well aware
64|1|What is in the heavens and what is in the earth celebrates God's praises; His is the kingdom, and His is the praise, and He is mighty over all
64|2|He it is who created you, and of you is (one) a misbeliever and (one) a believer; and God on what ye do does look
64|3|He created the heavens and the earth in truth; and has formed you and made excellent your forms; and unto Him the journey is
64|4|He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and knows what ye conceal and what ye display; for God knows the nature of men's breasts
64|5|Has there not come to you the story of those who misbelieved before, and tasted the evil result of their affair, and for them was grievous woe
64|6|That is because their apostles came to them with manifest signs, and they said, 'Shall mortals guide us?' and they misbelieved and turned their backs. But God was independent of them; for God is rich and to be praised
64|7|Those who misbelieve pretend that they shall surely not be raised: say, 'Yea! by my Lord! ye shall surely be raised: then ye shall be informed of that which ye have done;' for that is easy unto God
64|8|So believe in God and His Apostle and the light which we have sent down; for God of what ye do is well aware
64|9|On the day when he shall gather you to the day of gathering, that is the day of cheating! but whoso believes in God and acts aright, He will cover for him his offences, and will bring him into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye! that is the mighty bliss
64|10|But those who misbelieve and say our signs are lies, they are the fellows of the Fire, to dwell therein for aye! and evil shall the journey be
64|11|No calamity befalls but by the permission of God: and whoso believes in God, He will guide his heart; for God all things doth know
64|12|So obey God and obey the Apostle: but if ye turn your backs - our Apostle has only his plain message to preach
64|13|God, there is no god but He; and upon Him let the believers rely
64|14|O ye who believe! verily, among your wives and children are foes of yours: so beware of them! But if ye pardon, and overlook it, and forgive,- verily, God is forgiving, compassionate
64|15|Your property and your children are but a trial; and God, with Him is mighty hire
64|16|Then fear God as much as ye can! and hear, and obey, and expend in alms: it is better for yourselves. But whosoever is saved from his own covetousness - these are the prosperous
64|17|If ye lend to God a goodly loan, He will double it for you, and will forgive you; for God is grateful, clement
64|18|He knows the unseen and the visible; the mighty, the wise
65|1|O thou prophet! when ye divorce women, then divorce them at their term, and calculate the term and fear God your Lord. Do not drive them out of their houses unless they have committed manifest adultery. These are God's bounds, and whoso transgresses God's bounds has wronged himself. Thou knowest not whether haply God may cause something fresh to happen after that
65|2|And when they have reached their appointed time, then retain them with kindness, or separate from them with kindness; and bring as witnesses men of equity from among you; and give upright testimony to God. That is what He admonishes him who believes in God and the last day; and whosoever fears God, He will make for him a (happy) issue
65|3|and will provide for him from whence he reckoned not. And whosoever relies on God, He is sufficient for him: verily, God will attain His purpose:- God has set for everything a period
65|4|And such of your women as despair of menstruation,- if ye doubt, then their term is three months; and such as have not menstruated too. And those who are heavy with child their appointed time is when they have laid down their burden; and whosoever fears God, He will make for him an easy affair
65|5|That is God's command, He has sent it down to you; and whosoever fears God He will cover for him his offences and will make grand for him his hire
65|6|Let them dwell where ye dwell, according to your means, and do not harm them, to reduce them to straits; and if they be heavy with child, then pay for them until they lay down their burdens; and if they suckle (the child) for you, then give them their hire, and consult among yourselves in reason; but if ye be in difficulties, and another woman shall suckle the child for him
65|7|let him who has plenty expend of his plenty; but he whose provision is doled out, let him expend of what God has given him; God will not compel any soul beyond what He has given it;- God will make after difficulty ease
65|8|How many a city has turned away from the bidding of its Lord and His apostles; and we called them to a severe account, and we tormented them with an unheard-of torment
65|9|And they tasted the evil results of their conduct; and the end of their conduct was loss
65|10|God prepared for them severe torment;- then fear God, ye who are endowed with minds
65|11|Ye who believe! God has sent down to you a reminder; - an apostle to recite to you God's manifest signs;- to bring forth those who believe and act aright from darkness into light! and whoso believes in God and acts right He will bring him into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever and for aye! God has made goodly for him his provision
65|12|God it is who created seven heavens, and of the earth the like thereof. The bidding descends between them, that ye may know that God is mighty over all, and that God has encompassed all things with His knowledge
66|1|O thou prophet! wherefore dost thou prohibit what God has made lawful to thee, craving to please thy wives? but God is forgiving, compassionate
66|2|God has allowed you to expiate your oaths; for God is your sovereign, and He is the knowing, the wise
66|3|And when the prophet told as a secret to one of his wives a recent event, and when she gave information thereof and exposed it, he acquainted her with some of it and avoided part of it. But when he informed her of it, she said, 'Who told thee this?' he said, 'The wise one, the well-aware informed me
66|4|If ye both turn repentant unto God, - for your hearts have swerved! - but if ye back each other up against him,- verily, God, He is the sovereign; and Gabriel and the righteous of the believers, and the angels after that, will back him up
66|5|It may be that his Lord if he divorce you will give him in exchange wives better than you, Muslims, believers, devout, repentant, worshipping, given to fasting - such as have known men and virgins too
66|6|O ye who believe! save yourselves and your families from the fire, whose fuel is men and stones;- over it are angels stout and stern; they disobey not God in what He bids them, but they do what they are bidden
66|7|O ye who disbelieve! excuse not yourselves today;- ye shall only be rewarded for that which ye have done
66|8|O ye who believe! turn repentant to God with sincere repentance; it may be that thy Lord will cover for you your offences and will bring you into gardens beneath which rivers flow!- the day God will not disgrace the Prophet nor those who believe with him; their light shall run on before them, and at their right hands! they shall say, 'Our Lord! perfect for us our light and forgive us; verily, Thou art mighty over all
66|9|O thou prophet! fight strenuously against the misbelievers and hypocrites and be stern towards them; for their resort is hell, and an evil journey shall it be
66|10|God strikes out a parable to those who misbelieve: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot; they were under two of our righteous servants, but they betrayed them: and they availed them nothing against God; and it was said, 'Enter the fire with those who enter
66|11|And God strikes out a parable for those who believe: the wife of Pharaoh, when she said, 'My Lord, build for me a house with Thee in Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his works, and save me from the unjust people
66|12|And Mary, daughter of Imran, who guarded her private parts, and we breathed therein of our spirit and she verified the words of her Lord and His books, and was of the devout
67|1|Blessed be He in whose hand is the kingdom, for He is mighty over all
67|2|Who created death and life, to try you, which of you does best; for He is the mighty, the forgiving
67|3|Who created seven heavens in stories; thou canst not see any discordance in the creation of the Merciful
67|4|Why, look again! canst thou see a flaw? Then look again twice!- thy look shall return to thee driven back and dulled
67|5|And we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps; and set them to pelt the devils with; and we have prepared for them the torment of the blaze
67|6|And for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the torment of hell, and an evil journey shall it be
67|7|When they shall be cast therein they shall hear its braying as it boils
67|8|it will well-nigh burst for rage! Whenever a troop of them is thrown in, its treasurers shall ask them, 'Did not a warner come to you
67|9|They shall say, 'Yea! a warner came to us, and we called him liar, and said, "God has not sent down aught; ye are but in great error
67|10|And they shall say, 'Had we but listened or had sense we had not been amongst the fellows of the blaze
67|11|And they will confess their sins; but 'Avaunt to the fellows of the blaze
67|12|Verily, those who fear their Lord in secret, for them is forgiveness and a great hire
67|13|Speak ye secretly or openly, verily, He knows the nature of men's breasts
67|14|Ay! He knows who created! for He is the subtle, the well-aware
67|15|He it is who made the earth flat for you; so walk in the spacious sides thereof and eat of His provision; for unto Him the resurrection is
67|16|Are ye sure that He who is in the heaven will not cleave the earth with you, and that it then shall quake
67|17|Or are ye sure that He who is in the heaven will not send against you a heavy sand storm, and that ye then shall know how the warning was
67|18|But those before them did call the apostles liars, and what a change it was
67|19|Or have they not looked at the birds above them expanding their wings or closing them? - none holds them in except the Merciful One; for He on everything doth look
67|20|Or who is this who will be a host for you, to help you against the Merciful?- the misbelievers are only in delusion
67|21|Or who is this who will provide you if He hold back His provision? - Nay, but they persist in perverseness and aversion
67|22|Is he who walks prone upon his face more guided than he who walks upright upon a straight path
67|23|Say, 'It is He who produced you and made for you hearing and sight and hearts' - little is it that ye give thanks
67|24|Say, 'It is He who sowed you in the earth, and unto Him shall ye be gathered
67|25|They say, 'When shall this threat be, if ye do speak the truth
67|26|Say, 'The knowledge is only with God; and I am but a plain warner
67|27|And when they see it nigh, sorry shall be the faces of those who misbelieve; and it shall be said, 'This is that for which ye used to call
67|28|Say, 'Have ye considered, whether God destroy me and those with me, or whether we obtain mercy, yet who will protect the misbelievers from grievous torment
67|29|Say, 'He is the Merciful; we believe in Him, and upon Him do we rely; and ye shall shortly know who it is that is in obvious error
67|30|Say, 'Have ye considered if your waters on the morrow should have sunk, who is to bring you flowing water
68|1|By the pen, and what they write
68|2|thou art not, by God's grace, mad
68|3|and, verily, thine is a hire that is not grudged
68|4|and, verily, thou art of a grand nature
68|5|But thou shalt see and they shall see
68|6|which of you is the infatuated
68|7|Verily, thy Lord He knows best who errs from His way; and He knows best those who are guided
68|8|Then obey not those who call thee liar
68|9|they would fain that thou shouldst be smooth with them, then would they be smooth with thee
68|10|And obey not any mean swearer
68|11|a back-biter, a walker about with slander
68|12|a forbidder of good, a transgressor, a sinner
68|13|rude, and base-born too
68|14|though he have wealth and sons
68|15|When our signs are recited to him he says, 'Old folks' tales
68|16|We will brand him on the snout
68|17|Verily, we have tried them as we tried the fellows of the garden when they swore, 'We will cut its fruit at morn
68|18|But they made not the exception
68|19|and there came round about it an encompassing calamity from thy Lord the while they slept
68|20|and on the morrow it was as one the fruit of which is cut
68|21|And they cried to each other in the morning
68|22|Go early to your tilth if ye would cut it
68|23|So they set off, saying privily to each other
68|24|There shall surely enter it today unto you no poor person
68|25|And they went early deciding to be stingy
68|26|And when they saw it they said, 'Verily, we have erred
68|27|Nay, we are forbidden (its fruit)
68|28|Said the most moderate of them, 'Said I not to you, "unless ye celebrate God's praises
68|29|Said they, 'Celebrated be the praises of our Lord! verily, we were unjust
68|30|And they approached each other with mutual blame
68|31|Said they, 'O woe to us! verily, we have been outrageous
68|32|Haply our Lord may give us instead a better than it; verily, we unto our Lord do yearn
68|33|Thus is the torment, but, verily, the torment of the hereafter is greater, if ye did but know
68|34|Verily, for the pious with their Lord are gardens of pleasure
68|35|Shall we then make the Muslims like the sinners
68|36|What ails you? how ye judge
68|37|Or have ye a book in which ye can study
68|38|that ye are surely to have what ye may choose
68|39|Or have ye oaths binding on us until the judgment day that ye are surely to have what ye may judge
68|40|Ask them, which of them will vouch for this
68|41|Or have they partners, then let them bring their partners if they do speak the truth
68|42|On the day when the leg shall be bared; and they shall be called to adore and shall not be able
68|43|Lowering their looks, abasement shall attack them, for they were called to adore while yet they were safe
68|44|But let me alone with him who calls this new discourse a lie. We will surely bring them down by degrees from whence they do not know
68|45|And I will let them have their way! for my device is sure
68|46|Or dost thou ask them a hire for it while they are burdened with debts
68|47|Or have they the knowledge of the unseen, so that they write
68|48|But wait patiently for the judgment of thy Lord, and be not like the fellow of the fish, when he cried out as he was choking with rage
68|49|Had it not been that grace from his Lord reached him, he would have been cast out on the naked (shore) and blamed the while
68|50|But his Lord elected him, and made him of the pious
68|51|The misbelievers well-nigh upset thee with their looks when they hear the reminder, and they say, 'Surely he is mad
68|52|And yet it is but a reminder to the worlds
69|1|The Infallible
69|2|what is the Infallible
69|3|and what should make thee know what the Infallible is
69|4|Thamud and 'Ad called the Striking Day a lie
69|5|but as for Thamud they perished by the shock
69|6|and as for 'Ad they perished with the violent cold blast of wind
69|7|which He subjected against them for seven nights and eight days consecutively
69|8|Thou mightest see the people therein prostrate as though they were palm stumps thrown down, and canst thou see any of them left
69|9|And Pharaoh and those before him of the overturned Cities committed sins
69|10|and they rebelled against the apostle of their Lord, and He seized them with an excessive punishment
69|11|Verily, we, when the water surged, bore you on it in a sailing ship
69|12|to make it a memorial for you, and that the retentive ear might hold it
69|13|And when the trumpet shall be blown with one blast
69|14|and the earth shall be borne away, and the mountains too, and both be crushed with one crushing
69|15|on that day shall the inevitable happen
69|16|and the heaven on that day shall be cleft asunder, for on that day shall it wane
69|17|and the angels upon the sides thereof; and above them on that day shall eight bear the throne of thy Lord
69|18|On the day when ye shall be set forth no hidden thing of yours shall be concealed
69|19|And as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he shall say, 'Here! take and read my book
69|20|Verily, I thought that I should meet my reckoning
69|21|and he shall be in a pleasing life
69|22|in a lofty garden
69|23|whose fruits are nigh to cull
69|24|Eat ye and drink with good digestion, for what ye did aforetime in the days that have gone by
69|25|But as for him who is given his book in his left hand he shall say, 'O, would that I had not received my book
69|26|I did not know what my account would be
69|27|O, would that it had been an end of me
69|28|my wealth availed me not
69|29|my authority has perished from me
69|30|Take him and fetter him
69|31|then in hell broil him
69|32|then into a chain whose length is seventy cubits force him
69|33|verily, he believed not in the mighty God
69|34|nor was he particular to feed the poor
69|35|therefore he has not here today any warm friend
69|36|nor any food except foul ichor
69|37|which none save sinners shall eat
69|38|I need not swear by what ye see
69|39|or what ye do not see
69|40|verily, it is the speech of a noble apostle
69|41|and it is not the speech of a poet:- little is it ye believe
69|42|And it is not the speech of a soothsayer,- little is it that ye mind
69|43|a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
69|44|Why if he had invented against us any sayings
69|45|we would have seized him by the right hand
69|46|then we would have cut his jugular vein
69|47|nor could any one of you have kept us off from him
69|48|Verily, it is a memorial to the pious
69|49|and, verily, we know that there are amongst you those who say it is a lie
69|50|and, verily, it is a source of sighing to the misbelievers
69|51|and, verily, it is certain truth
69|52|Therefore celebrate the name of thy mighty Lord
70|1|An asker asked for torment that must befall
70|2|for the unbelievers; there is no repelling it
70|3|from God the Lord of the ascents
70|4|whereby ascend the angels and the Spirit unto Him in a day whose length is fifty thousand years
70|5|Wherefore be patient with fair patience
70|6|verily, they see it as afar off
70|7|but we see it nigh
70|8|The day when the heaven shall be as molten brass
70|9|and the mountains shall be like flocks of wool
70|10|when no warm friend shall question friend
70|11|they shall gaze on each other, and the sinner would fain give as a ransom from the torment of that day his sons
70|12|and his mate, and his brother
70|13|and his kin who stand by him
70|14|and all who are in the earth, that yet it might rescue him
70|15|Nay, verily, it is a flame
70|16|dragging by the scalp
70|17|it shall call those who retreated and turned their backs
70|18|and who amassed and hoarded
70|19|Verily, man is by nature rash
70|20|when evil touches him, very impatient
70|21|when good touches him, niggardly
70|22|all save those who pray
70|23|who remain at their prayers
70|24|and in whose wealth is a reasonable due (set aside)
70|25|for him who asks and him who is kept from asking
70|26|and those who believe in a day of judgment
70|27|and those who shrink in terror from the torment of their Lord
70|28|verily, the torment of their Lord is not safe
70|29|and those who guard their private parts
70|30|except for their wives or the (slave girls) whom their right hands possess, for they are not to be blamed
70|31|but whoso craves beyond this, they are the transgressors
70|32|and those who observe their trusts and their compacts
70|33|and those who are upright in their testimonies
70|34|and those who keep their prayers
70|35|these shall dwell in gardens honoured
70|36|What ails the misbelievers that they hurry on before thee
70|37|crowding together on the right and on the left
70|38|Does every man of them wish to enter the garden of pleasure
70|39|Nay, we created them of what they know
70|40|And I need not swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests; verily, we are able
70|41|to change them for others better, nor are we prevented
70|42|So leave them to plunge in discussion, and to play until they meet that day of theirs which they are threatened with
70|43|the day when they shall come forth in haste from the graves, as though they flock to a standard
70|44|with their looks abashed; meanness shall cover them! That is the day which they were promised
71|1|Verily, we sent Noah to his people, 'Warn thy people before there come to them a grievous torment
71|2|Said he, 'O my people! verily, I am to you an obvious warner
71|3|that ye serve God and fear Him and obey me
71|4|He will pardon you your sins, and will defer you unto an appointed time; verily, God's appointed time when it comes will not be deferred, did ye but know
71|5|Said he, 'My Lord! verily, I have called my people by night and day
71|6|and my call did but increase them in flight
71|7|and, verily, every time I called them, that Thou mightest pardon them, they placed their fingers in their ears and tried to cover themselves with their garments and persisted, and were very big with pride
71|8|Then I called them openly
71|9|then I published to them and I spoke to them in secret
71|10|and I said, "Ask forgiveness of your Lord, verily, He is very forgiving
71|11|He will send the rain upon you in torrents
71|12|and will extend to you wealth and children, and will make for you gardens, and will make for you rivers
71|13|What ails you that ye hope not for something serious from God
71|14|when He has created you by steps
71|15|Do ye not see how God has created the seven heavens in stories
71|16|and has set the moon therein for a light, and set the sun for a lamp
71|17|and God has made you grow out of the earth
71|18|and then He will make you return thereto, and will make you come forth therefrom
71|19|and God has made for you the earth a carpet
71|20|that ye may walk therein in broad paths
71|21|Said Noah, 'My Lord! verily, they have rebelled against me, and followed him whose wealth and children have but added to his loss
71|22|and they have plotted a great plot
71|23|and said, "Ye shall surely not leave your gods: ye shall surely neither leave Wadd, nor Suwah, nor Yaghuth, nor Ya'uq, nor Nasr
71|24|and they led astray many."' And thou (Mohammed) wilt only increase the unjust in their error
71|25|because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter into the fire, and they found no helpers against God
71|26|And Noah said, 'My Lord! leave not upon the earth one dweller of the misbelievers
71|27|Verily, Thou, if Thou shouldst leave them, they will lead astray Thy servants, and they will only bear for children sinners and misbelievers
71|28|My Lord! pardon me and my two parents, and whomsoever enters my house believing, and (pardon) the believers men and women - but Thou shalt only increase the unjust in loss
72|1|Say, 'I have been inspired that there listened a company of the ginn, and they said, "We have heard a marvellous Qur'an
72|2|that guides to the right direction; and we believe therein, and we join no one with our Lord
72|3|for, verily, He - may the majesty of our Lord be exalted!- has taken to Himself neither consort nor son
72|4|And, verily, a fool among us spake against God wide of the mark
72|5|And we thought that men and ginn would never speak a lie against God
72|6|And there are persons amongst men who seek for refuge with persons amongst the ginn; but they increase them in their perverseness
72|7|And they thought, as ye thought, that God would not raise up any one from the dead
72|8|But we touched the heavens and found them filled with a mighty guard and shooting-stars
72|9|and we did sit in certain seats thereof to listen; but whoso of us listens now finds a shooting-star for him on guard
72|10|And, verily, we know not whether evil be meant for those who are in the earth, or if their Lord means right by them
72|11|And of us are some who are pious, and of us are some who are otherwise: we are in separate bands
72|12|And we thought that we could not frustrate God in the earth, and could not frustrate Him by flight
72|13|But, verily, when we heard the guidance we believed therein, and he who believes in his Lord shall fear neither diminution nor loss
72|14|And, verily, of us are some who are Muslims, and of us some are trespassers; but those of us who are Muslims they strive after right direction
72|15|and as for the trespassers they are fuel for hell
72|16|And if they will go right upon the way, we will irrigate them with copious water
72|17|to try them thereby; and whoso turns from the remembrance of his Lord He will drive him to severe torment
72|18|And (say) that the mosques are God's, and that ye should not call on any one with God
72|19|and that when God's servant stood up to pray they called out to him and well-nigh crowded upon him
72|20|Say, 'I only call upon my Lord, and I join no one with Him
72|21|Say, 'Verily, I cannot control for you either harm, or right direction
72|22|Say, 'Verily, as for me none can protect me against God, nor do I find any refuge beside Him
72|23|except delivering the message from God and His errands: and whoso rebels against God and His Apostle, verily, for him is the fire of hell for them to dwell therein for ever and for aye
72|24|Until when they see what they are threatened with, then shall they surely know who is most weak at helping and fewest in numbers
72|25|Say, 'I know not if what ye are threatened with be nigh, or if my Lord will set for it a term
72|26|He knows the unseen, and He lets no one know His unseen
72|27|save such apostle as He is well pleased with: for, verily, He sends marching before him and behind him a guard
72|28|That He may know that they have delivered the errands of their Lord, for He compasses what they have, and reckons everything by number
73|1|O thou who art enwrapped
73|2|rise by night except a little
73|3|the half or deduct therefrom a little
73|4|or add thereto, and chant the Qur'an chanting
73|5|Verily, we will cast on thee a heavy speech
73|6|Verily, the early part of the night is stronger in impressions and more upright in speech
73|7|Verily, thou hast by day a long employment
73|8|but mention the name of thy Lord and devote thyself thoroughly to Him
73|9|the Lord of the east and the west; there is no god but He; then take Him for a guardian
73|10|And endure patiently what they say, and flee from them with a decorous flight
73|11|And leave me and those who say it is a lie, who are possessed of comfort; and let them bide for a while
73|12|Verily, with us are heavy fetters and hell-fire
73|13|and food that chokes, and mighty woe
73|14|On the day when the earth and the mountains shall tremble and the earth shall be as a crumbling sand-hill
73|15|Verily, we have sent unto you an apostle bearing witness against you, as we sent an apostle unto Pharaoh
73|16|But Pharaoh rebelled against the apostle, and we seized him with an overpowering punishment
73|17|Then how will ye shield yourselves if ye misbelieve from the day which shall make children grey-headed
73|18|whereon the heaven cleaves - its promise shall be fulfilled
73|19|Verily, this is a memorial, and whoso will, let him take unto his Lord a way
73|20|Verily, thy Lord knows that thou dost stand up to pray nearly two-thirds of the night, or the half of it or the third of it, as do part of those who are with thee; for God measures the night and the day; He knows that ye cannot calculate it, and He turns relentant towards you. So read what is easy of the Qur'an. He knows that there will be of you some who are sick and others who beat about in the earth craving the grace of God, and others who are fighting in the cause of God. Then read what is easy of it and be steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and lend to God a goodly loan, for what ye send forward for yourselves of good ye will find it with God. It is better and a greater hire; and ask ye pardon of God: verily, God is forgiving, merciful
74|1|O thou who art covered
74|2|rise up and warn
74|3|And thy Lord magnify
74|4|And thy garments purify
74|5|And abomination shun
74|6|And grant not favours to gain increase
74|7|And for thy Lord await
74|8|And when the trump is blown
74|9|for that day is a difficult day
74|10|for the misbelievers aught but easy
74|11|Leave me alone with him I have created
74|12|and for whom I have made extensive wealth
74|13|and sons that he may look upon
74|14|and for whom I have smoothed things down
74|15|Then he desires that I should increase
74|16|nay, verily, he is hostile to our signs
74|17|I will drive him up a hill
74|18|Then he reflected and planned
74|19|May he be killed, - how he planned
74|20|Again, may he be killed, - how he planned
74|21|Then he looked
74|22|then he frowned and scowled
74|23|then he retreated and was big with pride
74|24|and said, 'This is only magic exhibited
74|25|this is only mortal speech
74|26|I will broil him in hell-fire
74|27|and what shall make thee know what hell-fire is
74|28|It will not leave and will not let alone
74|29|It scorches the flesh
74|30|over it are nineteen (angels)
74|31|We have made only angels guardians of the fire, and we have only made their number a trial to those who misbelieve; that those who have been given the Book may be certain, and that those who believe may be increased in faith; and that those who have been given the Book and the believers may not doubt; and that those in whose hearts is sickness, and the misbelievers may say, 'What does God mean by this as a parable?' Thus God leads astray whom He pleases, and guides him He pleases: and none knows the hosts of thy Lord save Himself; and it is only a reminder to mortals
74|32|Nay, by the moon
74|33|And the night when it retires
74|34|And the morning when it brightly dawns
74|35|Verily, it is one of the greatest misfortunes
74|36|a warning to mortals
74|37|for him amongst you who wishes to press forward or to tarry
74|38|Every soul is pledged for what it earns
74|39|except the fellows of the right
74|40|in gardens shall they ask each other
74|41|about the sinners
74|42|What drove you into hell-fire
74|43|They shall say, 'We weren't of those who prayed
74|44|we didn't feed the poor
74|45|but we did plunge into discussion with those who plunged
74|46|and we called the judgment day a lie
74|47|until the certainty did come to us
74|48|But there shall not profit them the intercession of the intercessors
74|49|What ailed them that they turned away from the memorial
74|50|as though they were timid asses
74|51|fleeing from a lion
74|52|Nay, every man of them wished that he might have given him books spread open
74|53|Nay, but they did not fear the hereafter
74|54|Nay, it is a memorial
74|55|and let him who will remember it
74|56|but none will remember it except God please. He is most worthy of fear; and he is most worthy to forgive
75|1|I need not swear by the resurrection day
75|2|Nor need I swear by the self-accusing soul
75|3|Does man think that we shall not collect his bones
75|4|Able are we to arrange his finger tips
75|5|Nay, but man wishes to be wicked henceforward
75|6|he asks, When is the resurrection day
75|7|But when the sight shall be dazed
75|8|and the moon be eclipsed
75|9|and the sun and the moon be together
75|10|and man shall say upon that day, 'Where is a place to flee to
75|11|nay, no refuge
75|12|and to thy Lord that day is the sure settlement
75|13|He will inform man on that day of what He has sent forward or delayed
75|14|Nay, man is an evidence against himself
75|15|and even if he thrusts forward his excuses
75|16|Do not move thy tongue thereby to hasten it
75|17|It is for us to collect it and to read it
75|18|and when we read it then follow its reading
75|19|And again it is for us to explain it
75|20|Nay, indeed, but ye love the transient life
75|21|and ye neglect the hereafter
75|22|Faces on that day shall be bright
75|23|gazing on their Lord
75|24|And faces on that day shall be dismal
75|25|Thou wilt think that a back-breaking calamity has happened to them
75|26|Nay, but when the [soul] comes up into the throat
75|27|and it is said, 'Who will charm it back
75|28|and he will think that it is his parting [hour]
75|29|And leg shall be pressed on leg
75|30|unto thy Lord on that day shall the driving be
75|31|For he did not believes and did not pray
75|32|but he said it was a lie, and turned his back
75|33|Then he went to his people haughtily
75|34|woe to thee, and woe to thee
75|35|again woe to thee, and woe to thee
75|36|Does man think that he shall be left to himself
75|37|Wasn't he a clot of emitted seed
75|38|Then he was congealed blood, and (God) created him, and fashioned him
75|39|and made of him pairs, male and female
75|40|Is not He able to quicken the dead
76|1|Does there not come on man a portion of time when he is nothing worth mentioning
76|2|Verily, We created man from a mingled clot, to try him; and we gave him hearing and sight
76|3|Verily, we guided him in the way, whether he be grateful or ungrateful
76|4|Verily, we have prepared for those who misbelieve chains and fetters and a blaze
76|5|Verily, the righteous shall drink of a cup tempered with Kafur
76|6|a spring from which God's servants shall drink and make it gush out as they please
76|7|They who fulfill their vows, and fear a day, the evil which shall fly abroad
76|8|and who give food for His love to the poor and the orphan and the captive
76|9|We only feed you for God's sake; we desire not from you either reward or thanks
76|10|we fear from our Lord a frowning, calamitous day
76|11|And God will guard them from the evil of that day and will cast on them brightness and joy
76|12|and their reward for their patience shall be Paradise and silk
76|13|reclining therein upon couches they shall neither see therein sun nor piercing cold
76|14|and close down upon them shall be its shadows; and lowered over them its fruits to cull
76|15|and they shall be served round with vessels of silver and goblets that are as flagons
76|16|flagons of silver which they shall mete out
76|17|and they shall drink therein a cup tempered with Zingabil
76|18|a spring therein named Silsabil
76|19|and there shall go round about them eternal boys; when thou seest them thou wilt think them scattered pearls
76|20|and when thou seest them thou shalt see pleasure and a great estate
76|21|On them shall be garments of green embroidered satin and brocade; and they shall be adorned with bracelets of silver; and their Lord shall give them to drink pure drink
76|22|Verily, this is a reward for you, and your efforts are thanked
76|23|Verily, we have sent down upon thee the Qur'an
76|24|Wherefore wait patiently for the judgment of thy Lord, and obey not any sinner or misbeliever amongst them
76|25|But remember the name of thy Lord morning, and evening
76|26|and through the night, and adore Him, and celebrate His praises the whole night long
76|27|Verily, these love the transitory life, and leave behind them a heavy day
76|28|We created them and strengthened their joints; and if we please we can exchange for the likes of them in their stead
76|29|Verily, this is a memorial, and whoso will, let him take unto his Lord a way
76|30|But ye will not please except God please! Verily, God is knowing, wise
76|31|He makes whomsoever He pleases to enter into His mercy; but the unjust He has prepared for them a grievous woe
77|1|By those sent in a series
77|2|And by those who speed swiftly
77|3|And by the dispensers abroad
77|4|And by the separators apart
77|5|And by those who instil the reminder
77|6|as an excuse or warning
77|7|Verily, what ye are threatened with shall surely happen
77|8|And when the stars shall be erased
77|9|And when the heaven shall be cleft
77|10|And when the mountains shall be winnowed
77|11|And when the apostles shall have a time appointed for them
77|12|For what day is the appointment made
77|13|For the day of decision
77|14|and what shall make thee know what the decision is
77|15|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|16|Have we not destroyed those of yore
77|17|and then followed them up with those of the latter day
77|18|Thus do we with the sinners
77|19|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|20|Did we not create you from contemptible water
77|21|and place it in a sure depository
77|22|unto a certain decreed term
77|23|for we are able and well able too
77|24|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|25|Have we not made for them the earth
77|26|to hold the living and the dead
77|27|and set thereon firm mountains reared aloft? and given you to drink water in streams
77|28|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|29|Go off to that which ye did call a lie
77|30|Go off to the shadow of three columns
77|31|that shall not shade nor avail against the flame
77|32|Verily, it throws off sparks like towers
77|33|as though they were yellow camels
77|34|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|35|This is the day when they may not speak
77|36|when they are not permitted to excuse themselves
77|37|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|38|This is the day of decision! We have assembled you with those of yore
77|39|if ye have any stratagem employ it now
77|40|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|41|Verily, the pious are amid shades and springs
77|42|and fruit such as they love
77|43|Eat and drink with good digestion, for that which ye have done
77|44|Verily, thus do we reward those who do well
77|45|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|46|Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little; verily, ye are sinners
77|47|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|48|And when it is said to them bow down, they bow not down
77|49|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
77|50|And in what new discourse after it will they believe
78|1|Of what do they ask each other
78|2|Of the mighty information
78|3|whereon they do dispute
78|4|nay, they shall know too well
78|5|Again, nay, they shall know too well
78|6|Have we not set the earth as a couch
78|7|and the mountains as stakes
78|8|and created you in pairs
78|9|and made your sleep for rest
78|10|and made the night a garment
78|11|and made the day for livelihood
78|12|and built above you seven solid (heavens)
78|13|and set a burning lamp
78|14|and, sent down from the rain-expressing clouds water pouring forth
78|15|to bring out thereby the grain and herb
78|16|and gardens thickly planted
78|17|Verily, the day of decision is an appointed time
78|18|and the day when the trumpet shall be blown, and ye shall come in troops
78|19|and the heavens shall be opened, and shall be all doors
78|20|and the mountains shall be moved, and shall be like a mirage
78|21|Verily, hell is an ambuscade
78|22|a reward for the outrageous
78|23|to tarry therein for ages
78|24|They shall not taste therein cool nor drink
78|25|but only boiling water and pus
78|26|a fit reward
78|27|Verily, they did not hope for the account
78|28|but they ever said our signs were lies
78|29|Everything have we remembered in a book
78|30|Then taste, for we will only increase your torment
78|31|Verily, for the pious is a blissful place
78|32|gardens and vineyards
78|33|and girls with swelling breasts of the same age as themselves
78|34|and a brimming cup
78|35|they shall hear therein no folly and no lie
78|36|a reward from thy Lord, a sufficient gift
78|37|The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what is between them both,- the Merciful,- they cannot obtain audience of Him
78|38|The day when the Spirit and the angels shall stand in ranks, they shall not speak save to whom the Merciful permits, and who speaks aright
78|39|That is the true day; and whoso pleases let him take to a resort unto his Lord
78|40|Verily, we have warned you of a torment that is nigh: on a day when man shall see what his two hands have sent forward; and the misbeliever shall say, 'Would that I were dust
79|1|By those who tear out violently
79|2|And by those who gaily release
79|3|And by those who float through the air
79|4|And the preceders who precede
79|5|And those who manage the affair
79|6|On the day when the quaking quakes
79|7|which the following one shall succeed
79|8|Hearts on that day shall tremble
79|9|eyes thereon be humbled
79|10|They say, 'Shall we be sent back to our old course
79|11|What! when we are rotten bones
79|12|they say, 'That then were a losing return
79|13|But it will only be one scare
79|14|and lo! they will be on the surface
79|15|Has the story of Moses come to you
79|16|when his Lord addressed him in the holy valley of Tuva
79|17|Go unto Pharaoh, verily, he is outrageous
79|18|and say, "Hast thou a wish to purify thyself
79|19|and that I may guide thee to thy Lord, and thou mayest fear
79|20|So he showed him the greatest signs
79|21|but he called him a liar and rebelled
79|22|Then he retreated hastily
79|23|and gathered, and proclaimed
79|24|and said, 'I am your Lord most High
79|25|but God seized him with the punishment of the future life and of the former
79|26|Verily, in that is a lesson to him who fears
79|27|Are ye harder to create or the heaven that He has built
79|28|He raised its height and fashioned it
79|29|and made its night to cover it, and brought forth its noonday light
79|30|and the earth after that He did stretch out
79|31|He brings forth from it its water and its pasture
79|32|And the mountains He did firmly set
79|33|a provision for you and for your cattle
79|34|And when the great predominant calamity shall come
79|35|on the day when man shall remember what he strove after
79|36|and hell shall be brought out for him who sees
79|37|And as for him who was outrageous
79|38|and preferred the life of this world
79|39|verily, hell is the resort
79|40|But as for him who feared the station of his Lord, and prohibited his soul from lust
79|41|verily, Paradise is the resort
79|42|They shall ask thee about the Hour, for when it is set
79|43|Whereby canst thou mention it
79|44|Unto thy Lord its period belongs
79|45|Thou art only a warner to him who fears it
79|46|On the day they see it, it will be as though they had only tarried an evening or the noon thereof
80|1|He frowned and turned his back
80|2|for that there came to him a blind man
80|3|But what should make thee know whether haply he may be purified
80|4|or may be mindful and the reminder profit him
80|5|But as for him who is wealthy
80|6|thou dost attend to him
80|7|and thou dost not care that he is not purified
80|8|but as for him who comes to thee earnestly
80|9|fearing the while
80|10|from him thou art diverted
80|11|Nay! verily, it is a memorial
80|12|and whoso pleases will remember it
80|13|In honoured pages
80|14|exalted, purified
80|15|in the hands of
80|16|noble, righteous scribes
80|17|May man be killed! how ungrateful he is
80|18|Of what did He create him
80|19|Of a clot. He created him and fated him
80|20|then the path He did make easy for him
80|21|then He killed him, and laid him in the tomb
80|22|then when He pleases will He raise him up again
80|23|Nay, he has not fulfilled his bidding
80|24|But let man look unto his foods
80|25|Verily, we have poured the water out in torrents
80|26|then we have cleft the earth asunder
80|27|and made to grow therefrom the grain
80|28|and the grape, and the hay
80|29|and the olive, and the palm
80|30|and gardens closely planted
80|31|and fruits, and grass
80|32|a provision for you and for your cattle
80|33|But when the stunning noise shall come
80|34|on the day when man shall flee from his brother
80|35|and his mother and his father
80|36|and his spouse and his sons
80|37|Every man among them on that day shall have a business to employ him
80|38|Faces on that day shall be bright
80|39|laughing, joyous
80|40|and faces shall have dust upon them
80|41|darkness shall cover them
80|42|those are the wicked misbelievers
81|1|When the sun is folded up
81|2|And when the stars do fall
81|3|And when the mountains are moved
81|4|And when the she-camels ten months gone with young shall be neglected
81|5|And when the beasts shall be crowded together
81|6|And when the seas shall surge up
81|7|And when souls shall be paired with bodies
81|8|And when the child who was buried alive shall be asked
81|9|for what sin she was slain
81|10|And when the pages shall be spread out
81|11|And when the heaven shall be flayed
81|12|And when hell shall be set ablaze
81|13|And when Paradise shall be brought nigh
81|14|The soul shall know what it has produced
81|15|I need not swear by the stars that slink back
81|16|moving swiftly, slinking into their dens
81|17|Nor by the night when darkness draws on
81|18|Nor by the morn when it first breathes up
81|19|Verily, it is the speech of a noble apostle
81|20|mighty, standing sure with the Lord of the throne
81|21|obeyed and trusty too
81|22|Your comrade is not mad
81|23|he saw him on the plain horizon
81|24|nor does he grudge to communicate the unseen
81|25|Nor is it the speech of a pelted devil
81|26|Then whither do ye go
81|27|It is but a reminder to the worlds
81|28|to whomsoever of you pleases to go straight
81|29|but ye will not please, except God, the Lord of the world, should please
82|1|When the heaven is cleft asunder
82|2|And when the stars are scattered
82|3|And when the seas gush together
82|4|And when the tombs are turned upside down
82|5|The soul shall know what it has sent on or kept back
82|6|O man! what has seduced thee concerning thy generous Lord
82|7|who created thee, and fashioned thee, and gave thee symmetry
82|8|and in what form He pleased composed thee
82|9|Nay, but ye call the judgment a lie
82|10|but over you are guardians set
82|11|noble, writing down
82|12|they know what ye do
82|13|Verily, the righteous are in pleasure
82|14|and, verily, the wicked are in hell
82|15|they shall broil therein upon the judgment day
82|16|nor shall they be absent therefrom
82|17|And what shall make thee know what is the judgment day
82|18|Again, what shall make thee know what is the judgment day
82|19|a day when no soul shall control aught for another; and the bidding on that day belongs to God
83|1|Woe to those who give short weight
83|2|who when they measure against others take full measure
83|3|but when they measure to them or weigh to them, diminish
83|4|Do not these think that they shall be raised again
83|5|at the mighty day
83|6|the day when men shall stand before the Lord of the worlds
83|7|Nay, verily, the book of the wicked is in Siggin
83|8|and what shall make thee know what Siggin is
83|9|a book inscribed
83|10|Woe on that day for those who say it is a lie
83|11|Who call the judgment day a lie
83|12|but none shall call it a lie except every sinful transgressor
83|13|who, when our signs are read to him, says, Old folks tales
83|14|Nay, but that which they have gained has settled upon their hearts
83|15|Nay, verily, from their Lord on that day are they veiled
83|16|and then, verily, they shall broil in hell
83|17|then it shall be said, 'This is what ye once did call a lie
83|18|Nay, verily, the book of the righteous is in Illiyun
83|19|and what shall make thee know what Illiyun is
83|20|book inscribed
83|21|those nigh to God shall witness it
83|22|Verily, the righteous shall be in pleasure
83|23|upon couches shall they gaze
83|24|thou mayest recognise in their faces the brightness of pleasure
83|25|they shall be given to drink wine that is sealed
83|26|whose seal is musk; for that then let the aspirants aspire
83|27|and it shall be tempered with Tasnim
83|28|a spring from which those nigh to God shall drink
83|29|Verily, those who sin do laugh at those who believe
83|30|and when they pass by they wink at one another
83|31|and when they return to their family they return ridiculing them
83|32|and when they see them they say, Verily, these do go astray
83|33|but they are not sent as guardians over them
83|34|But today those who believe shall at the misbelievers laugh
83|35|Upon couches shall they gaze
83|36|are the misbelievers rewarded for what they have done
84|1|When the heaven is rent asunder
84|2|and gives ear unto its Lord, and is dutiful
84|3|And when the earth is stretched out
84|4|and casts forth what is in it, and is empty
84|5|and gives ear unto its Lord, and is dutiful
84|6|O man! verily, thou are toiling after thy Lord, toiling; wherefore shalt thou meet Him
84|7|And as for him who is given his book in his right hand
84|8|he shall be reckoned with by an easy reckoning
84|9|and he shall go back to his family joyfully
84|10|But as for him who is given his book behind his back
84|11|he shall call out for destruction
84|12|but he shall broil in a blaze
84|13|Verily, he was amongst his family joyful
84|14|Verily, he thought that he should never return to God
84|15|Yea, verily, his Lord on him did look
84|16|I need not swear by the evening glow
84|17|Or by the night, and what it drives together
84|18|Or by the moon when it is at its full
84|19|Ye shall be surely transferred from state to state
84|20|What ails them that they do not believe
84|21|and, when the Koran is read to them, do not adore
84|22|Nay, those who misbelieve do say it is a lie
84|23|but God knows best the (malice) that they hide
84|24|So give them the glad tidings of grievous woe
84|25|save those who believe and act aright, for them is hire that is not grudged
85|1|By the heaven with its zodiacal signs
85|2|And the promised day
85|3|And the witness and the witnessed
85|4|The fellows of the pit were slain
85|5|And the fire with its kindling
85|6|When they sat over it
85|7|And witnessed the while what they were doing with those who believed
85|8|And they took not vengeance on them save for their belief in God, The mighty, the praiseworthy
85|9|Whose is the kingdoms of the heavens and the earth; For God is witness over all
85|10|Verily, those who make trial of the believers, men and women, and then do not repent, for them is the torment of hell, and for them is the torment of the burning
85|11|Verily, those who believe and act aright, for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow,- that is the great bliss
85|12|Verily, the violence of thy Lord is keen
85|13|Verily, He produces and returns
85|14|and He is the forgiving, the loving
85|15|the Lord of the glorious throne
85|16|the doer of what He will
85|17|Has there come to thee the story of the hosts
85|18|of Pharaoh and Thamud
85|19|Nay, those who misbelieve do say it is a lie
85|20|but God is behind them - encompassing
85|21|Nay, it is a glorious Koran
85|22|in a preserved tablet
86|1|By the heaven and by the night star
86|2|And what shall make thee know what the night star is
86|3|The star of piercing brightness
86|4|Verily, every soul has a guardian over it
86|5|Then let man look from what he is created
86|6|he is created from water poured forth
86|7|that comes out from between the loins and the breast bones
86|8|Verily, He is able to send him back again
86|9|on the day when the secrets shall be tried
86|10|and he shall have no strength nor helper
86|11|By the heaven that sends back the rain
86|12|And the earth with its sprouting
86|13|Verily, it is indeed a distinguishing speech
86|14|and it is no frivolity
86|15|Verily, they do plot a plot
86|16|But I plot my plot too
86|17|let the misbelievers bide; do thou then let them bide awhile
87|1|Celebrated the name of thy Lord most High
87|2|who created and fashioned
87|3|and who decreed and guided
87|4|and who brings forth the pasture
87|5|and then makes it dusky stubble
87|6|We will make thee recite, and thou shalt not forget
87|7|save what God pleases. Verily, He knows the open and what is concealed
87|8|and we will send thee easily to ease
87|9|wherefore remind, for, verily, the reminder is useful
87|10|But he who fears will be mindful
87|11|but the wretch will avoid it
87|12|he who will broil on the great fire
87|13|and then therein shall neither die nor live
87|14|Prosperous is he who purifies himself
87|15|and remembers the name of his Lord and prays
87|16|Nay! but ye prefer the life of this world
87|17|while the hereafter is better and more lasting
87|18|Verily, this was in the books of yore
87|19|the books of Abraham and Moses
88|1|Has there come to thee the story of the overwhelming
88|2|Faces on that day shall be humble
88|3|labouring, toiling
88|4|shall broil upon a burning fire
88|5|shall be given to drink from a boiling spring
88|6|no food shall they have save from the foul thorn
88|7|which shall not fatten nor avail against hunger
88|8|Faces on that day shall be comfortable
88|9|content with their past endeavours
88|10|in a lofty garden
88|11|wherein they shall hear no foolish word
88|12|wherein is a flowing fountain
88|13|wherein are couches raised on high
88|14|and goblets set down
88|15|and cushions arranged
88|16|and carpets spread
88|17|Do they not look then at the camel how she is created
88|18|And at the heaven how it is reared
88|19|And at the mountains how they are set up
88|20|And at the earth how it is spread out
88|21|But remind: thou art only one to remind
88|22|thou art not in authority over them
88|23|except such as turns his back and misbelieves
88|24|for him will God torment with the greatest torment
88|25|Verily, unto us is their return
88|26|and, verily, for us is their account
89|1|By the dawn
89|2|and ten nights
89|3|And the single and the double
89|4|And the night when it travels on
89|5|Is there in that an oath for a man of sense
89|6|Hast thou not seen how thy Lord did with Ad
89|7|with Iram of the columns
89|8|the like of which has not been created in the land
89|9|And Thamud when they hewed the stones in the valley
89|10|And Pharaoh of the stakes
89|11|Who were outrageous in the land
89|12|and did multiply wickedness therein
89|13|and thy Lord poured out upon them the scourge of torment
89|14|Verily, thy Lord is on a watch tower
89|15|and as for man, whenever his Lord tries him and honours him and grants him favour, then he says, My Lord has honoured me
89|16|but whenever he tries him and doles out to him his subsistence, then he says, My Lord despises me
89|17|Nay, but ye do not honour the orphan
89|18|nor do ye urge each other to feed the poor
89|19|and ye devour the inheritance (of the weak) with a general devouring
89|20|and ye love wealth with a complete love
89|21|Nay, when the earth is crushed to pieces
89|22|and thy Lord comes with the angels, rank on rank
89|23|and hell is brought on that day,- on that day shall man be reminded! but how shall he have a reminder
89|24|He will say, 'Would that I had sent something forward for my life
89|25|But on that day no one shall be tormented with a torment like his
89|26|and none shall be bound with bonds like his
89|27|O thou comforted soul
89|28|return unto thy Lord, well pleased and well pleased with
89|29|And enter amongst my servants
89|30|and enter my Paradise
90|1|I need not swear by the Lord of this land
90|2|and though a dweller in this land
90|3|Nor by the begetter and what he begets
90|4|We have surely created man in trouble
90|5|Does he think that none can do aught against him
90|6|He says, I have wasted wealth in plenty
90|7|does he think that no one sees him
90|8|Have we not made for him two eyes
90|9|and a tongue, and two lips
90|10|and guided him in the two highways
90|11|but he will not attempt the steep
90|12|And what shall make thee know what the steep is
90|13|It is freeing captives
90|14|or feeding on the day of famine
90|15|an orphan who is akin
90|16|or a poor man who lies in the dust
90|17|and again (it is) to be of these who believe and encourage each other to patience, and encourage each other to mercy
90|18|these are the fellows of the right
90|19|But those who disbelieve in our signs, they are the fellows of the left
90|20|for them is fire that closes in
91|1|By the sun and its noonday brightness
91|2|And the moon when it follows him
91|3|And the day when it displays him
91|4|And the night when it covers him
91|5|And the heaven and what built it
91|6|And the earth and what spread it
91|7|And the soul and what fashioned it, and taught it
91|8|its sin and its piety
91|9|Prosperous is he who purifies it
91|10|And disappointed is he who corrupts it
91|11|Thamud called the apostle a liar in their outrage
91|12|when their wretch rose up
91|13|and the apostle of God said to them, God's she-camel! so give her to drink
91|14|But they called him a liar, and they ham-strung her; but their Lord destroyed them in their sins, and served them all alike
91|15|and He fears not the result thereof
92|1|By the night when it veils
92|2|And the day when it is displayed
92|3|And by what created male and female
92|4|Verily, your efforts are diverse
92|5|But as for him who gives alms and fears God
92|6|And believes in the best
92|7|We will send him easily to ease
92|8|But as for him who is niggardly, And longs for wealth
92|9|And calls the good a lie
92|10|We will send him easily to difficulty
92|11|And his wealth shall not avail him When he falls down (into hell)
92|12|Verily, it is for us to guide
92|13|And, verily, ours are the hereafter and the former life
92|14|And I have warned you of a fire that flames
92|15|None shall broil thereon, but the most wretched
92|16|who says it is a lie and turns his back
92|17|But the pious shall be kept away from it
92|18|he who gives his wealth in alms
92|19|and who gives no favour to any one for the sake of reward
92|20|but only craving the face of his Lord most High
92|21|in the end he shall be well pleased
93|1|By the forenoon
93|2|And the night when it darkens
93|3|Thy Lord has not forsaken thee, nor hated thee
93|4|and surely the hereafter is better for thee than the former
93|5|and in the end thy Lord will give thee, and thou shalt be well pleased
93|6|Did He not find thee an orphan, and give the shelter
93|7|and find thee erring, and guide thee
93|8|and find thee poor with a family, and nourish thee
93|9|But as for the orphan oppress him not
93|10|and as for the beggar drive him not away
93|11|and as for the favour of thy Lord discourse thereof
94|1|Have we not expanded for thee thy breast
94|2|and set down from thee thy load
94|3|which galled thy back
94|4|and exalted for thee thy renown
94|5|Verily, with difficulty is ease
94|6|verily, with difficulty is ease
94|7|And when thou art at leisure then toil
94|8|and for thy Lord do thou yearn
95|1|By the fig! And by the olive
95|2|And by Mount Sinai
95|3|And by this safe land
95|4|We have indeed created man in the best of symmetry
95|5|Then we will send him back the lowest of the low
95|6|save those who believe and act aright; for theirs is a hire that is not grudged
95|7|But what shall make thee call the judgment after this a lie
95|8|Is not God a most just of judges
96|1|READ, in the name of thy Lord
96|2|Who created man from congealed blood
96|3|Read, for thy Lord is most generous
96|4|Who taught the pen
96|5|Taught man what he did not know
96|6|Nay, verily, man is indeed outrageous
96|7|at seeing himself get rich
96|8|Verily, unto thy Lord is the return
96|9|Hast thou considered him who forbids
96|10|a servant when he prays
96|11|Hast thou considered if he were in guidance
96|12|or bade piety
96|13|Hast thou considered if he said it was a lie, and turned his back
96|14|Did he not know that God can see
96|15|Nay, surely, if he do not desist we will drag him by the forelock
96|16|the lying sinful forelock
96|17|So let him call his counsel
96|18|we will call the guards of hell
96|19|Nay, obey him not, but adore and draw nigh
97|1|Verily, we sent it down on the Night of Power
97|2|And what shall make thee know what the Night of Power is
97|3|the Night of Power is better than a thousand months
97|4|The angels and the Spirit descend therein, by the permission of their Lord with every bidding
97|5|Peace it is until rising of the dawn
98|1|Those of the people of the Book and the idolaters who misbelieve did not fall off until there came to them the manifest sign
98|2|An apostle from God reading pure pages
98|3|wherein are right scriptures
98|4|Nor did those who were given the Book divide into sects until after there came to them the manifest sign
98|5|But they were not bidden aught but to worship God, being sincere in religion unto Him as Hanifs, and to be steadfast in prayer, and to give alms: for that is the standard religion
98|6|Verily, those who disbelieve amongst the people of the Book and the idolaters shall be in the fire of hell, to dwell therein for aye; they are wretched creatures
98|7|Verily, those who believe and act aright, they are the best of creatures
98|8|their reward with their Lord is gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; God shall be well pleased with them, and they with Him! that is for him who fears his Lord
99|1|When the earth shall quake with its quaking
99|2|And the earth shall bring forth her burdens
99|3|and man shall say, What ails her
99|4|On that day she shall tell her tidings
99|5|because thy Lord inspires her
99|6|On the day when men shall come up in separate bands to show their works
99|7|and he who does the weight of an atom of good shall see it
99|8|and he who does the weight of an atom of evil shall see it
100|1|By the snorting chargers
100|2|And those who strike fire with their hoofs
100|3|And those who make incursions in the morning
100|4|And raise up dust therein
100|5|And cleave through a host therein
100|6|Verily, man is to his Lord ungrateful
100|7|and, verily, he is a witness of that
100|8|Verily, he is keen in his love of good
100|9|Does he not know when the tombs are exposed
100|10|and what is in the breasts is brought to light
100|11|Verily, thy Lord upon that day indeed is well aware
101|1|The smiting
101|2|What is the smiting
101|3|And what shall make thee know what the smiting is
101|4|The day when men shall be like scattered moths
101|5|and the mountains shall be like flocks of carded wool
101|6|And as for him whose balance is heavy
101|7|he shall be in a well-pleasing life
101|8|But as for him whose balance is light
101|9|his dwelling shall be the pit of hell
101|10|And who shall make thee know what it is
101|11|a burning fire
102|1|The contention about numbers deludes you
102|2|till ye visit the tombs
102|3|Not so! In the end ye shall know
102|4|And again not so! In the end ye shall know
102|5|Not so! Did ye but know with certain knowledge
102|6|Ye shall surely see hell
102|7|And again ye shall surely see it with an eye of certainty
102|8|Then ye shall surely be asked about pleasure
103|1|By the afternoon
103|2|verily, man is in loss
103|3|save those who believe and do right, and bid each other be true, and bid each other be patient
104|1|Woe to every slanderous backbiter
104|2|who collects wealth and counts it
104|3|He thinks that his wealth can immortalize him
104|4|Not so! he shall be hurled into ElHutamah
104|5|And what shall make thee understand what ElHutamah is
104|6|the fire of God kindled
104|7|which rises above the hearts
104|8|Verily, it is an archway over them
104|9|on long-drawn columns
105|1|Hast thou not seen what thy Lord did with the fellows of the elephant
105|2|Did He not make their stratagem lead them astray
105|3|and send down on them birds in flocks
105|4|to throw down on them stones of baked clay
105|5|and make them like blades of herbage eaten down
106|1|For the uniting of the Qurais
106|2|uniting them for the caravan of winter and summer
106|3|So let them serve the Lord of this house
106|4|who feeds them against hunger and makes them safe against fear
107|1|Hast thou considered him who calls the judgment a lie
107|2|He it is who pushes the orphan away
107|3|and urges not (others) to feed the poor
107|4|But woe to those who pray
107|5|and who are careless in their prayers
107|6|Who pretend
107|7|and withhold necessaries
108|1|Verily, we have given thee El Kauthar
108|2|So pray to thy Lord and slaughter (victims)
108|3|Verily, he who hates thee shall be childless
109|1|Say, O ye misbelievers
109|2|I do not serve what ye serve
109|3|nor will ye serve what I serve
109|4|nor will I serve what ye serve
109|5|nor will ye serve what I serve
109|6|ye have your religion, and I have my religion
110|1|When there comes God's help and victory
110|2|And thou shalt see men enter into God's religion by troops
110|3|Then celebrate the praises of thy Lord, and ask forgiveness of Him, verily, He is relentant
111|1|Abu Lahebs two hands shall perish, and he shall perish
111|2|His wealth shall not avail him, nor what he has earned
111|3|He shall broil in a fire that flames
111|4|and his wife carrying faggots
111|5|on her neck a cord of palm fibres
112|1|Say, He is God alone
112|2|God the Eternal
112|3|He begets not and is not begotten
112|4|Nor is there like unto Him any one
113|1|Say, I seek refuge in the Lord of the daybreak
113|2|from the evil of what He has created
113|3|and from the evil of the night when it cometh on
113|4|and from the evil of the blowers upon knots
113|5|and from the evil of the envious when he envies
114|1|Say, I seek refuge in the Lord of men
114|2|the King of men
114|3|the God of men
114|4|from the evil of the whisperer, who slinks off
114|5|who whispers into the hearts of men
114|6|from ginns and men
{
    "name": "eng-edwardhenrypalm",
    "author": "Edward Henry Palmer",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "The Author is of non-muslim faith",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-edwardhenrypalm.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-edwardhenrypalm.min.json"
}