In the name of God, the Merciful-to-all, the Mercy Giver
Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds
The Merciful-to-all, the Mercy Giver
Master of the Day of Judgment
It is You we worship, and it is You we seek for help
Guide us to the straight path
The path of those whom You have blessed, with whom You are not angry and who have not gone astray
Alef Lam Meem
This is the Book that, without doubt, has guidance for those who are mindful of God
Who believe in the existence of what is beyond human perception, perform prayers and contribute some of what We have provided to them
those who believe in what We revealed to you and what We revealed before you; they are certain of the Hereafter
Such people are guided by their Lord and are successful
As for the unbelievers, it is all the same whether you warn them or not, they will not believe
God has sealed their hearts and their hearing and covered their sight. They will have a terrible punishment
Some people say, "We believe in God and in the last day," but they are not believers
They try to fool God and the believers, but they fool only themselves and do not even realize it
They have a sickness in their hearts, and God has made them even sicker. They will have a painful punishment because of their lies
When they are told, "Do not cause corruption in the land," they say, "But we are reformers
They are truly corrupters and do not realize it
When they are told, "Believe just like other people have believed," they say, "Will we believe like fools?" They are the fools, but they do not know it
If they meet believers, they say, "We have believed." But when they are alone with their devils, they tell them, "We are with you. We were only mocking them
God will mock them and will increase their arrogance as they stray
They have sold guidance for error, what an unprofitable trade; they have not been guided
They are like one who lights a fire, and when it shines around him, God takes away their light and leaves them in darkness, where they are unable to see
deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return [to the path]
Or, they are like a cloudburst in the sky that has darkness, thunder, and lightning. They put their fingers in their ears because of the lightning bolts, afraid of death. God surrounds those who deny [the truth]
The lightning almost blinds them. Whenever it shines, they walk by its light. When it is dark, they stand still. If God had willed, he would have taken away their hearing and their sight. God has power over all things
People, worship your Lord who created you and those before you, that you may be mindful of God
He, who spread out the earth for you and built the sky. He sent rain from the sky, and through it, brought forth fruits as provision for you. So do not knowingly set up rivals for God
And if you are in doubt concerning our revelation to our servant, bring a chapter like it, and call your witnesses other than God, if you are telling the truth
If you do not do that-and you never will-beware of Hell, whose fuel is people and rocks. It was prepared for the unbelievers
Give good news to the believers who do virtuous deeds; they will have Heavenly Gardens with flowing rivers. Every time they are provided fruit from it, they will say, "This is similar to what we were provided before." It appears to them that they are given the same thing. There they will have pure spouses, [and there] they will be eternally
God is not reluctant to present a proverb about a mosquito or something bigger. Believers know that it is truth from their Lord, but the unbelievers say, "What does God mean by this?" It is a proverb that misguides many and guides many. It misguides only the defiantly disobedient
Those who break God's covenant after it is confirmed and sever what God commanded to be joined and corrupt the earth, they are doomed
How can you deny the truth in God when you were dead, and He made you alive? Then He will make you die, then make you alive, and then you will return to Him
It is He who created everything on the earth for you, and then turned toward heaven, and He made them seven heavens. He has knowledge of all things
When your Lord told the angels, "I will place a steward on earth," they said, "Will you put someone there who will corrupt it and shed blood, while we glorify, praise, and sanctify You?" He said, "I know things you do not know
He taught Adam the names of everything, and then showed them to the angels. He said, "Tell me the names of these if you are so sure of yourselves
They said, "May You be exalted in your glory! We know nothing except what You have taught us. You are the All-Knowing, the Wise
He said, "Adam, tell them their names." When he told them their names, He said, "Did I not tell you that I know the hidden reality of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you show and what you hide
When We told the angels, "Bow down to Adam," they all bowed down, except for Iblis, who refused out of arrogance. He was one who rejected the truth
We said, "Adam, live with your spouse in the Heavenly Garden, and eat freely whatever you want, but do not come near this tree, or you will be unjust
But Satan made them slip and caused them to be expelled from where they were, and We said, "Go down, you will be enemies to one another, and on earth you will have a temporary abode and livelihood
Then Adam received word from his Lord, and He accepted his repentance. He alone is the Accepter of Repentance, the Mercy Giver
We said, "All of you go down from it [the Garden]. When my guidance comes to you, whoever follows my guidance will not have fear or grieve
Those who deny the truth and reject Our revelations are headed for Hell, where they will be eternally
Children of Israel, remember my grace which I gave you. Fulfill your promise, and I will fulfill My promise, as I am the One you should revere
Believe in My revelation, confirming the revelations that you already have. Do not be the first to deny it, and do not barter away My verses for trivial gain, but be mindful of Me
And do not mix truth with error or knowingly hide the truth
Perform prayers, and pay the purifying alms, and kneel together with those who are kneeling
As you read the Book, do you command others to be virtuous and yet forget yourselves? Don't you comprehend
Seek help in endurance and prayers. [Doing this] is a burden, except for the humble
who assume they will meet their Lord, and they will return to Him
Children of Israel, remember my grace which I gave you. I preferred you above all mankind
And beware of a day when no soul can benefit another soul, nor will any intercession be accepted on its behalf, nor will any ransom be accepted from it; nor will they be helped
When We rescued you from Pharaoh's people, who subjected you to malicious punishment, slaughtering your sons and sparing only your women, it was a great trial from your Lord
When We divided the sea for you, and rescued you and drowned Pharaoh's people as you watched
when We appointed for Moses forty nights, then you chose to worship the calf in his absence, and were unjust
Afterwards, We pardoned you so that you might give thanks
We gave Moses the Book and a standard by which We judge right from wrong, so that you might be guided
Then Moses told his people, "My people, you have sinned against yourselves by worshipping the calf, so repent to your Creator and then kill yourselves. That would be better for you in your Creator's sight. Then He turned to you, accepting your repentance. He is always forgiving, the Mercy Giver
Then you said, "Moses, we will not believe you until we see God clearly." Thunderbolts overtook you as you watched
Then We resurrected you after your death, so that you might give thanks
And We provided shade for you with clouds and sent manna and quail down to you [saying], "Eat of the good things We have provided you." They did not cheat Us, but they cheated themselves
And when We said, "Enter this village and eat freely whatever you want. But enter the door humbly, and say, 'Relieve us from the burden of our sins.' We will forgive your sins and increase the rewards of those who do good
Those who were unjust substituted words other than those given to them, so We sent down a plague from heaven on the unjust for their disobedience
When Moses prayed for water for his people, We said, "Strike the rock with your staff," and twelve springs broke forth from it. All people knew their drinking place. Eat and drink from God's provision, and do not act unjustly on earth by spreading corruption
When you said, "Moses, we will not put up with just one kind of food. Pray to your Lord for us. Let Him bring us herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions that grow from the earth for us." He said, "Will you trade what is good for what is less? Go down to Egypt. You can have all that you ask." Humiliation and misery struck them, and they incurred the wrath of God because they persistently rejected His messages and killed prophets contrary to all that is right. They were transgressors
Truly those believers in this message, as well as the Jews, the Christians, and the Sabeans, whoever believes in God and in the Last Day and does righteous deeds will have their reward from their Lord, and will not have fear, nor will they grieve
When We made a covenant with you and raised the mountain over you, [We said], "Hold fast to what We give you, and remember what is in it, so that you may be mindful of God
Even after that you turned away. If not for the grace and mercy of God towards you, you would have ended up being lost
You know those of you who profane the Sabbath, so We told them, "Be despicable apes
We made them a warning for their time and for all times to come and an example for those that are mindful of God
When Moses told his people, "God commands you to sacrifice a cow," they said, "Are you making fun of us?" Moses answered, "God forbid that I should be so foolish
They said, "Pray to your Lord for us that He would clarify for us which kind." He said, "He says that it is a heifer, neither old, nor virgin, but middle-aged, so do as you are told
They said, "Pray to your Lord for us to clarify to us what color she should be." Moses said, "He says it is a yellow heifer, bright yellow-colored, pleasing to look at
They said, "Pray to your Lord for us, to clarify which one she is. The heifers look alike to us. If God wills, we will be guided
Moses said, "He says it is a cow never yoked to plow the ground, or to water the furrows, whole and without blemish." They said, "Now you have spoken the truth." They almost missed the opportunity to sacrifice it
When you [Israelites] killed a person and fought about it, God brought to light what you hid
So We said, "Strike the body with parts of the cow in this way, God brings life from death and shows you his signs, so you might comprehend
Then, after that, your hearts were hardened. They were as hard as stone or harder. For there are rocks from which streams gush forth, and some from which water flows when they split open, and others which fall down in awe of God. He is not unaware of what you do
Do you really hope that they will be true to you when some of them heard God's words, comprehended it and then knowingly altered it
When they meet believers, they say, "We believe," and when they are alone by themselves, they say, "Do you tell them what God has disclosed to you so they dispute with you about it before your Lord?" Have you no sense
Do they not know that God knows what they conceal and what they reveal
Some of them are Gentiles, and know only a little of the Book. They are guessing
How terrible it is to those who write the Book with their hands and then say, "This is from God," to sell it for a little money. How terrible it is for them for what their hands have written, and how terrible for them what they have earned
They said, "we will spend only a few days in Hell." Have you made a covenant with God that He will not break? Or do you say what you do not know about God
Truly, those who do evil and are caught in their sins will be in Hell eternally
Those who believe and do good deeds will go to Heaven, where they will remain eternally
We made a covenant with the Children of Israel: Worship God alone, be good to your parents, relatives, orphans and the poor. Speak nicely to people, perform prayers and pay the purifying alms. Then all but a few of you turned away as you weren't interested
We took your pledge that you don't shed one another's blood or drive one another from your homeland. You acknowledged and witnessed it
[Nevertheless], here you are, you kill one another and expel some of your own people from their homeland. You assist each other against your own in sin and hostility. But when they come to you as captives, you ransom them, though it is forbidden for you to expel them. Do you believe in part of the Book but not in the rest? What is the repayment for those of you who do that but humiliation in this world? And, on the day of resurrection, they will be sent to the severest punishment. God is aware of what you do
The punishment of those who trade this life for the Hereafter will not be lightened, and they will not be saved
We gave Moses the Book, and he was followed by other messengers, and [We] gave Jesus, the son of Mary, all evidence of the truth, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Whenever a messenger comes to you with a message you do not like, you become arrogant, calling some of them liars, and murdering some of them
They said, "Our hearts are hardened." God has rejected them in their unbelief. How little they believe
And when a Book came to them from God confirming what they have, while they were themselves asking for help against the unbelievers, they did not believe the Book. Although they recognized [the truth], they denied it. God rejects the unbelievers
They sell their souls for nothing of value, denying what God has revealed out of resentment that God reveals his grace to whomever He will from among his worshipers. They angered God more and more. The unbelievers will have a shameful punishment
If they are told, "Believe in what God has revealed," they say, "We believe in what was revealed to us." They do not believe in what came afterward, though it is the Truth confirming what they have already received. Say, "Why then did you murder God's prophets beforehand, if you are believers
Moses came to you with clear signs, but then, when he was away, you chose to worship the calf and were unjust
And when We made a covenant with you and raised the mountain above you, saying, "Cling firmly to what we bring you and listen," they said, "We listened and disobeyed." Then, in their unbelief, their hearts were filled with the [worship of the] calf. Say, "It is dreadful what your faith commands you to do, if you are in fact believers
Say, "If you have a clear and exclusive title to Heaven, you should long for death, if you are telling the truth
They will not wish for it at all because of what their hands have done. God knows the unjust
You will discover that they cling to life even more than the idol-worshippers. Any of them would desire to live a thousand years, but none will avoid punishment by living a long time. God sees what they do
Say, "Those that are enemies to Gabriel should know that he has brought it [the Qur'an] down to your heart by God's permission, confirming what is already revealed and a guidance and good news to believers
For anyone who is an enemy of God, His angels, His Messengers, Gabriel and Michael, God is the enemy of the unbelievers
We have revealed clear verses and miracles to you. Only those who defy God would not believe them
Whenever they make a covenant, some of them violate it. Most of them do not believe
And when a messenger from God comes to them confirming what they have, some recipients of the Book throw God's Book behind their backs as if they knew nothing of it
Instead, they followed what the evil ones used to practice during Solomon's reign. Not that Solomon himself was one who denied the truth; it was the evil ones who denied the truth. They taught people witchcraft and what was revealed in Babylon to the two angels Harut and Marut, although these two never taught it to anyone without first declaring, "We are nothing more than a temptation to evil: Do not deny [God's] truth." From these two, they learned what can separate a man from his wife, although they harm no one with it except with God's permission. They learned what harmed them, not what benefited them, knowing full well that whoever acquired [this knowledge] would have no share in the Hereafter. Surely, evil is the [price] for which they sold their souls, if only they realized that
If they had believed and been God conscious, God would have rewarded them well, if they only knew it
Believers, do not say, "Listen to us," but, rather say, "Have patience and listen to us." Those who reject the truth will have painful punishment
Neither those people of the Book who deny the truth, nor the idol worshippers would like anything good to come down to you from your Lord. But God assigns his mercy to whom He wills. God has boundless grace
Any verse [from the previous Books] We cause to be abrogated or forgotten; We will replace it with one like it or better. Do you not know that God has power over all things
Do you not know that God owns the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth? Besides God, you have no helper or protector
Or do you want to ask your Messenger as Moses was asked previously? Whoever exchanges faith for unbelief has strayed from the straight path
Even after truth became clear to them, many of the people of the Book, out of their selfish envy, wish they could turn you back to unbelief after you became believers. So forgive and forbear until God makes His will clear. God has power over all things
Perform the prayers and give the purifying alms. Whatever good you do here you will find later with God. God discerns what you do
They said, "Only Jews and Christians will enter heaven." That is their wishful thinking. Say, "Present your proof if you are telling the truth
Rather, whoever turns his face in submission towards God while acting generously have their reward from their Lord, and will neither fear nor grieve
The Jews said, "Christians are without valid grounds," and the Christians said, "The Jews are without valid grounds," while they chant the Book. The ignorant speak similarly. God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning their differences
Who could be more unjust than the one who forbids God's name to be mentioned in his places of worship and then tries to get them destroyed? They should be afraid to enter them. They will have shame in this world and terrible punishment in the Hereafter
To God belong the East and the West, and His face is wherever you turn. God is Infinite, All-Knowing
They said, "God has taken a son." May He be exalted in His glory. All things in the heavens and on the earth belong to Him. All things devoutly obey His will
the Originator of the heavens and the earth. If He decrees something, He simply says to it, "Be!" and it is
And the ignorant said, "If only God would speak to us or give us a sign." Those before them spoke similarly. Their hearts are similar. We have made signs clear to people who are certain
We have sent you with the Truth as a bearer of good news and a warner. You will not be held accountable for those who are going to Hell
The Jews and Christians will not be pleased with you until you follow their ways. Say, "God's guidance is the guidance." If you follow their whims, after having received knowledge, you will not have anyone to protect you from God or to help you
Those to whom We gave the Book and read it the way it should be read, believe in it, and whoever denies it is doomed
O Children of Israel, remember my blessings which I gave you and that I preferred you above all human kind
And beware of a day when no soul stands in for another. Ransom will not be accepted, nor will intercession benefit any of them, nor will any be helped
When God tested Abram with certain words and he fulfilled them, God said, "I will make you a leader of men." He said, "And [what about] my seed?" God said, "My covenant does not extend to the unjust
We made the House a destination and a sanctuary for people, and made the place where Abram stood a place of prayer. We commanded Abram and Ishmael to purify my House for those who walk around it, the devout and those who kneel and bow down
When Abram said, "Lord, make this town safe. Provide fruit for its inhabitants who believe in God and the Last Day." God said, "I will let them who deny the truth have pleasure for a short time, and then I will force them into the punishment of Hell, a dreadful destiny
When Abram and Ishmael constructed the foundations of the Sanctuary, [they prayed], "May Our Lord, accept this work from us. You hear all and know all
Our Lord make us submit ourselves to you, and make from our descendants a nation submissive to You. Show us how to properly worship You and accept our repentance, for You are the One who always accepts our repentance and are the Merciful-to-all
May our Lord send them a messenger from among them who recites Your revelations, teaching them the Book and wisdom, and purify them. You are the Almighty, the Wise
Who but a fool would abandon Abram's faith? We have chosen him in this world and in the Hereafter; he is righteous
When his Lord told him, "Submit," he said, "I have submitted to the Lord of the worlds
Abram commanded his sons to do the same as did Jacob, "Sons, your God is One, He has chosen this faith for you, so do not die unless you have submitted to Him
Or were you witnesses when Jacob was on his deathbed, when he asked his sons, "What will you worship after I die?" They said, "We will worship your God and the God of your fathers, Abram and Ishmael and Isaac. (He is] one God and we have submitted to Him
That nation has passed away. They have what they deserve, and you have what you deserve. You will not be questioned about what they did
They said, "Become Jews or Christians, and you will be guided." Say, rather, "We will follow the faith of Abram, who turned away from all that is false, and was not one who ascribed divinity to anything other than God
Say, "We believe in God and what was revealed to us and what was revealed to Abram, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the tribes, what was given to Moses and Jesus, and what was given to the prophets from their Lord. We do not distinguish between any of them, and we submit to Him
If they believe as you believe, they are guided, but if they turn away, they are in dispute. God will protect you from them, and He hears all and knows all
This is God's identifying color, and who is better than God at giving us a color of identity? And it is He whom we worship
Say, "Do you argue with us about God, when He is our Lord and your Lord? We have our works and you have your works, and we are sincere towards Him
Or do you say that Abram, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the tribes were Jews or Christians?" Say: "Do you know more than God does?" And who is more wicked than the one who conceals a testimony with him from God? God is never unaware of what you do
That nation has passed away. It has received what it deserves, and you will receive what you deserve. You are not accountable for what they did
Foolish people will say, "What turned them away from their former prayer direction?" Say, "East and West belong to God. He guides whoever wants to be guided to a straight path
We have made you a moderate nation, so that you may bear witness to humanity and the Messenger may bear witness to you. We made your former prayer direction only so that we could know who would follow the Messenger and who would turn away from him. This change was too much to bear except for those whom God has guided. God will surely not lose sight of your faith. God is compassionate and Merciful-to-all people
We have seen you turning your face towards the heavens, so We will certainly turn a prayer direction for you that will please you. So turn your face toward the Sacred Sanctuary in Mecca, and wherever you are, turn your faces toward it. Those who were given the Book know that it is the truth from their Lord. God is aware of what they do
If you brought every revelation to those who were given the Book, they would not follow your prayer direction, and you will not follow their prayer direction, and some of them do not follow the others' prayer direction. If you follow their desires after knowledge has come to you, you will be unjust
Those to whom we gave the Book know it as they know their children, but a group of them knowingly hide the truth
This is the Truth from your Lord, so do not doubt
To every community there is a direction to turn to, so compete to do good deeds wherever you may be. God will bring you all. God has power over all things
Wherever you go, turn your face toward the Sacred Sanctuary. This is the Truth from your Lord. God is aware of what you do
Wherever you go, turn your face toward the Sacred Sanctuary, and wherever you all are, turn your faces towards it, so that people should have no argument against you. Except for the unjust among them, do not fear them, but fear Me, and I will complete my grace to you, so that you might be guided
For this We sent one of your own people as a Messenger reciting Our revelations to you, purifying you, teaching you the Book and wisdom, and teaching you what you didn't know
So, remember Me, and I will remember you. Thank Me, and do not be ungrateful to Me
Believers, seek help through patience and prayers. God helps those who endure in hard times
Do not say that those killed in God's path are dead; they are alive, though you do not realize it
We will certainly send you trials of fear, hunger, and the loss of wealth, people and crops, so give good news to the steadfast
who say when disaster strikes them, "We belong to God and to Him we will return
It is they who have their Lord's grace and mercy, and they are guided
Safa and Marwa are among the rites of God. Whoever makes the Pilgrimage to the House, or performs the Umrah must stride between them. Regarding those who voluntarily do good, God is grateful and All-knowing
Those who hide evidence of the Truth and the guidance revealed after We made it clear to the people in the Book, those God will reject, and they will be rejected by others
except for those who repent and make amends and declare the Truth. I will accept their repentance. I am the Ever-Forgiving, the Merciful-to-all
God will reject from His mercy those who denied the truth, who died in their unbelief, and they will be cursed by God, angels and all people
They will be there [in Hell) forever, and their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be relieved
Your God is one God. There is no God but Him, the Merciful-to-all, the Mercy Giver
The creation of the heavens and the earth, the difference of night and day, the ships that sail the seas to benefit people, the rain God sends to give life to a lifeless earth and to all kinds of creatures that He scattered over it, the directing of the winds and clouds that run a course between heaven and earth, these are all signs to people who comprehend
Still, some people equate others to God, and they love them as only God should be loved. Believers, love God more than anything. If the unjust could only see, and they will see when suffering becomes their destiny, that all power is God's and that God is severe in punishment
When those who were followed disown their followers, and they all see punishment and are at their wit's end
the followers will say, "If only we had another chance, we would disown them just as they have disowned us." Thus God will make them bitterly regret their works. They will not leave Hell
People, eat what is permitted and delicious on earth. Do not follow Satan's steps; he is clearly your enemy
He commands you to do evil and to behave shamelessly, and to say things about God you do not know
If they are told "Follow what God has revealed," they say, "Rather We will follow what we found our fathers doing," even though their fathers did not understand anything and were not guided
Unbelievers are like ones who call out to that which hears nothing more than a scream and a cry. They are deaf, dumb, and blind; they do not comprehend
Believers, eat the good things we provided you, and thank God, if you are truly worshiping Him
He has forbidden you to eat dead animals, blood, pork, and meat offered in any name other than God. If someone is compelled to do so; not driven by desire or excess, he does not sin. God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Those who hide part of what God has revealed in the Book and barter it away for a small price will consume nothing in their bellies except fire, and God will neither speak to them on the Day of Resurrection nor purify them. They will have painful punishment
It is they who accept misguidance in exchange for guidance, and punishment in exchange for forgiveness. yet they have no tolerance for the fire
That is because God revealed the Book in Truth and those who differed about the Book are deeply divided
Righteousness is not a matter of turning your faces eastward or westward. Rather, righteousness is believing in God and the Last Day and the angels and the Book and the prophets; giving money for the love of Him to relatives, orphans, the poor, stranded travelers, beggars, and to free slaves; performing prayers and paying the purifying alms; keeping promises, and enduring misery and hard times in time of threat. It is they who prove themselves true, and it is they who are mindful of God
Believers, just retribution is prescribed in the case of those killed: a free person for a free person, a slave for a slave, a female for a female. But If the aggrieved brother pardons the guilty person, then grant any reasonable demand and pay with kindness. This is a relief and mercy from your Lord. However, if anyone then goes beyond these limits he will have painful punishment
You who have understanding, there is life for you [by practicing] just retribution, so that you may continue to be mindful of God
If any of you is close to death and leaves possessions, it is an obligation that he includes fairly his parents and relatives in a will. This is a duty for those who are mindful of God
But whoever changes the terms after hearing it is a sin on the one who changes it. God hears all and knows all
He who is concerned that the person leaving a will is deviating from fairness or sinning and then reconciles them, he does not sin. God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Believers, God commanded fasting for you just as he commanded it for those who came before you so that you might be mindful of God
Fast for a specific number of days, and if someone is sick or traveling, then alternate days. For those who can afford a redemption should feed a poor person. If someone voluntarily does good, it is goodness for him. Fasting is good for you, if you only knew
The month of Ramadan is when the Qur'an was revealed, giving guidance to humanity, and clear messages of guidance and a standard for distinguishing right from wrong. Whoever lives to see this month should fast. Whoever is sick or traveling should fast on alternate days. God wants it to be easy for you, not hard, so you can complete the days you missed. So praise God for his guidance to you, and give thanks
If My worshipers ask you about Me, I am near, answering the prayer of the one who prays to Me. They should respond to Me and believe in Me in order to be guided
Sex with your wives is permitted on the night of a fast. They are clothing to you, and you to them. God knows that you used to betray yourselves, so He turned to you and forgave you. So now, have sex with them, and seek what God has ordained for you. [You may] eat and drink until you can distinguish a white thread from a black one in the dawn, then complete the fast until night. Do not have sex with them while you are secluded in the places of worship. These are God's boundaries. So don't go near them. This is how God shows people His messages so that they would be mindful of Him
Do not abuse other people's wealth using wrong means, and do not bribe authorities in order to take possession of other people's wealth knowingly and sinfully
They ask you about new moons. Say, "They show times for people and for the Hajj." It is not right to enter houses from the back. Rather, righteousness is to be mindful of God and to enter houses through their front doors. Always be mindful of God, so that you may succeed
Fight in God's path against those who fight you, but do not be aggressors, for God does not love aggressors
[If they start a fight] kill them wherever you find them, and expel them from wherever they expelled you. For oppression is worse than murder. Do not fight them at the Holy Sanctuary unless they fight you in it. If they fight you, kill them. That is the reward of the unbelievers
If they stop, God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Fight them until there is no more persecution and until all worship is devoted only to God. If they stop, there should be no aggression except toward the unjust
Fight back during the sacred month: violation of sanctity [calls for] just retribution. Whoever attacks you, attack them as you were attacked. Be mindful of God, and know that God is with those who are mindful of Him
Spend your money in the path of God, and do not contribute to your own destruction, but do good. God loves those who do good
Do your Hajj and the Umrah for God. If you are prevented, then send what offerings for sacrifice are possible, and do not shave your heads until the offerings arrive. If one of you is sick or has a head injury, then one can be redeemed by fasting, giving the purifying alms or offering a sacrifice. When you are secure, whoever breaks one's purification between the Umrah until the Hajj should offer whatever sacrifice one can; or, if one cannot, one should fast three days during the Hajj, and then seven when one returns, ten days in all. This [observance] is for those whose families are not present at the Sacred Sanctuary. Be mindful of God, and know that God is severe in punishment
The Hajj is in the prescribed months; for him who decides to perform the Hajj, there should be no vulgarity, bad behavior, or argument during the Hajj. God knows the good deeds you do, so do lots of them. And take provision for yourself. The best of all provision is being mindful of God. So be mindful of Me, you who have insights
It is not wrong to seek your Lord's blessing. So when you flow down from [Mount] Arafat, remember God at the sacred place. Remember Him as He guided you after you had gone astray
Then surge onward with all the others, and ask God's forgiveness. He is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
When you have completed your rituals, remember God at least as much as you remember your fathers, or even more. Some people say, "Our Lord, bless us in this world." They have no share in the Hereafter
Others say, "Our Lord, give us goodness in this world and goodness in the Hereafter. Protect us from the punishment of Hell
Those have the portion of blessings they deserve. God is swift in reckoning judgment
Remember God on certain appointed days. Whoever completes the process in two days is not guilty, and whoever stays longer out of minding God will not be guilty. Know that you will be gathered to Him
Among the people there is a kind of person whose view of this life pleases you. He even calls God as witness to what is in his heart, yet he is the fiercest of [your] opponents
When he leaves you, he goes throughout the land, spreading corruption, destroying crops and animals. God does not like corruption
If he is told, "Be mindful of God," arrogance leads him to sin. He is headed to Hell, a dreadful destination
Some people give their life away, desiring God's pleasure. God is compassionate to His worshipers
Believers, enter wholeheartedly into submission to God, and do not follow the steps of Satan; he is clearly your enemy
If you should stumble after clear signs have come to you, be aware that God is Powerful and Wise
Are these people waiting to see God and the angels coming to them in a formation of clouds? At that point, the matter would already be over. All matters are referred to God
Ask the Children of Israel how many times We brought them clear signs. If anyone alters God's grace after having received it, God is stern in punishment
This life has been made attractive to the unbelievers, and they ridicule the believers, but those who are mindful of God will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. God provides bountifully for all He wills
Human beings were [once] all one nation. God sent prophets carrying good news and warnings, and with them He sent the Book in Truth to judge between people in matters on which they differ. Yet rivalry between those who received it led them to disagreement, even after having received clear signs. God willingly guided believers to the truth about which they differed. God guides whoever wants to be guided into a straight path
Or do you think you will enter Heaven without experiencing the trials of those who were before you. They experienced misery, hard times, and they were so shaken that even their messenger and the believers with him cried, "When will God's help arrive?" Truly, God's help is near
They ask you [Prophet] what they should contribute. Say, "The possessions you contribute should be for parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, and the stranded traveler." God is fully aware of all the good you do
Fighting is ordained for you, even though it repulses you. You may hate something that is good for you, or love something that is evil for you. God knows, but you do not
They ask you about fighting during the sacred month. Say, "Fighting in it is a big offense. But turning people away from the path of God, denying Him, preventing access to the Sacred Sanctuary, and expelling its residents is a bigger offense to God because sedition is a bigger offense than murder. They will not stop fighting you as long as there is the possibility of turning you away from your faith. But if any of you denies the faith and dies in a state of unbelief, their deeds will come to nothing in this world and the Hereafter. They will be in Hell, where they will remain forever
Those who have believed and journeyed and struggled in God's path, they may hope for God's mercy. God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
They ask you about intoxicants and gambling. Say, "There is great sin in them, and also some benefit for humankind. The sin is greater than the benefit." They ask you what they should contribute. Say, "Whatever you can possibly give." Thus God makes signs clear to you so that you might think about
this world and the Hereafter. They ask you about orphans, say, "Improving their lot in life is good. If you mingle your affairs with them, [they are] your brethren." God knows the difference between one who corrupts and one who improves things. If God had wanted, He would have made things difficult for you. God is strong and wise
Do not marry idolatrous women until they believe; a believing slave woman is better than an idolatrous woman even if she pleases you. And do not give your women in marriage to idolaters until they believe. A believing slave is better than an idolater, even if he pleases you. They [idolaters] invite [you] to Hell, whereas God calls for Heaven and forgiveness by His permission. He makes his signs clear to people so that they may remember
They ask you about menstruation. Say, "It is painful, so keep away from women during their menstruation, and do not approach them until they are purified. When they are purified, you may approach them the way God has ordained you." God loves the repentant and the purified
Your wives are a field for you, so go into your fields however you want and do beforehand all that is necessary, being fully mindful of God and knowing that you will meet Him. Give good news to the believers
Do not use your oaths to God as an excuse for not doing good, being mindful of God, and making peace between people. God hears all and knows all
God does not blame you for foolishness in your oaths, but only as your hearts deserve. God is forgiving and gentle
To those who swear not to have sexual relations with their wives, there is a waiting period of four months; if they change their minds, God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
If they insist on divorce, God hears all and knows all
Divorced women will wait three menstruation periods [before re-marrying], for they are not allowed to hide what God has created in their wombs if they believe in God and the Last Day. Their husbands are entitled to take them back if they want to be reconciled. But, in accordance with justice, the rights of the wives [with regard to their husbands] are equal to the [husbands'] rights with regard to them, although husbands have a degree [of right] over them. God is almighty and wise
Divorce is allowed twice, after which keep [your wives] kindly, or dismiss them generously. You [husbands] may not take back anything you have given them unless both of you fear that they may not be able to keep within the limits set by God. It is not then wrong for them if she buys her way out. These are God's limits, do not exceed them. Anyone who exceeds them is unjust
If he divorces her [for the third time], she is no longer allowed to remarry him until she marries another husband. Then, if [the latter] divorces her, it is not wrong for them to return [to each other] if they think that they can observe God's limits. These are the bounds set by God, which He makes clear to people who have knowledge
If you divorce [your] women, and their waiting term is complete, either take them back kindly or let then go kindly. Do not take them back in order to harm them or to treat them belligerently. Anyone who does that sins against himself. Do not mock God's revelations, but remember God's grace to you and what He revealed to you from the Book and the wisdom through which He exhorts you. Be mindful of God, and know that God knows everything
If you divorce women and their waiting term is complete do not prevent them from marrying their new husbands if they come to a fair agreement. This instruction is to all who believe in God and the Last Day. This [way] is the most virtuous and purest for you. God knows, and you do not
Mothers should nurse their children for two complete years if they wish to complete the nursing period. Their provision and clothing are, in fairness, the father's responsibility. No soul should be burdened with more than it can possibly bear; neither should a mother be made to suffer because of her child, nor a father because of his child. An heir has similar duties. If both [parents] decide to separate, they will incur no sin. Nor will there be any blame if you decide to employ a wet nurse, provided you ensure the child's safety in a fair manner. But remain mindful of God, and know that God sees all that you do
Widows of those who die among you must wait four months and ten days [prior to remarrying]. When they complete their waiting period, you are not to be blamed for what they may choose to do lawfully with themselves. God is aware of what you do
You will not be blamed whether you publicly announce that you want to marry these women or decide to keep your proposal to yourself; God knows your intentions to propose to them. Do not make a secret arrangement with them, but speak decently to them, and do not confirm the marriage contract until the prescribed period is finished. And you should know that God knows what is in your soul, so be mindful of Him. Remember that God is most forgiving, most forbearing
There is nothing wrong with divorcing your wives before you have touched them or paid them their dowry, but make fair provision for them, the rich according to his means and the poor according to his. This is a duty for those who behave righteously
If you divorce them before you touch them, but after you have given them their dowry, then let them have half of it, unless they renounce [their claim], or unless the one making the marriage-tie renounces it. Renouncing [the portion] is closer to being mindful of God. Do not forget the grace that is between you. God sees what you do
Always be mindful of prayers and perform the intermediate prayer and stand devoutly before God
But If you fear danger, pray [whether you are] walking or riding, and remember God when you are safe again, because it is He Who has taught you what you did not know
Those of you who die and leave wives should have a will with a provision giving their widows a year without being driven from their homes. If they leave [on their own], you will not be blamed for what they may reasonably choose to do with their lives. God is strong and wise
Divorced women should be provided for adequately. This is an obligation on those who are mindful of God
God thus makes his revelations clear to you, so that you might understand
Did you not see the thousands who left their homes to avoid death? God told them, "Die." Then he made them alive again. God is gracious to people, but most people do not give thanks
Fight in God's path, and know that God hears all and knows all
Who will make a good loan to God, which He will repay many times over? It is God who withholds, and it is He Who gives abundantly, and it is to Him you will return
Did you not see how, after Moses' time, the leaders of the Children of Israel told one of their prophets, "Raise up a king for us, and we will fight in God's cause"? He said, "If it is God's will for you to fight, would you refuse?" They answered, "Why should we not fight in God's cause when we and our children have been driven from our homelands?" Yet, when they were commanded to fight, all but a few of them turned away. God has full knowledge of the unjust
Their prophet told them, "God has chosen Saul as your king." They said, "How can he be our king? We are more deserving of being king than he. He does not have a lot of money." He said, "God has chosen him over you, and has endowed him with knowledge and physical strength. God gives his kingdom to whomever He wills." God is Infinite, All-Knowing
Their prophet told them, "The sign of his royal authority is that the Ark of the Covenant will come to you, carried by angels, bearing inner peace from your Lord as well as reminders of the family of Moses and Aaron. If you believe, that is a sign for you
When Saul divided the troops, he said, "God will test you at a river. Whoever drinks from it is not with me, and whoever does not taste it is with me, except for those who scoop up a handful." All but a few drank from it. When he and the believers crossed it together, they said, "We do not have any strength against Goliath and his troops today." Those who thought they were about to meet God said, "How often small groups have defeated large groups by God's authority. God is with those who endure
When they met Goliath and his troops, they said, "Lord, give us endurance and make our feet firm and save us from the unbelievers
So, with God's approval, they defeated them. David killed Goliath, and God gave him the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him what He willed. If God had not driven some back by means of others, the earth would have been corrupted, but God shows grace to people
These are God's revelations, which We recite to you [Prophet] in Truth. You are one of the messengers
We preferred some of those messengers over others. God spoke to some, and He raised some in degree; We gave Jesus son of Mary clear signs, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. If God had willed, those after them would not have fought each other after clear evidence of the truth had come to them, but they fought. Some of them believed, and others denied the truth. If God had willed, they would not have fought. But God does whatever He wants
Believers, contribute some of what We have provided you before a day comes when there is no bargaining, nor friends, nor intercession. Those who have denied the truth are unjust
God is the only god, the Eternal and Self-Sustainer. He neither slumbers nor sleeps. He owns what is in the heavens and the earth. Who is he who intercedes with Him except with His permission? He knows what is before them and what is behind them. They know nothing of His knowledge except what He wills. The throne of His majesty covers the heavens and the earth, and protecting them does not tire Him. He is Most high and Tremendous
There is no compulsion in religion. The difference between guidance and error has been made clear. Whoever rejects false gods and believes in God has grasped a firm, unshakable support. God hears all and knows all
God protects believers and brings them out of the darkness of ignorance into enlightenment. False gods are the protectors of the unbelievers, bringing them out of enlightenment into the darkness of ignorance. They will be eternally in Hell
Have you not considered the one who was given a kingship by God [and] then disputed with Abram about his Lord? Abram said, "My Lord gives life and causes death." He said, "I also give life and death." Abram said, "God brings the sun from the East. So bring it from the West." The disbeliever was dumfounded. God does not guide unjust people
Or, [consider] the one who passed by a town which had fallen into ruin. He said, "How can God bring back those who were once alive here after their death?" God made him die for a hundred years, and then resurrected him. He said, "How long have you stayed?" He said, "A day or part of a day." He said, "You stayed for a hundred years. Look at your food and your drink. They have not gone bad. Look at your dead donkey. We will make you a sign for people. Look how We raise the bones, and then cover them with flesh." When he saw it, he said, "I know that God has power over all things
Abram said, "My Lord, show me how you give life to the dead." God said, "Have you not believed?" He said, "Yes I have, but assure my heart." God said, "Take four birds, kill them and cut them into pieces. Then put pieces of each on a mountain and call them. They will come quickly to you. Know that God is Strong and Wise
Those who contribute their money in God's way are like a seed that sprouts seven heads, in each of which are a hundred grains. God grants such multiple increase to whom He wills. God is Infinite and All-Knowing
Those who spend their money in God's way and then do not follow what they spend with reproach or harm will have a reward from their Lord. They will neither fear nor grieve
A kind word and forgiveness are better than charity followed by hurt. God is Rich beyond need and Forbearing
Believers do not ruin your charitable deeds with reproach and harm like one who does not believe in God or the Last Day and contributes his money so people will see him. He is like a rock with dirt on it that was rained upon heavily and became hard and bare. Such people can do nothing with what they earned. God does not guide disbelieving people
Those who spend their money seeking God's pleasure and as an affirmation of their own faith are like a garden on a hill when heavy rain falls on it-it doubles its produce-and if heavy rain does not fall, there is dew. God sees what you do
Do any of you want to have a garden with date palms and vineyards, with flowing rivers , having every kind of fruit, to then be overtaken by old age, with only weak children, and then a fiery whirlwind strikes it and burns it up? Thus God shows you signs so that you may contemplate
Believers, contribute some of the good things You have earned, and of what We have produced for you from the earth. Do not choose the worst of it to give in charity that you yourself would be reluctant to accept. Know that God is Rich beyond need and Praiseworthy
Satan promises you poverty and orders you to commit immoral acts. God promises you His forgiveness and esteem. God is Infinite, All-Knowing
He gives wisdom to whom He chooses, and whoever is given wisdom is blessed abundantly. But only insightful people bear this in mind
God knows what you contribute or what you vow. The unjust have no one to save them
If you give charity visibly, it is good. But if you hide it while giving to the poor, it is better for you, and He will atone for some of your sins. God is well aware of what you do
It is not for you to guide them. God guides whomever He wills. What charity you give benefits you when you contribute only to please God. Your contributions will be paid back to you, and you will not be cheated
Give to the poor who are wholly committed to the path of God and who are unable to travel in the land. The unaware considers them rich because of their self-restraint. You will recognize them by their character traits. They are not always asking people to help them. God knows what you contribute
All those who contribute their money at night or during the day, both secretly and publicly, will receive a reward from their Lord. They will not be afraid, nor will they grieve
Those who profit from usury will rise up on the Day of Resurrection like someone tormented by Satan's touch because they say, "Selling is like usury, but God allowed selling and forbade usury." So whoever stops when receiving his Lord's good advice may keep what was previously his, and his matter is with God. Those who return to [usury] will eternally be in Hell
God condemns usury, while He blesses and multiplies charitable transactions. God does not love any sinful person who denies the truth
Those who believe and do righteous deeds and perform their prayers and give the purifying alms have their reward from their Lord, and they will not fear or grieve
Believers, always be aware of God, and quit what remains of usury, if you are believers
If you do not, then be warned of a war from God and his Messenger; and if you repent, you may have your original capital. Wrong not, and you will not be wronged
However, if the borrower has financial difficulties, then defer payment until circumstances are better, and it would be for your own good, if you fully understood, to forgive the entire loan
Beware of a day when you are returned to God and every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned, and none will be wronged
Believers, if you become indebted to each other for a stated term, put it in writing. Let a legal clerk draw it up between you. The clerk should not refuse to write as God has taught him. The one who owes should dictate and always be mindful of God, his Lord. No amount should be withheld from him. If the one who owes is foolish, weak, or unable to dictate himself, let his legal guardian dictate and have it witnessed by two men, or, if there are not two, by one man and two women whom you approve as witnesses. If one of [the women] forgets, the other will remind her. Witnesses should not refuse when they are called upon. Do not think it unimportant to write it down, whether a small or large amount, along with its specified terms. That is more equitable to God, more reliable for testimony, and more likely to preclude doubt, except when it is a current business [that] you manage among yourselves. [In that case], not writing it down is not wrong. Always have witnesses present whenever you trade with one another, and do not let any harm be done to either the legal clerk or witnesses. If you do, you will be sinning. Be mindful of God, and God will teach you. God knows everything
If you are on a trip and do not find a scribe, then an earnest payment should be paid. If you entrust things to each other, the one to whom it was entrusted should fulfill his pledge. He should be mindful of God, his Lord. Do not hide the testimony. Whoever hides it has a guilty heart. God knows what you do
To God belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. Whether you reveal what is in your hearts or if you hide it, God will call you to account for it. He forgives whom he wills and punishes whom He wills. God has power over all things
The Messenger believes in what was revealed to him by his Lord, as do the believers; they all believe in God, His angels, His Books and His Messengers. We do not distinguish between any of His Messengers. They said, "We have heard and obeyed. Our Lord, [we seek] Your forgiveness. To You is [our] destiny
God does not burden a soul more than it can bear. It has [the good] it has earned, and [the evil] it has incurred. Our Lord, do not blame us if we forget or err. Our Lord, do not make us bear a burden like those before us. Our Lord, do not make us bear what We have no strength to bear. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Master, so help us against the people who deny the truth
Alef Lam Meem
God! There is no God but Him. The Eternal, the Self-Sustainer
He has sent down the Book to you with the Truth to confirm what is available of other revelations, as it is He who sent down the Torah and the Gospel
beforehand as guidance to people, and He revealed the Standard by which we judge right from wrong. Those who do not believe God's signs will have severe punishment. God is Almighty and capable of revenge
Nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from God
He forms you in the womb as He wills. There is no God but Him, the Almighty, the Wise
It is He who revealed this Book to you. Some of its verses are clear and definite in meaning; they are the Book's core. Others are ambiguous. Those with stubborn hearts follow the ambiguous verses, desiring to create confusion and their own interpretation, while absolutely no one but God knows their [exact] interpretation. Those who are grounded in knowledge say, "We believe it. It is all from our Lord." No one will take this to heart except those endowed with insight
Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate after you have guided us. Give us your mercy. You are the Ever Giving
Our Lord, You are gathering the people for a definite day. God does not break His promise
Neither the possessions nor the children of the unbelievers will help them at all with God. They are fuel for Hell
As in the case of Pharaoh's people and those before them, they have denied our signs, so God punished them for their sins. God is severe in punishment
Say to the unbelievers, "You will be defeated and gathered into Hell - a dreadful suffering place
You already have a sign: Two groups met [in battle], one fighting in God's cause and the other denying Him; with their own eyes the unbelievers saw the believers as double in numbers." God provides help to whomever He wills. That is a lesson for those who have eyes to see
The love of worldly pleasures is alluring to people: women, children, vast hoards of gold and silver, branded horses, cattle, and farmland. These are matters of this world. God has the best of destinations
Say, "Will I tell you of better things than that? Those that were mindful of God will have Heavenly Gardens with their Lord, with flowing rivers. They will live there forever, with purified mates and God's grace." God is fully aware of His worshipers
who say, "Our Lord, We have believed, so forgive us our sins and protect us from the punishment of Hell
They are the ones who are patient in hard times, true to their word, devout, generous and who pray before dawn for forgiveness
God bears witness that there is no God but Him, as do the angels, and those who are endowed with knowledge. He is the Upholder of Justice. There is no God but Him, the Almighty, the Wise
To God true faith is submission [Islam], and those who received the Book differed only after receiving knowledge out of contention. God will be swift in reckoning with those who deny His revelations
If they dispute with you, say, "My followers and I have totally submitted to God." Say to those who were given the Book and to the Gentiles, "Have you submitted?" If they submit, they have been guided. If they turn away, your responsibility is to only convey the message. God is well aware of His worshipers
Tell those who deny God's revelations, who wrongfully kill prophets and kill those who call for justice, that they will have painful punishment
Their works have failed both in this world and in the Hereafter, and they have no one to rescue them
Have you thought about those who were given a portion of the Book? They were asked to accept judgment according to God's Book, some of them being unreasonably stubborn, turned away
just because they declared, "We will only be in Hell for a few days." The lies they had fabricated caused them to betray their faith
How then will they feel if we gather them for a definite day, when every soul is repaid as it deserves, and they will not be wronged
Say, "God, Lord of all dominion, You give sovereignty to whom You will and You take sovereignty from whom You will; You exalt whom You will, and You bring low whom You will. Goodness is in Your hand. You can do anything
You make night flow into day, and day flow into night; You bring out the living from the dead, the dead from the living, and You provide bountifully, without measure, for those You will
The believers should not take unbelievers as allies in preference to believers. Anyone who does that will completely isolate himself from God, unless you are seeking to protect your own selves from them. God warns you to beware of Him. God is our ultimate destination
Say, "God knows what is in your hearts, whether you hide or reveal it. He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. God has power over all things
On that day, every soul will find the good that it has done present before it. But it will wish that there were a great distance between it and the evil it has done. God cautions you about Himself. God is compassionate with His worshipers
Say, "If you love God, follow me, God will surely love you and forgive your sins. God is forgiving and merciful
Say, "Obey God and the Messenger. But if they turn away, God does not love those who deny the truth
God chose Adam, Noah, Abraham's family, and Imran's family over all people
a common line of descent, one following the other. God hears all and knows all
Imran's wife said, "Lord, I have vowed to you what is in my womb to be wholly dedicated to you; accept it from me. You hear all and know all
When she gave birth, she said, "Lord, I have delivered a female." God knows well what she delivered--that a male is not like a female. "I have named her Mary. I seek your protection for her and her children, from the accursed Satan
Her Lord accepted the female baby favorably and caused her to have a good upbringing and placed her in Zechariah's care. As often as Zechariah visited her in the inner sanctuary, he found she had food. He said, "Mary, how did you get this?" She said, "It is from God. God provides bountifully for whomever he wills
There Zechariah prayed to his Lord. He said, "Lord, be gracious to me and give me such a blessed child. You certainly hear prayer
The angels called to him as he stood praying in the inner sanctuary, "God gives you good news of John, who will confirm a Word from God. He will be noble and chaste, a prophet and one of the righteous
He said, "Lord, how can I have a boy when I am an old man, and my wife is barren?" The angel said, "It will be so. God does whatever He wills
He said, "Lord, give me a sign." He said, "Your sign will be that you will not speak to people for three days except by gestures. Remember your Lord frequently and glorify Him in the evening and the morning
The angels said, "Mary, God has chosen you, purified you, and chosen you above all women in the worlds
Mary, be dedicated to your Lord; bow down and kneel with those who are kneeling in prayer
This is hidden knowledge that We reveal to you [Muhammad]. You were not with them when they cast lots for which of them would take care of Mary, or when they quarreled
[When] the angels said, "Mary, God gives you good news of a word from Him, whose name will be the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary. He will be highly distinguished in this world and the Hereafter, and brought near to God
He will speak to people from the cradle and when he's an old man. He's from among the righteous
She said, "Lord, how can I have a boy when no man has ever touched me?" He said, "God creates what He wills, when He decides a matter, He simply says to it: "Be!", and then it is
And He will teach him the Book, the Wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel
and he will be a messenger to the people of Israel, saying, "I have come to you with a sign from your Lord: I will create a bird like for you from clay and breathe into it and by God's permission it will be a bird. I, by God's permission, heal men born blind and lepers and give life to the dead. I will tell you what you may eat and what you should store in your homes. There is a sign in this for you, if you will believe
I will confirm what is available of the Torah, and I will make permissible for you some of the things that were forbidden to you. I have brought you a sign from your Lord, so be mindful of God and obey me
God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is the straight path
When Jesus sensed their refusal to acknowledge the truth, he asked, "Who are my supporters in God's cause?" The disciples said, "We are God's supporters. We have believed in God, so bear witness that we have submitted
Our Lord, we believe in what You revealed, and we follow the Messenger, so record us as witnesses
And they [the unbelievers] plotted [against Jesus] but God caused their schemes to fail, for God is the best of all plotters
God said, "Jesus, I will cause you to die and raise you up to me, and purify you from those who denied the truth, and I will exalt your followers over those who deny you until the Resurrection Day. Then you all will return to me, and I will judge between you in matters about which you disagree
But I will severely punish the unbelievers both in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have no one to help them
As for the believers who do righteous deeds, God will pay them in full. God does not love the unjust
What we are relating to you [Muhammad] are verses and the Wise Reminder [the Qur'an]
To God, Jesus is like Adam, whom He created from dust, then He told him, "Be!" and he was
This is the Truth from your Lord, so do not doubt
If someone continues to argue with you about it after knowledge has come to you, say, "Come let us call your children and ours and your wives and ours and you and us, then let us praise God and call down His curse on the liars
This is the truth of the matter, and there is no deity but God. God is the Almighty, the Wise
If they turn away, God is well aware of the corrupters
People of the Book, "Come to a common word between us that we will not worship any but God, and we will not ascribe partners to Him, nor will we take each other as lords in addition to God." If they turn away, say, "Bear witness that we have submitted to God
People of the Book, "Why do you argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until after him? Do you not understand
Here you are arguing about some things you know, so why do you argue about things which you do not know? God knows and you do not
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was one who turned away from all that is false, a monotheist who submitted to God; never an idolater
The people who are most deserving of Abraham are surely those who followed him - as does this Prophet and all who believed. God is the guardian of the believers
Some People of the Book want to mislead you. They mislead only themselves, while not realizing it
People of the Book, "Why do you deny God's revelations when you yourselves are witnesses
People of the Book, "Why do you clothe the Truth with falsehood, and knowingly hide the Truth
Some People of the Book said, "Believe in what was revealed to the believers at daybreak, and deny it at sunset, so they may return [to their ignorance]
Only trust those who follow your faith." Say, "True guidance is God's guidance. But you think it is impossible for anyone to be given the same revelation as you were given, or that they could use it to argue against you before your Lord. " Say, "Grace is in God's hand, and He gives it to those He wills. God is infinite, All-knowing
He singles out for His mercy whomever He wills, and God has boundless grace
Some of the People of the Book you can trust with a lot of gold, and they will return it to you. If you give others of them merely one coin, they will not return it to you unless you constantly remind them. That is because they say, "We are under no obligation to the Gentiles." They knowingly say lies about God
Indeed, God loves those who keep His covenant and are always mindful of Him
Those who barter God's covenant and their oaths for a small price have no portion in the Hereafter, and God will not speak to them or look at them on the Resurrection Day, nor will He cleanse them of their sins. They will a have painful punishment
Some of them distort the Book with their tongues, so that you would think that it is from the Book, when it is not. They say, it is from God, when it is not, and they knowingly tell lies about God
It is inconceivable that a man could have been given the Book, Wisdom and Prophecy by God and then have told people, "Worship me instead of God," rather than, "Be godly teachers because of what you were taught from the Book and because of what you have studied
He will not command you to take angels and prophets as lords. Would he command you to deny God after you have submitted
When God made a covenant with the prophets, [He said], "If after I give you the Book and the Wisdom, I then send a messenger confirming what is with you, you should believe in him and help him. Do you accept and make it binding on you?" They said, "We accept." He said, "Then bear witness, and I, too, will be your witness
From now on, those who turn away are disobedient
Do they seek to have faith in something other than God, when all that is in heaven and earth submit to Him willingly or unwillingly? And unto Him all must return
Say, "We believe in God and what He revealed to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, the tribes, and in what was given to Moses, Jesus and the prophets from their Lord. We do not distinguish between any of them, and we have submitted to Him
If one seeks a faith other than submission to God [Islam], it will never be accepted from him, and in the Hereafter he will be among the losers
How can God guide those who deny Him after having believed and witnessed that the messenger is true and after having seen miracles? God does not guide unjust people
Their reward is the curse of God, angels, and all such men
They will remain in that state forever, and their punishment will not be lightened nor will they be given relief
As for those who repent and do good beforehand, God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
The unbelievers, if after they have believed they then became stubborn in their unbelief, their repentance will never be accepted. They are truly lost
An earth full of gold will not be accepted as a ransom from anyone who dies in a state of unbelief denying God. They will have a painful punishment and will not have anyone to help them
You [believers] will not attain righteousness until you give from what you hold dearest to your heart. God knows well what you give away
Before the Torah was revealed, all food was lawful for the children of Israel except what Israel [Jacob] made unlawful for himself. If you are telling the truth, bring the Torah and read it
Those who persist in inventing lies about God after that are truly unjust
Say, "God has spoken the Truth; therefore follow the creed of Abraham, a monotheist. He was not an idolater
The first house of worship established for people was the one in Bakkah. It is blessed and a source of guidance to humanity
In it are signs and miracles. It was the place where Abraham stood. Whoever entered it was safe. Pilgrimage to the House is a duty owed to God by all people who can find a way to do it. But if anyone decides to reject the truth, [they should know that] God is rich beyond need of the worlds
Say, "People of the Book, why do you reject God's revelations? God is witness to what you do
Say, "People of the Book, why do you turn the believers away from God's path? Seeking to make it [seem] deviant, while you are witnesses [to the truth]? God is not oblivious to what you do
Believers, if you obey some of those who were given the Book, they will turn you back to unbelief
How can you not believe when God's message is recited to you and His Messenger is among you? Whoever clings to God has been guided to a straight path
Believers, be mindful of God as is due Him and be sure you have submitted to Him before you die
Cling all together to God's rope, and do not separate. Remember God's grace to you: when you were enemies He united your hearts and you became brothers through His grace. You were at the edge of a pit of Hell, and He rescued you from it. God makes His signs clear to you, so that you may be guided
May there be a group among you that calls for all that is good, promotes what is right and prevents what is wrong. It is they who are successful
Do not be like those, who after having received clear signs, disputed and were divided among themselves. They will have a great punishment waiting for them
On the Day [of Judgment] when some faces are bright [with hope] while others are dark [with despair]. Those whose faces are darkened will be asked "Have you denied God's Truth after believing? Then experience the punishment for your unbelief
As for those whose faces were bright, they will live eternally in God's mercy
These are God's revelations which we recite to you in Truth. God does not desire injustice for people
Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God, and all things will return to Him
You are the best community brought forth for the good of mankind, promoting what is right, forbidding what is wrong, and believing in God. If the People of the Book had believed, it would have been better for them. Some of them are believers, but most are defiantly disobedient
They will not do you much harm, and if they fight you, they will flee and not be helped
They are disgraced wherever they are, except for a lifeline from God and from people, and they brought God's anger upon themselves. They are branded with humiliation because they, in their transgression and disobedience, persisted in denying God's signs and wrongly killed the prophets
They are not all alike. Among the People of the Book are upright people, reading God's verses all night as they bow down
They believe in God and the Last Day, order what is obviously right, forbid what is obviously wrong, and they are quick to do good deeds. They are righteous
The good they do will not be forgotten. God knows those who are mindful of Him
As for the unbelievers, neither their wealth nor their children will be of benefit to them before God. They are destined to Hell, where they will remain eternally
The parable of what they spend in this worldly life is like a freezing wind that blew on a field belonging to people who wronged themselves, and it destroyed it. God did not cheat them, but they cheated themselves
Believers do not be close friends to outsiders who spare no effort to ruin you and want to see you suffer. Their hatred is apparent in what they say, and what their hearts hide is even worse. We have made Our revelations clear to you, if you would only use your reason
Here you are loving them, but they do not love you. You believe in the entire Book, and when they meet you, they say, "We believe." When they depart, they bite their fingers in rage against you. Say, "Perish in you rage. God knows what is in your hearts
If goodness befalls you, they are displeased, and if evil, then they rejoice. If you endure and are godly, their plots will not harm you at all. God surrounds all they do
Remember, Prophet, when you left your family at dawn to post the believers at their battle stations, knowing that God hears all and knows all
when two of your groups were about to give up, God protected them. Let the believers put their trust in God
You were very weak, and God gave you the victory at Badr. So, remain mindful of God and be grateful
When you said to the believers, "Will it not be enough that your Lord supplies you with three thousand angels
Yes! If you endure and are mindful of God, and the enemy suddenly attacks you, your Lord will provide five thousand swooping angels
God makes it all good news for you so that your hearts will be at peace in Him. Victory is only from God, the Almighty, the Wise
He destroyed a flank of the unbelievers and suppressed them, so they would retreat frustrated in failure
You have nothing to do with the matter. Either He will accept their repentance or punish them because they are unjust
To God belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. He forgives whomever He wants and punishes whomever he wants. God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Believers, do not collect exorbitantly compounded interests from usury, and be mindful of God so that you will succeed
Be aware that Hell was prepared for the unbelievers
and obey God and his Messenger, that you may receive mercy
Rush toward forgiveness from your Lord and a Heavenly Garden as wide as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who are mindful of God
Those who give in good times and in bad, suppress their rage and pardon other people. God loves those who do good
and those who when they are promiscuous or wrong themselves, remember God and ask forgiveness for their sins. Who but God forgives sins? And they do not knowingly persist in the sins they commit
Their reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Heavenly Gardens with flowing rivers. They will live there eternally. What an incredible reward for their works
Historic events guided by God's laws happened down through the ages. As you walk throughout the land consider the consequences of those who denied the truth
This is a clear statement to Mankind. It is guidance, and instruction to those who are mindful of God
Do not lose heart or despair. You will overcome if you are believers
If you have been wounded, know that the other side has been similarly wounded. We alternate such days between people, so God may know those who believe and to choose from among them some who [with their lives] will bear witness to the Truth. God does not love the unjust
So God can test the believers and annihilate the unbelievers
Or do you suppose that you will enter the Heavenly Garden while God has not yet made evident those among you who struggled and made evident those who endure
You desired death [in God's cause] before you encountered it. Now you have seen it with your own eyes
Muhammad is only a messenger. Other messengers have passed away before him. If he dies or is killed, will you turn back? Whoever turns back will not hurt God at all. God will reward those who give thanks
No soul can die without God's permission at a predetermined time. We will give rewards in this world to whoever wants them, and rewards in the Hereafter to whoever wants them. We will reward those who give thanks
Many prophets have fought with godly people by their side. They did not lose heart or weaken or surrender when suffering for God's cause. God loves those who endure
What they said was, "Lord, forgive us our sins and our over indulgences and make our feet firm, and save us from the unbelieving people
So God gave them rewards in this world and best rewards in the life to come. God loves those who do good
Believers, if you obey the unbelievers, they will cause you to turn back [from faith], and you will become losers
God is your protector and He is the best of all victors
We will strike panic into the hearts of the unbelievers. They attributed partners to God, for which He has never sent down any authority. Their dwelling is Hell. What an awful dwelling for the unjust
God has fulfilled His promise to you when you, with His permission, were about to destroy your enemy. He showed you what you love, and then you failed, disputed and disobeyed. Some of you long for this world, and others long for the life to come. Then, in order that He might put you to a test, He kept you from winning. Then, later He pardoned you. God is gracious towards the believers
As you fled up [the mountain], not listening to anyone, even as the Messenger was calling out to you from behind, God afflicted you with sorrow upon sorrow. [God has now forgiven you] so that you would not grieve over what you missed or what happened to you. God is well aware of what you do
Then after the sorrow, He surrounded you with a sense of calm and drowsiness covered some of you, while others were feeling sorry for themselves, entertaining wrong and ignorant thoughts about God. They said, "Do we have a say about this matter?" Say, "The whole matter is God's." They hide their true feeling from you. They say, "If we had a say about this we would not have been killed here." Say, "If you were in your houses, those destined to be killed would have gone out to meet their death. God wants to test what is within you and purify what is in your hearts. God knows what is in the hearts
As for those of you who ran away on the day the two groups met, Satan humiliated them by their own actions. However, God has pardoned them. God is forgiving and forbearing
Believers, do not be like the unbelievers and say about their brothers who went on a journey or a raid, "If they were with us, they would not have died or been killed." God will make these thoughts turn into bitter regret in their hearts. It is God who gives life and causes death. God sees well what you do
If you die or are killed in God's path, there is forgiveness and mercy from God better than all the wealth one might accumulate
When you die or are killed, you will be assembled before God
By God's mercy, you [Prophet] were gentle toward them. If you had been rude and hard-hearted, they would have turned away from you. Pardon them, ask forgiveness for them, and consult them about the matter, but once you decide on a course of action, put your trust in God. God loves those who trust Him
If God supports you, no one can defeat you. But if He fails you, who then can help you? Let the believers put their trust in God
No prophet should deceive, and whoever deceives will be faced with his deceit on the Resurrection Day. Then every soul will be rewarded according to what it earned, and they will not be wronged
Is someone who pursues God's acceptance, like the one who earns God's wrath? His dwelling is Hell, a dreadful destiny
They are on different levels in the sight of God. God sees what they do
God was gracious to the believers by sending them a messenger from among them reciting to them His verses, purifying them and teaching them the Book and Wisdom, though they were previously in clear error
And when you are stricken with a disaster even after you have inflicted twice as much damage [on the enemy], you say, "How can this be?" Say, "You brought this upon yourselves. God has power over all things
What happened to you on the day when the two groups met was according to God's will, in order to give believers a chance to prove their faith
and to let the hypocrites be known. When they were told "Come fight in God's path or at least defend yourselves." They said, "If we had known how to fight, we would have followed you." They were closer on that day to unbelief than they were to faith. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts. God knows what they hide
As for those who remained behind, and said of their brothers, "If they obeyed us, they would not have been killed." Say, "Prevent death from reaching you, if you are telling the truth
Never think of those who are killed in God's path as dead, but alive and provided for with their Lord
rejoicing in what God has bestowed upon them of His favor, and they receive good news about those who remained behind who have not yet joined them - that there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve
They are rejoicing in God's blessings and favor from God, and that God does not allow the believers' rewards to be lost
Those who responded to God and his Messenger after suffering defeat, who do good and are mindful of God, will have a great reward
Those who were told by others, "People have gathered [an army] to fight you so fear them." This instead increased their faith, and they said, "It is sufficient for us to be on God's side. He is the best of protectors
So they returned with grace and favor from God; no harm had touched them. And they worked hard at pleasing God, for truly God's favor is great
It is Satan who is trying to get you to fear his allies, so do not be afraid, but fear Me, if you are believers
Do not let those who rush to unbelief grieve you. They will not harm God at all. It is God's will that they will have no part in the life to come. They will have great punishment
Those who chose to deny God over faith will not harm God at all. They will have painful punishment
Those who are adamantly denying God shouldn't think that granting them more time, is necessarily better for them. We give them more time, but they only increase their guilt. They will have shameful punishment
God would not leave the believers in the state they are in, until He identifies the wicked from the sincere. Nor would God reveal to you His unseen plan, but God chooses messengers according to His will. So believe in God and his Messengers. If you believe and are mindful of God, you will have a great reward
Those who are tightfisted with what God has given them out of His abundance must not think that it is good for them; in fact, it is terrible for them. Whatever they cruelly withhold will be hung around their necks on Resurrection Day. It is God who will inherit the heavens and the earth: God is well aware of all you do
God has heard those who said, "God is poor, and we are rich." We will write down what they said and their wrongful killing of the prophets in defiance of all that is right. We tell them, "Experience the fire's punishment
That is for what your hands have committed, because God is never unjust to his servants
They are those who said that God has made a covenant with us not to believe in a messenger unless he brings us an offering that fire consumes. Say, "Messengers before me have come to you with miracles including the one you mentioned, so why did you kill them if you are telling the truth
And if they reject you, so also were messengers rejected who came before you, who brought miracles, written texts and the enlightening Book
Every soul will experience death, and your true compensation will come on the Resurrection Day. The victor is he who is drawn away from Hell to enter the Heavenly Garden, for the life of this world is merely an illusion
You will certainly be tested in your wealth and yourselves and will certainly hear hurtful things from those previously given the Book and the idolaters. But if you endure and are mindful of God, this proves the strength of your resolve
God made a covenant with those who were given the Book, to clearly show it to humanity and not hide it, but they turned their backs on the covenant and bartered it for a small price. What an evil bargain they made
Do not think that those who rejoice over what they were given and who love to be praised for what they did not do - do not think that they will escape from punishment. They will have agonizing punishment
To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. God has power over all things
The creation of the heavens and the earth and the sequence of night and day are signs to those who are endowed with insight
They are those who remember God while standing and sitting and lying on their sides, and consider the creation of the heavens and the earth, saying "Our Lord, you have not created this aimlessly. May You be exalted in your glory! So protect us from the punishment of Hell
Our Lord, You humiliate those You condemn to Hell. There is no help for the unjust
Our Lord, We have heard one calling us to faith, 'Believe in your Lord.' So we believed. Our Lord, forgive us our sins and wipe out our bad deeds, and let us die with the righteous
Our Lord, bring us what You promised us through Your messengers, and do not shame us on the Day of Resurrection. You do not break Your promises
So their Lord answered their prayer, "I will not allow any of your deeds to be lost, male or female, each one of you is like the other. I will wipe away the sins of those who emigrated and were expelled from their homes and were harmed for My sake, and who fought and were killed, and make them enter Heavenly Gardens graced with flowing rivers as a reward from God. God has great rewards
Do not be deceived by the [uninhibited] movement of the unbelievers throughout the land
They have a short time of enjoyment, and then their dwelling is Hell, a dreadful dwelling place
But those who are mindful of their Lord have Heavenly Gardens with flowing rivers, lodging there forever in dwellings from God. God has the best in store for the righteous
Among the people of the Book are those who believe in God and what was revealed to you and what was revealed to them. They stand in awe of God; they do not barter God's messages for trivial gain. They have their reward from their Lord: God is quick in settling accounts
Believers, be patient in hard times, and encourage each other to endure, and always be ready. Remain mindful of God, so you may prosper
People, be mindful of your Lord, who created you out of a single soul, and out of it created its mate, and out of the two spread countless men and women. Remain mindful of God, in whose name you make requests of one another and beware of severing ties of kinship. God is always watching over you
Give orphans their property, so do not replace [their] good things with bad, and do not intentionally mix their property into your own to consume it [for yourself]. This is a great sin
If you fear that you will not be fair to the orphans, then you may marry two, three, or four, from among the orphans' mothers, if they seem good to you. However, if you fear that you may not be able to treat them with equal fairness, then marry only one or from those whom your right hands held in trust. This will make it more likely that you do not deviate from the right course
Give women their bridal gift upon marriage, but if they decide to give you back a portion, then you may enjoy it with a good conscience
Do not entrust to the incompetent any property of theirs for which God has made you responsible. Make provision for them from it, clothe them and speak to them in a kind way
Mentor and train orphans until they reach marriageable age; then, if you find they are mature, hand over their possessions to them. Do not consume it wastefully or spend it before they come of age. If the guardian is rich, let him abstain [from charging fees]. But if he's poor, he should charge a fair fee. When you give them their property, call in witnesses, although God takes full account of everything you do
Men will have a share in what their parents and close relatives leave behind, and women will have a share in what their parents and close relatives leave behind, whether it is a little or a lot: this is ordained by God
If other relatives, orphans and poor people are present at the distribution [of inheritance], give them something as well, and speak to them in a kind way
Let those who fear for the future of their own helpless children, if they were to die, show the same concern [for orphans]. Let them be mindful of God and speak justly
Those who unjustly consume the possessions of orphans are filling their bellies with fire, and they will fuel a blazing flame
Concerning [the inheritance of] your children, God commands you that a son should receive the equivalent share of two daughters. If there are more than two daughters, they should have two-thirds of what [their parents] leave behind. If there is only one daughter, she will have half. As for the parents [of the deceased], each of them will have one-sixth of what he leaves behind if the deceased leaves children. If the deceased has left no children and his parents are his [only] heirs, then his mother will have one-third; and if he has brothers and sisters, then his mother will have one-sixth. [This should take place] after the payment of any will or debts. As for your parents and your children, you do not know which of them most deserves to benefit from you. This is a law from God, and He is all-knowing, all wise
You will inherit one-half of what your wives leave, provided they have no children. If they had a child, then you will have one-quarter of what they leave behind, [this should take place] after payment of any will is carried through or debts. Your widows will have one-quarter of what you leave behind, provided you have no child. If there is a child, the widow will receive one-eighth of what you leave behind. [This should take place] after payment of any will is carried through or debts.If a man or a woman has no direct heir, but has a brother or sister, then each of these two will inherit one-sixth; but if there are more than two, then they will share in one-third [of the inheritance]. [This should take place] after payment of any will or debts, with no harm done to anyone. This is a commandment from God. He is All-knowing and Clement
These are the bounds set by God. God will admit those who obey Him and His Messenger into Gardens with flowing rivers, and there they will stay. This is the ultimate victory
But whoever rebels against God and His Messenger and transgresses His bounds, He will admit him into the fire, and there they will stay where shameful suffering awaits them
As for those of your women who are accused of committing unlawful sexual conduct, call four witnesses from among you, and if they testify to their guilt, keep the women at home until death comes to them or until God shows them another way
Punish both of the guilty parties, but if they both repent and mend their ways, leave them alone. God is always ready to accept repentance. He's the Mercy Giver
But God only accepts repentance from those that do evil out of ignorance and then repent soon after: It is they whom God will forgive; He is all-knowing, all wise
Whereas repentance will not be accepted from those who continue to do evil deeds until their dying hour and then say, "I now repent," nor from those who die denying God. For those We have prepared a painful punishment
Believers, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will, nor should you treat them harshly in the hopes of re-gaining some of the bridal-gift you gave them, unless they are obviously guilty of promiscuity. Live with your wives in a way that is fair and kind. If you dislike them, it may well be that you dislike something which God has made a source of abundant grace
If you wish to replace one wife with another, do not take away what you have given to the first one, regardless of how much it is
How could you take it away after you have been intimate with one another, and she has received a solemn pledge from you
Do not marry women that your fathers married- with the exception of what previously took place: this is a shameful deed and a hateful thing and leads to evil
You are forbidden to take as wives your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your paternal and maternal aunts, a brother's daughters, a sister's daughters, your wet nurse, your milk-sisters, mothers-in law, and your step-daughters- who are your foster children that are born of your wives with whom you have consummated your marriage. However, if you have not consummated your marriage, you will incur no sin [by marrying their daughters]. You are forbidden to marry the wives of your begotten sons, two sisters simultaneously: with the exception of what previously took place. God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
[You are forbidden to marry] women who are already married, except from those whom your right hands held in trust . God has ordained all of this for you. Other women are lawful to you as long as you seek to marry them and not for unlawful intimacy. If you wish to enjoy women through marriage, you will give them their bridal-gift. If you should mutually choose, after fulfilling this obligation, to do something else with the bridal-gift, you will not be blamed. God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
If any of you does not have the means to marry free believing women, then marry a believer from those whom your right hands held in trust. God knows all about your faith; each one of you is part of the same human family. Marry them with their guardian's consent, and give them their rightful bridal-gifts. Make them married women, not adulterous fornicators or lovers. If they commit adultery when they are married, their punishment should be half that of free women. This permission is for those of you who fear they will sin. It is better for you to practice self-control. God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
God wishes to make His laws clear to you, and to guide you towards the righteous ways of those who preceded you. He wishes to redeem you. He is all-knowing and all wise
God wants to redeem you in mercy, but those who only follow their lusts want you to drift astray from the right path
God wants to lighten your burden as human beings were created weak
Believers, do not consume one another's possessions wrongfully, not even if It is a trade with mutual consent. Do not kill each other, for God is Merciful-to-all of you
Whoever does these things with malicious intent, We will make them burn in Hell: for this is easy for God
If you avoid the great sins which you have been forbidden, We will wipe away your minor bad deeds and will cause you to enter through an honorable gate
Do not desire that which God has given more abundantly to some of you in preference to others. Men will profit from what they earned, and women will profit from what they earned. Ask God to give to you out of His favor. God has full knowledge of everything
We have appointed heirs to everything that parents and close relatives leave behind, including those to whom you have pledged to marry: give them their share. God is witness to everything
Husbands have charge of their wives with the wealth God has given to some over others, and with what they spend out of their wealth. Righteous wives are truly devout, and they guard what God has ordained them to guard in their husbands' absence. If you have reason to fear ill-will from your wives, remind them of the teachings of God, then ignore them when you go to bed, then depart away from them. If they obey you, do not seek to harm them. God is most high and great
If you have reason to fear that a problem might occur between married couples, appoint one arbiter from among his family and one arbiter from among her family. If they both want to set things right, God may bring about their reconciliation. God is all-knowing, fully aware
Worship God alone; do not attribute divinity to others. Be good to your parents, close relatives, orphans, the needy, to close and far neighbors, close friends, stranded travelers and those whom your right hands held in trust. God does not love those who are conceited and full of pride
who are stingy and demand that others be the same, concealing God's blessings to them. We have prepared a humiliating punishment for all the unbelievers
God does not love those who spend their possessions on others only to be publicly praised, while they do not actually believe in God or the Last Day. Whoever has Satan as his companion has an evil companion
What harm would it be to them to believe in God and the Last Day, and give charitably from what God has given to them? God knows them well
God does not wrong anyone by so much as an atom's weight. If there is a good deed done, He will multiply it, and will bestow out of His grace a mighty reward
What will the sinners do on Judgment Day when We bring forward witnesses from within every community, with you [Muhammad] as a witness against these people
Those who denied the truth and disobeyed the Prophet will wish that the earth would swallow them. They will not be able to conceal from God anything that has happened
Believers, do not attempt to pray while you are in a state of drunkenness, but wait until you know what you are saying; nor if you are in a state of major ritual impurity, until you have bathed, unless you are travelling and are unable to do so. If you are ill, are travelling, have relieved yourselves, or had intercourse, and cannot find any water, then find some pure dust and wipe your faces and your hands with it. God is always ready to pardon and forgive
[Prophet], have you not considered how those who have been granted their portion of the Book barter it away for error? They wish you, too, would lose the right path
God knows your enemies best. No one can befriend and protect you as God does
Among those of the Jewish faith, some distort the meaning of the [revealed] words, taking them out of their context and saying, "We have heard, but we disobey," and, "Listen," [adding the insult] 'May you not hear,' - thus speaking abusively and implying that the [true] Faith is false. If they had said, "We have heard, and we obey," and "Hear us, and have patience with us," it would have been better and more appropriate for them. God has rejected them because of their refusal to acknowledge the truth. They have little faith
People of the Book, believe in what We have sent down to confirm what you already have before We wipe out [your sense of] direction, turning you back, or rejecting you, as We rejected those who broke the Sabbath. God's will is always done
God does not forgive the attribution of partners to Him, although He forgives any lesser sin unto whomever He wills. He who attributes a partner to God has invented a terrible sin
[Prophet], have you considered those who claim purity for themselves? No! God purifies whomever He wills. No one will be wronged by as much as a hair's breadth
See how they invent lies about God. This in itself is an obvious sin
Do you not see how those given a portion of the Book, now believe in idols and the powers of evil and maintain that those who are bent on denying the truth are more surely guided than those who are believers
Those are the ones God has rejected. You [Prophet] will not find anyone to help those God has rejected
Do they have a share in [God's] dominion? If they had this, they would not give away so much as the groove of a date seed
Do they envy the favor God has granted to other people? We gave the descendants of Abraham the Book and Wisdom and we gave them a great kingdom
and some of them believed in him yet some of them turned away from him. Nothing could be as blazing as Hell
Those who are bent on denying Our messages will endure fire: [and] every time their skin burns off We will replace it with new skin so that they may perpetually suffer. God is mighty and wise
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will bring them into Gardens with flowing rivers and they will live there eternally. They will have pure spouses there, and We will give them abundant shade
God commands you to return things entrusted to you to their rightful owners, and if you judge between people, do so with justice. God's instructions to you are excellent for He is All-Hearing and All-Seeing
Believers, obey God and the Messenger and those among you who have been entrusted with authority. If you have a dispute about anything, refer it to God and the Messenger, if you truly believe in God and the Last Day. This is best to do and in turn gives the best results
Do you [Prophet] not see those who claim they believe in what has been revealed to you and revealed before you, yet they still want to turn to unjust tyrants for judgment, even though they have been ordered to reject them? Satan wants to lead them astray
When they are told, "Turn to God's revelation and the Messenger," you see the hypocrites turn away from you in disgust
How will they fare when disaster strikes them because of what they themselves have done? They will come to you swearing by God, "We desired nothing but good and to achieve reconciliation
God knows well what is in these people's hearts, so ignore what they say, instruct them, and admonish them
It is God's will that all messengers He sent be obeyed. If they [hypocrites] had come to you [Prophet], after having wronged themselves, and asked God to forgive them, while you, too, were asking for their forgiveness, they would have found that God accepts repentance and is Merciful-to-all
By your Lord, they do not really believe unless they make you [prophet] judge their disputes, and then find no resentment to accept your decision, fully submitting
If we had ordered them, "Lay down your lives!" or, "Leave your homes," they would not have done so, except for a few. However, if they had done what they were ordered to do, it would have been better for them and a stronger confirmation of their faith
and We would have granted them, out of Our grace, a mighty reward
and guided them to a straight path
All the people who obey God and the Messenger will be among those God has blessed including the prophets, those that never strayed from the truth, those who bore witness to the truth and the righteous. What excellent companions are these
That is how God favors you, and no one knows better than God
Believers, be on your guard, then mobilize for war in small groups or together
Among you there is the type of person that would lag behind, and then if calamity would strike you, he would say, "God has been gracious to me that I was not there with them
Yet, if good fortune comes to you from God, such a person would say, as if there had been no question of love between you and him, "If I had only been with them, I would have profited a lot
Let only those who are willing to trade life in this world for the Hereafter fight in God's cause. We will grant a mighty reward to all who fight in God's cause, whether they are killed or are victors
How could you refuse to fight in God's cause for the helpless men, women and children who are screaming, "Lord! Lead us towards freedom, out of this land of oppressors! Through your grace, give us a protector and a helper
The believers fight for God's cause, whereas those who are bent on denying the truth fight for the cause of evil. Fight the allies of Satan. Satan's tactics are truly weak
[Prophet], are you not aware of those who have been told, "Refrain from fighting, perform prayer, and pay the purifying alms?" However, as soon as the fighting is ordained for them, some of them feared men even more than they feared God, saying, "Lord, why have You ordained fighting for us? If only You would give us just a little more time?" Say to them, "The enjoyment of this world is brief, whereas the life to come is far better for those who are mindful of God. You will not be wronged, not even a little bit
Wherever you may be, death will overtake you, even if you are in high protected towers. When good fortune happens to them, some [people] say, "This is from God," whereas when harm comes to them, they say, "This is from you [Prophet]." Tell them, "Both come from God." What is the matter with these people? They hardly understand what they are told
Anything good that happens to you is from God, and whatever evil happens to you is from yourself. We have sent you as a Prophet to all people, and it is enough that God is your witness
Whoever obeys the Messenger obeys God. We have not sent you to be the keeper for those who turn away
They say, "We obey you [Prophet]," but when they leave your presence, some of them plot during the night to disobey you. God records what they plot. Ignore them, and place your trust in God, for none is as worthy of trust as God
Will they not, at least, try to understand this Qur'an? If it had been from anyone but God, they would have found many inconsistencies in it
Whenever a rumor pertaining to peace or war comes to them, they broadcast it. But had they referred it to the Messenger and to the believers who were in charge, they would have understood it and made sense of it. If it were not for God's favor and mercy on you, most of you would have followed Satan
So, [Messenger] fight in the cause of God. You are responsible only for yourself. Rally the believers, because God may well curb the strength of the unbelievers. God is stronger in might and in His ability to destroy
Whoever rallies for a good cause will share in its benefits; and whoever rallies for an evil cause will answer for his part in it. God watches everything
When you are greeted with a greeting, answer with an even better greeting, or [at least] respond with the same greeting. God keeps account of everything
He is God. There is no god but Him. He will gather all of you on the Resurrection Day. There is no doubt about it. Whose word could be truer than God's
How is it that you are double-minded and divided over the hypocrites, seeing that God Himself has disowned them because of their disobedience? Do you, perhaps, want to guide those whom God has let go astray? Whomever God leads astray, you [Messenger] will never find a way for them
They would love to see you deny the truth just as they have denied it, so you will all be the same. Do not take them as allies until they migrate for God's cause. But if they turn on you with open hostility, then seize them and kill them wherever you may find them. Do not take any of them as your allies or supporters
Some seek refuge with people with whom you are bound by a treaty, or they come over to you because their consciences forbid them to go to war against you or against their own people. Had God willed, He would have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. So if they withdraw and do not fight you, and offer you peace, God does not allow you to harm them
You will find others who wish to be safe from you, and from their own people, but whenever they are back in a situation where they are tempted [to fight you], they succumb to it. So if they do not withdraw, offer peace, or restrain themselves from hostility, seize and kill them wherever you encounter them. We give you clear authority against such people
A believer should never kill another believer, but mistakes happen. If someone kills a believer by mistake, he must free one believing slave and pay compensation to the victim's relatives, unless they willingly forgo compensation. If the victim is a believer, but belonged to a community with which you are at war, then the compensation is only to free a believing slave; whereas, if the person killed belonged to a community with whom you have a treaty, then the compensation should be paid to his relatives in addition to freeing a believing slave. Anyone who does not have the means to do this must fast for two consecutive months. God ordains this atonement. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
But whoever deliberately slays another believer, his punishment will be Hell. There, he will remain and God will condemn him, and will reject him, and will prepare horrible suffering for him
So, believers, be careful when you fight in God's path, and use your discernment. Do not say to someone who offers you a greeting of peace, "You are not a believer, aspiring for worldly goods. God has plenty of gains for you. You were once in the same position, but God has been gracious to you. Therefore, use your discernment. God is always aware of what you do
Unequal are the passive believers who stay behind, to those who commit themselves, their possessions and their lives to struggling in God's cause. God has raised those who struggle to a rank far above those who stay behind. Even though God has promised the ultimate good unto all believers, those who struggle are favored with a tremendous reward
high ranks conferred by Him, as well as forgiveness, and mercy. God is most Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
While the angels are gathering the souls of those who wronged themselves, they will wonder, "What was the matter with you?" They will say, "We were oppressed in our land." [The angels] will ask, "Was not God's earth vast enough for you to run away?" These people will have Hell as their refuge, a horrible destination
The truly helpless, including men, women or children, who do not have the means to leave may be exempt
God might just pardon them. God is forever pardoning and forgiving
He who migrates for God's cause will find many safe places and abundant resources on earth. If anyone leaves his home as an emigrant for God and His Messenger, and then he dies, his reward is certain with God. God is forever forgiving and Merciful-to-all
When you believers are travelling, you will not be blamed for shortening your prayers if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you. They are your sworn enemies
[Prophet] When you are among believers and about to lead them in prayer, let a group of them stand up in prayer with you, taking their weapons with them. When they have finished their prayer, let them take up their positions at the back while another group, who has not yet prayed, come forward to pray with you, also on their guard and armed with their weapons. The unbelievers would love to see you unarmed, so that they might take you in a surprise attack. You will not be blamed for laying down your weapons, while you pray if you encounter heavy rain or are ill; But be fully prepared against danger. God has prepared a shameful and humiliating punishment for the unbelievers
When you have finished your prayer, continue to remember God- standing, sitting and lying down; and when you are safe again, observe your complete prayers. For all believers, prayer is a sacred duty to be performed at prescribed times
Do not be hesitant when pursuing the enemy. If you are feeling pain, so are they. But you expect from God what they cannot expect. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise
We have sent down the Book to you [Prophet], with the Truth, so that you can judge between people according to what God has taught you. Do not be an advocate for those who are traitors
but pray for God's forgiveness. God is most Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Do not argue on behalf of those who betray their own souls. God does not love anyone given to treason and sin
They try to hide their actions from men, but from God they cannot hide them. God is with them while they are plotting during the night, saying things that are displeasing to Him. God is fully aware of everything they do
Here you are pleading their cause in this world, but on the Resurrection Day who will plead with God on their behalf? Who will then be their advocate
He who does evil or sins against himself and later prays asking for God to forgive him, will find God very forgiving and merciful
He who commits sin does so against his own soul. God is All-knowing, All-Wise
He who commits an offence or sin and then blames an innocent person has burdened himself with deceit and flagrant sin
If it were not for God's favor and mercy to you [Prophet], some of them would have led you astray. They only lead themselves astray. They cannot harm you in any way, and God has given you the Book and the Wisdom, and taught you what you did not know. God's favor on you is indeed tremendous
Nothing good comes from their secretive discussion, except for when they are encouraging charity, or good or reconciliation between people. To anyone who does this out of a longing for God's pleasure, We will give a great reward
Whoever deviates, after guidance has been clearly given to him, contentiously opposes the Messenger and follows a path other than that of the believers, We will leave him on his chosen path and let him burn in Hell, an evil destination
God does not forgive the association of partners with Him, although He forgives any lesser sin of whomever He wills. Those people who worship deities besides Him have gone far, far astray
In His place the idolaters invoke only idols with female names, thus invoking the rebellious Satan
whom God has rejected for having said, "I will certainly claim my due share of your servants
and will lead them astray and fill them with vain desires. I will command them, and they will slit the ears of cattle. I will command them to corrupt God's creation." Whoever chooses Satan as their master, as opposed to God, is utterly ruined
He makes them promises and fills them with vain desires; yet, whatever Satan promises them is nothing but an illusion
Such people will have Hell as their home, and they will have no way out
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will admit them into Gardens graced with flowing rivers, to remain eternally. This is a true promise from God. Who speaks more truthfully than God
You will not be judged according to your wishes or according to the wishes of the People of the Book. Anyone who does evil will be judged for it and will not find anyone to protect him or help him
Whereas, anyone, be it man or woman, who does good deeds and is a believer will enter Heaven, and will not be wronged by as much as a tiny bit
Who could be better in faith than those who submit themselves to God, and do good, and follow the faith of Abraham, who turned away from all that is false? God took Abraham as a friend
Everything in heaven and on earth belongs to God. God is fully aware of everything
They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling about women. Say, "God gives you a ruling about them, along with what has been recited to you through the Book about orphan women [in your charge], from whom you withhold the prescribed shares [of their inheritance] and whom you wish to marry; and about helpless children; and about your duty to treat orphans with fairness. God has full knowledge of whatever good you do
If a woman has reason to fear ill-treatment or even a lack of interest from her husband, neither of them will be blamed if they come to a peaceful settlement, for peace is best. Selfishness is always present in human souls. If you do good and are mindful of God, He is well aware of all that you do
You will never be able to treat your wives with equal fairness, regardless of how much you desire to do so. Do not allow yourself to incline more towards one and exclude the other, potentially leaving her dangling [between marriage and divorce) If you make amends and remain mindful of God, He's most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
If a husband and wife do separate, God will provide for each of them out of His plenty. God is limitless in His provision and wise
All that is in heaven and on earth belongs to God. We have commanded those who were given the Book before your time, as well as you, to remain mindful of God. Even if you ignore Him, everything in the heavens and on earth belong to Him, and God is rich beyond need and worthy of all praise
Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to God, and He is sufficient for those who trust in Him
If He's willing, He can cause all of you to disappear and replace you with new people: God is fully capable of doing this
If someone desires the rewards of this world, the rewards of this world and the next are both God's to give. God hears and sees everything
Believers, uphold justice and bear witness to God, even if that witness is against yourself, your parents or your close relatives. Whether a person is rich or poor, God can best take care of both. Refrain from following your own desires, so that you do not act unjustly. If you distort the truth, God is fully aware of what you do
Believers, hold on to your faith in God and His Messenger, as well as the Book that He has gradually sent down to His Messenger, as well as the Book that He sent down before. He who denies God, His angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Last Day has gone far astray
As for those who believe and then deny the truth, then believe again, and again deny the truth and become increasingly defiant, God will not forgive them, nor will He guide them
[Prophet] tell these hypocrites that an agonizing punishment awaits them
Are those who ally themselves with the unbelievers rather than the believers doing so because they seek power through them? Power is only God's to give
He has already revealed to you in the Book that whenever you hear people denying and mocking God's message, you should avoid their company until they start talking about other things, or else you will become like them. God will gather the hypocrites in Hell, together with the unbelievers
They wait to see what happens to you and, if God brings you success. They say, "Were we not on your side?" If the unbelievers have some success, they say to them, "Have we not earned your affection by defending you against those believers?" God will judge between everyone on the Resurrection Day, and God will never allow the unbelievers to harm the believers
The hypocrites try to deceive God, but it is He who causes them to be deceived. They rise to pray, they rise reluctantly, only to be seen and praised by men, seldom remembering God
wavering between this and that, belonging neither to one side nor the other. If God let someone stray, [Prophet] you will never find a way for him
Believers, do not take the unbelievers as allies and protectors instead of the believers. Do you want to offer God clear evidence of your guilt
The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of Hell, and you will find no one to help them
except for those who repent, make amends, hold fast to God and are devoted in their faith to Him alone. They are one with the believers. God will grant a mighty reward to the believers
Why should God punish you [for your past sins] if you become thankful and believe in Him? God is always responsive to gratitude and is All-Knowing
God does not like any evil to be mentioned openly unless someone has been wronged. God is All-Hearing and All-Knowing
If you do good openly or in secret, or pardon others for something bad done to you, then God is most forgiving and powerful
As for those who ignore God and His Messenger by trying to make a distinction between them, saying, "We believe in the one, but we deny the other," and want to pursue a path in-between
it is they who are truly unbelievers. We have prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers
As for those who believe in God and His Messengers and did not make any distinction between His Messengers, God will grant them their rewards. God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
The People of the Book demand that you [Prophet] make a Book physically come down to them from heaven. They demanded even more than this from Moses when they said, "Let us see God face to face," and were then struck by a thunderbolt of punishment for their presumption. Even after clear revelations had come down to them, they started worshipping the calf. We pardoned this and gave Moses clear authority
to raise the mountain above them in witness of their solemn pledge. We said to them, "Enter the gate humbly," and, "Do not break the Sabbath law." We accepted from them a solemn pledge
[We punished them] for breaking their pledge, for their refusal to acknowledge God's messages, for unjustly killing their prophets, and for saying, "Our hearts are sealed." No, God has sealed their hearts as a result of their unbelief, and [now] they only believe in a few things
and because they denied the truth and uttered a terrible slander against Mary
and said, "We have killed the Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of God." However, they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, though it was made to appear as if it had been so. Those who disagree are confused, having no [real] knowledge to follow, only supposition. They certainly did not kill him
Rather, God raised him up to Himself. God is Almighty and Wise
Yet there is none among the People of the Book but will believe in him [Jesus] before his death. And on the Resurrection Day he [Jesus] will be a witness over them
Due to the wrongdoings done by the Jews, We denied them certain good things that had been permitted to them previously; and [We did this] because they frequently turned away from God
taking usury even though it had been forbidden them, and for wrongfully consuming other people's possessions. For those of them who continuously reject the truth, We have prepared painful punishment
As for those among them who are deeply rooted in knowledge and the believers who believe in what has been revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you, and those who are [especially] constant in prayer, and give the purifying alms, and all who believe in God and the Last Day-- to them We will give a great reward
We have sent a revelation to you [Prophet], just as We inspired Noah and all the prophets after him -- as We inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and their descendants, including Jesus and Job, and Jonah, and Aaron, and Solomon; and to David We gave the Psalms
and other messengers that We have already mentioned to you, as well as messengers that We have not mentioned to you. And God spoke directly to Moses
All of these were messengers bearing good news and warning, so that people would not have any excuse before God after these messengers were sent. God is almighty and wise
God [Himself] bears witness to what He has sent down to you: He sent it down from on high with His knowledge and with the angels bearing witness- although God is a sufficient witness
Those who have denied the truth and turned others away from God's path have gone far astray
God will not forgive those who reject the truth and are unjust, nor will He guide them onto any path
except the path that leads to Hell, where they will live eternally. This is easy for God
People, the Messenger has come to you with the Truth from your Lord, so believe it for your own wellbeing. If you deny the truth, remember that to God belongs everything that is in the heavens and on earth. God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
People of the Book, do not be excessive in your beliefs, and do not say anything about God except the Truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, is the Messenger of God; His word conveyed to Mary and a spirit from Him. Believe in God and His Messengers and do not say "Three." Stop this for your own good. God is only one God. So exalted is He, in His glory, from having a son. Everything belongs to Him that is in the heavens and on earth. None is as worthy to trust as He
The Messiah was never too proud to be God's servant, nor were the angels who are near to Him. He will gather before Him the arrogant and all those who are too proud to worship Him
To those who believe and do good deeds, He will give them their just rewards, and give them even more out of His favor. Whereas, to those who felt too proud and arrogant, He will punish them with a painful punishment. They will find no one to protect them from God
People, convincing truth has now come to you from your Lord, and We have sent down to you clear enlightenment
As for those who believe in Him, and hold fast to Him, God will admit them into His mercy and grace, and will guide them to Himself on a straight path
They will ask you [Prophet] for a ruling. Say, "God gives you a ruling concerning those who die childless and who have no surviving parents. If a man dies childless and has a sister, she will inherit one-half of what he has left, just as he will inherit from her if she dies childless. But if there are two sisters, then they are entitled to two-thirds of the inheritance between them, but if there are brothers and sisters, then the male is entitled to twice the share of the female.God makes this clear to you so that you do not go astray. God knows everything
Believers, fulfill your obligations. Livestock animals are lawful for you to eat, except for what We will describe to you. You are not allowed to hunt while you are in a state of pilgrimage. God commands what He wills
Believers, do not violate the laws pertaining to God's sacraments, the sacred month of pilgrimage, or the offerings, and do not prevent those who are going to the Sacred House from seeking favor, pleasure and acceptance from their Lord. Once your pilgrimage is over, then you are free to hunt. Never let your hatred for the people who barred you from the Sacred Sanctuary lead you to break the law. Help one another to do what is right-- to always be mindful of God, and do not encourage one another in sin and hostility. Always be mindful of God, because His punishment is severe
You are forbidden to eat animals that you find already dead, blood, pork's meat, any animal over which any name other than God's has been invoked, any animal that has been strangled or beaten to death or killed by a fall or gored to death or mauled by a wild animal, unless you can still properly slaughter it. You are also forbidden to eat anything that has been sacrificed to idols. You are forbidden to draw lots, since this is sinful conduct. The unbelievers have lost all hope of you ever forsaking your faith. Do not be afraid of them, but stand in awe of Me. Today I have perfected your faith for you and have shed My grace upon you and have chosen submission [Islam] to be your faith. As for him who is driven to what is forbidden by dire necessity, and not by an inclination to sin, God is All-Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
They will ask you [Prophet] what is lawful for them. Say, "All good things are lawful to you, including what you have taught your birds and beasts of prey to catch, teaching them as God has taught you. You may eat what they catch for you, but invoke God's name over it, and always be mindful of God." He is quick to take account
Today, all the good things of life have been made lawful for you. The food of the people of the Book is lawful to you just as your food is lawful to them. Virtuous, believing women are lawful to you as well as virtuous women from the People of the Book; provided that you give them their bridal gifts and marry them-- not taking them as lovers or secret mistresses. As for anyone who rejects faith in God, all of their works will come to nothing, and in the Hereafter they will be with the doomed
Believers, when you are about to pray, wash your face, your hands and arms up to the elbows, and pass your wet hands lightly over your head and wash your feet up to the ankles. After sexual intercourse, purify yourselves. If you are ill, or are travelling, or have just relieved yourself, or have had intimate contact with a woman and cannot find water, then take some dust and use it to wipe your face and hands. God does not wish to place any burden on you, but wants to make you pure and to perfect His grace on you, so that you may be thankful
Always remember God's grace on you and your pledge that binds you to Him when you said, "We hear, and we obey." Always be mindful of God. God is fully aware of what is in your hearts
Believers, always be steadfast in your devotion to God, equitably bearing witness to truth. Never let hatred for any people lead you to deviate from being just to them. Be just, for that is closer to being mindful of God. Always be mindful of God. God is well aware of what you do
God has promised forgiveness and rich rewards to those who have faith and do good works
whereas; those who deny Our revelations and lie are destined for the blazing fire
Believers, remember how God favored you when certain people were about to attack you, and He protected you from them. Be always mindful of God. Let the believers put their trust in Him
God took a pledge from the Children of Israel. We appointed twelve of them as leaders. And God said, "I am with you. If you are regular in prayer, give the purifying alms, and believe in My Messengers and support them, and lend God a good loan, I will cleanse you of your bad deeds and admit you into Gardens with flowing rivers. After this, any of you who deny the truth will be far from the right path
But, because they broke their pledge, We rejected them and hardened their hearts. They distorted the meaning of the revealed words, and they have forgotten a lot of what they have been told to remember. You will always find deceit in all but a few of them. Forgive them and forget. God loves those who honor Him by forgiving
And We also took the pledge from those who say "We are Christians," but they have forgotten part of what they were told to keep in mind. That caused resentment and hatred among them, which We have permitted until the Resurrection Day, when God will explain to them what they have done
People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to you to clarify much of what you used to conceal of the Book and to overlook much. An enlightenment has now come to you from God and a clear Book
Through it God guides those who follow what pleases Him to ways of peace and by His permission, He will bring them out from the darkness of ignorance into enlightenment, and will guide them to a straight path
Those who say, "God is the Messiah, the son of Mary," are defying the truth. Say, "If it had been God's will, could anyone have prevented Him from destroying the Messiah, son of Mary, together with his mother and everyone else on earth?" For God has control over the heavens and the earth and everything in between. He creates whatever He wants and has power over all things
The Jews and the Christians say, "We are God's children and His loved ones." Say to them, "Why does He punish you for your sins? No, you are only human beings of His creation. He forgives whomever He wills, and He punishes whomever He wills, for God has control over the heavens and the earth and everything in between. All journeys lead to Him
People of the Book, after a long time during which no messengers have appeared, Our Messenger comes to you now to make the truth clear to you so you should not say, "No one has come to give us good news or to warn us." Someone did come to you to give you good news and to warn you. God has the power to do all things
Moses said to his people, "My people, remember God's blessing on you when He raised up prophets among you, and appointed kings for you and gave you what He had not given anyone else in the world
My people, enter the holy land, which God has promised you; but do not turn back, or then you will be doomed
They answered, "Moses, there are ferocious people in this land. We will not enter it until they leave. If they leave, then we will enter
Two men from among those who feared God, and whom God had blessed, said, "Enter through the gate, for as soon as you enter, you will be victorious. If you are truly believers, you must place your trust in God
They said, "Moses, we will never enter while they are still there. Go forward with your Lord and fight, and we will stay here
Moses said, "Lord, I do not have control over anyone except my brother and myself. Judge between us and those defiantly disobedient people
God said, "The land is forbidden to them. They will wander aimlessly for forty years, on the earth. Do not grieve over those who disobey
[Prophet] tell them the truth about the story of Adams' two sons-- how each of them offered a sacrifice, one sacrifice being accepted and the other being rejected. One said, "I will kill you!" The other replied, "God only accepts the sacrifice of those who are mindful of Him
Even if you try to kill me, I will not try to kill you. I fear God, the Lord of all the worlds
I would rather you bear the burden of my sins as well as yours. Then you will be destined for the fire. That is the destiny of the unjust
His selfishness caused him to murder his brother. He killed him and became doomed
God sent a raven to scratch the ground to show him how to cover his brother's body. He cried out, "How awful! Am I so helpless that I cannot do what this raven has done?" He then buried his brother and was filled with sorrow
Because of this, We decreed to the Children of Israel that if anyone kills a human being, unless it is in punishment for murder or for spreading corruption on earth, it will be as though he killed all of human beings. And, if anyone saves a life, it will be as though he had saved the lives of all human beings. Our Messengers came to them with evidence of the truth. Yet, many of them continued to corrupt earth by their over indulgence
Those who wage war against God and His Messenger and strive to spread corruption on earth should be punished by death, crucifixion, the amputation of their hands and their feet, or should be entirely banished from [the face of] the earth. Such is their disgrace in this world. In the Hereafter, a terrible punishment awaits them
except for those who repent before you overpower them. You must bear in mind that God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Believers, remain mindful of God, seek ways to come closer to Him, and strive for His cause so that you may prosper
If the unbelievers possess all that is on earth, and twice as much, and offer it to ransom themselves from suffering on the Resurrection Day, it will not be accepted from them: they will have a painful punishment
They will wish to come out of the fire, but they will not come out of it. It will be an everlasting punishment
As for the men and women who steal, cut off their hands as punishment for what they have done. It is a deterrent ordered by God. God is almighty and wise
As for him who repents after having done wrong, and makes amends, God will accept his repentance. God is most forgiving and most Merciful-to-all
Do you not know that control of the heavens and the earth belongs to God? He punishes whomever He wills, and He forgives whomever He wills. God has the power to do anything
Messenger, do not be saddened by those who hurry to deny the truth; such as those who say, "We believe," and do not have any faith in their hearts and the Jews who eagerly listen to any lies and to those who have never met you. They distort the meaning of the words, taking them out of their context, saying, "If you have already been given this [in your Scriptures], accept it, but if you have not, then be on your guard!" Do not be saddened by them, for if God wills someone to be tempted by evil, you will not be able to do anything for them.These are the ones whose hearts God is not willing to cleanse. They will be disgraced in this world, and will have terrible suffering in the Hereafter
They eagerly listen to lies and greedily profit from all that is evil. If they come to you [Prophet] for judgment, you can either judge between them or decline, for if you decline, they cannot harm you in any way. If you do judge, judge them fairly: God loves the just
Why do they come to you for judgment, seeing that they have the Torah with God's Law? Even then they will turn away from your judgment. These are not true believers
We revealed the Torah with guidance and enlightenment. The prophets, who had submitted themselves to God, as well as the rabbis and the scholars, all judged according to that part of God's Book they were entrusted to preserve and to which they were witnesses. So do not fear people. Only fear Me. Do not barter my verses for a small profit. Those who do not judge according to what God has revealed are unbelievers
In the Torah we prescribed for them a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and a similar retribution for wounds. However, If anyone forgoes this out of charity, it will serve as atonement for them. Those who do not judge in accordance with what God has revealed are unjust
We sent Jesus, the son of Mary, to follow in the footsteps of those earlier prophets, confirming what was available of the Torah. We gave him the Gospel. It has guidance and enlightenment, confirming what was available of the Torah. It has guidance and an admonition for those who are mindful of God
Let the followers of the Gospel judge according to what God has revealed in it. Those who do not judge in light of what God has revealed are deviators
[Prophet] We sent you the Book, setting forth the Truth, confirming what is available of earlier revelations and with final authority over them. Judge between them in accordance with what God has sent down. Do not follow their whims, which deviate from the Truth revealed to you.We have assigned to each of you a law and a way of life. If God had wanted, He could have made all of you a single community, but instead He is testing you by means of what He has revealed to you. So compete in doing what is good. You will all return to God, and He will clarify these matters about which you have differed
[Prophet] Judge between them according to what God has revealed to them, and do not follow their whims. Be cautious. Do not let them tempt you away from what God has revealed to you. If they turn away, remember it is God's will to repay them for some of the sins they have committed. A great many people are deviators
Do they want judgment according to the age of ignorance? Is there any better judge than God for those who are firm in faith
Believers, do not take the Jews and Christians as allies. They are only allies with one another, and whoever allies himself with them becomes one of them. God does not guide such unjust people
You [Prophet] will see those with perverse hearts rushing to them and saying, "We are afraid that fortune may turn against us." God may bring about good fortune for the believers, or He may not. Then they will be overcome with remorse for the thoughts that they secretly harbored
The believers will say to one another, "Are these the same men who swore by God with their most solemn oath that they were with you? All they did was in vain, and they lost everything
Believers, if you ever abandon your faith, God will replace you with people He loves and who love Him, people who are meek toward the believers, uncompromising to the unbelievers; people who strive hard in God's cause, and do not fear being blamed by anyone. Such is God's grace, which He grants to whomever He wills. God has boundless grace and knowledge
Your true allies are God, His Messenger and the believers-- those who are constant in prayer, pay the prescribed purifying alms, and bow down in worship
All who ally themselves with God and His Messenger and the believers will be victorious
Believers, do not befriend people who mock your faith and make fun of it, whether they are people who were given the Book before you or who are unbelievers. Remain mindful of God if you are truly believers
When you make a call to prayer, they mock it and make fun of it because they are people who do not use reason
Say, "People of the Book, do you resent us for any reason other than that we believe in God and what He has revealed to us and what He revealed before us, or is it only because most of you are deviators
Say, "Will I tell you, in the sight of God, who deserves a worse punishment than these? They whom God has rejected and whom He condemned and turned into apes and pigs because they worshipped the powers of evil. They are worse in rank and farther astray from the right path
When they come to you, they say, "We believe." However, they come denying the truth and leave in the same state. God is fully aware of all they conceal
You [Prophet] can see many of them outdoing one another in sin and hostility and making illegal profits
If only their rabbis and scholars would stop them from speaking sinfully and making illegal profits. Their deeds are so evil
Those Jews said, "God hands are tied!" It is they whose hands are tied! They are cursed by God for what they have said. God's hands are open wide; He gives as He pleases. What has been sent down to you [Prophet] from your Lord is sure to make many of them even more stubborn in their arrogance and in their denial of the truth.We have incited enmity and hatred among the People of the Book until the Resurrection Day. Whenever they kindle the fires of war, God extinguishes them and they work hard at spreading corruption on earth. God does not love the corrupters
If the People of the Book would only truly believe and be mindful of God! We would wipe away their former evil deeds and bring them into Gardens of delight
and if they would truly observe the Torah and the Gospel and all that has been revealed to them by their Lord, they would have been given an abundance of grace from heaven and earth. Some of them are on the right course, but most of them do what is evil
Prophet, proclaim everything that has been sent down to you from your Lord, for unless you do it fully, you will not have delivered His message. God will protect you from men. God does not guide people who refuse to acknowledge the truth
Say, "People of the Book, You have no valid ground for your beliefs, unless you [truly] observe the Torah and the Gospel, and all that has been sent down to you from your Lord." Yet all that has been sent down to you [Prophet] by your Lord is bound to make many of them more stubborn in their arrogance and in their denial of the truth. Do not worry about unbelievers
The believers, as well as the Jews, the Sabeans and the Christians: all who believe in God and the Last Day and do righteous deeds, will have nothing to fear and they will not grieve
We made a covenant with the Children of Israel, and We sent messengers to them. Every time a messenger came to them with anything that was not to their liking, they rebelled. They accused some of them of lying and killed others
Thinking that they themselves would not be harmed, they became blind and deaf. God turned to them in mercy, yet many of them again became blind and deaf. God sees everything that they do
Those who say, "God is the Messiah, son of Mary," have defied God. The Messiah himself said, "Children of Israel, worship God. He is my Lord as well as your Lord." If anyone associated others with God, He will not permit them to enter Heaven. Their destiny will be Hell. No one can help such unjust people
Those who say, "God is the third of a trinity" are denying the truth because there is only One God. Unless they stop saying this, a painful punishment will happen to those of them who are determined to deny the truth
Why do they not turn towards God in repentance and ask for His forgiveness? God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
The Messiah, son of Mary, was only a messenger. All [other] messengers had passed away before him, and his mother was one who never deviated from the truth. They both ate food. See how clear We make these messages for them and how deluded their minds are
Say, "How can you worship something other than God that has no power to harm or to benefit you when God alone is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
Say, "People of the Book, do not overstep the bounds of Truth in your religious beliefs. Do not follow the whims of the people who went astray before you. They have led many others astray, and they continue to stray from the right path
Those of the Children of Israel who defied God and denied the truth, have been cursed and rejected by the words of David and Jesus, the son of Mary, because they rebelled and persistently overstepped the limits
They did not prevent each other from doing hateful things. Their deeds were so evil
You [Prophet] see many of them allying themselves with the unbelievers. How evil is what their souls make them do! God has condemned them, and they will remain in punishment forever
If they [truly] believed in God and their Prophet and all that was sent down to them, they would not take the unbelievers for their allies: but most of them are defiant
You [Prophet] are sure to find that the most hostile to the believers are the Jews as well as those who are bent on ascribing partners to God. While, you will find that the nearest in affection towards the believers are those who say, "We are Christians," because there are priests and monks among them, and because these people are not given to arrogance
For, when they understand what has come down to this messenger, you can see their eyes tear up because they recognize the Truth in it, and they say, "Lord, we do believe. Make us one with all who bear witness to the Truth
How could we fail to believe in God and in the Truth that has come to us when we long that our Lord include us in the company of the righteous
For saying this, God will reward them with Heavenly Gardens with flowing rivers where they will permanently abide, for this is the reward for those who do good
Whereas, those who reject the truth and deny Our messages are destined for the blazing fire
Believers, do not deprive yourselves of good things in life which God has made lawful to you, but do not exceed the limits of what is right. God does not love those who exceed the limits of what is right
Partake of the lawful and good things which God has provided for you and be mindful of God in Whom you believe
God does not hold you accountable for oaths thoughtlessly sworn, but He will take you to task for earnestly sworn oaths. So, the breaking of an oath must be atoned by feeding ten needy persons with the same food as you would want for your own family, or by clothing them, or by freeing a slave, and if a person cannot find the means to do this, he will fast for three days. This will be the atonement for your oaths whenever you have sworn [and broken them]. Be careful with your oaths. God makes His messages clear to you, so that you may be grateful
Believers, intoxicants, gambling, idolatry, and fortunetelling are repugnant and evil acts. They are evil acts of Satan. Avoid them so that you may prosper
With intoxicants and gambling, Satan only seeks to incite hostility and hatred among you, and to turn you away from remembering God and from prayer. Will you not give them up
Obey God and obey the Messenger, and always be careful! If you pay no attention, know that Our Messenger's only duty is to clearly transmit the message
Those who believe and do righteous deeds incur no sin for what they may have participated in, so long as they are mindful of God and believe and do righteous deeds, and continue to be mindful of God and to believe and grow ever more mindful of God and persevere in doing good: God loves those who do good deeds
Believers, God is sure to tempt you with wild games that come, within reach of your hands and weapons, so He can identify those who fear Him, even though they think He is not watching. Whoever oversteps the limits, will have a painful punishment
Believers, do not hunt while you are in the state for sanctity. Whoever kills an animal intentionally must make amends by offering an equivalent domestic animal comparable to what was killed as defined by two just men-an offering to be delivered to the Ka'bah. Or, he may atone for his sin by feeding the needy, or by fasting an equivalent number of days, so that he may understand the seriousness of what he has done. God forgives what is past, but if anyone does it again, God will punish him severely. God is mighty, and capable of exacting the penalty
It is permitted for you to catch and eat seafood. This is an enjoyment for you as well as for travelers, although you are forbidden to hunt on land while you are in the state of sanctity. Be mindful of God to whom you will be gathered
God has made the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, a sanctuary for human beings, and the Sacred Months, the animals for sacrifice and their garlands, so that you will be aware that God has knowledge about all that is in the heavens and the earth. God knows about everything
Know that God is severe in His punishment, and yet He is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
The Messenger only has a duty to deliver the message, as God knows what you reveal and what you hide
Say [Prophet], "The bad and the good are not equal, even though many of the bad things may greatly please you. People of understanding, be mindful of God so that you may prosper
Believers, do not ask about matters that would trouble you if disclosed to you. But, if you ask about them while the Qur'an is being revealed, they will be made known to you. God has absolved [you from any obligation] in this respect. God is most forgiving and longsuffering
People before your time have asked such questions, then later they rejected the answers
God has not ordained that certain kinds of cattle should be designated Bahirah, Saibah, Wasilah, or of Hami, and set aside from the use of man, yet the unbelievers invent lies about God. Most of them do not use reason
When they are told, "Accept what God has sent down and the Messenger," they answer, "What we inherited from our forefathers is enough for us." Their forefathers knew nothing and were not guided
Believers, you are responsible for your own souls; those who go astray cannot harm you if you are on the right path. All of you will return to God, and He will tell you what you used to do
Believers, when death approaches you, let two just men from among you act as witnesses to the writing of your will. If death approaches you while you are travelling far from home, let two just men from among another people act as witnesses. Take hold of the two men after having prayed and, if you have any doubt in your mind, let each of them swear to God, "We will not sell our word for any price, even if it were for the sake of a near relative. We will not hide God's testimony, or else We will be counted among the sinful
If It is discovered that these two are guilty of this sin, then two of those whose rights have been usurped have a better right to bear witness. Let them swear to God, "Our testimony is truer than the testimony of those two, and we have not committed perjury, because that would make us unjust
It will be more likely that people will offer the truth in their testimony because they will be afraid that others might refute their oaths. Remain mindful of God and listen. God does not guide those who are defiantly disobedient
On the Day when God assembles all the messengers and asks, "What response did you receive?" They will answer, "We have no knowledge. You alone know these things that cannot be seen
God will say, "Jesus, son of Mary, remember the grace which I bestowed upon you and your mother? How I strengthened you with the Holy Spirit so you could speak from your cradle, and as a grown man? [Remember] when I taught you the Book, the Wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel? [Remember] when, with My permission, you fashioned the shape of a bird out of clay, breathed into it, and it became, with My permission, a bird? [Remember] when, with My permission, you healed the blind person and the leper; when, by My permission, you brought the dead back to life? [Remember] when I kept the Children of Israel from harming you when you came to them with all the evidence of the truth, and when those of them who were bent on denying the truth said, "This is clearly nothing but deception
And [mention] when I inspired the disciples to believe in Me and My Messenger? They answered, "We believe and bear witness that we submit ourselves to You
And [mention] when the disciples said, "Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord send us a feast from heaven?" [Jesus] answered, "Remain mindful of God, if you are [truly] believers
They said, "We wish to eat from it so that our hearts might be reassured and that we might know that you have told us the truth and be among those who witness it
Jesus, the son of Mary, said, "God, our Lord, send us a meal from heaven so that we can have a recurring celebration for the first and the last of us, and a sign from You. Provide for us because You are the best of providers
God answered, "I will send it down to you, but anyone who denies the truth after this will be punished with a punishment that I will not inflict on anyone else in the world
God said, "Jesus, son of Mary, did you say to people, 'Worship me and my mother as gods instead God'?" [Jesus] answered, "May You be exalted in Your limitless glory. It is not for me to say what I have no right to say. Had I said this, You would have known it. You know all that is within me, whereas I do not know what is in You. It is You alone who has full knowledge of unknown things
I told them only what You commanded me to say, "Worship God, who is my Lord as well as your Lord." I was a witness to them during my time with them. But after you made me die, You were the One watching over them. You witness everything
If you punish them, they are Your worshipers, and if You forgive them, You alone are the Almighty, the Wise
[On Judgment Day] God will say, "Today, the truthful will benefit from their truthfulness. They will have Gardens with flowing rivers, where they will abide forever. God is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. That is the supreme triumph
The kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything in them belongs to God. He has power over all things
Al Ana'm [Livestock]Praise be to God, who created the heavens and the earth and made darkness and light; but, the unbelievers regard others as equal to their Lord
He created you out of clay and specified a span of time for you; a span, known only to him; however you still doubt
He is God in the heavens and on earth; He knows all your secrets and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn
Yet every time one of their Lord's messages came to them they ignored it
They denied the Truth when it came to them; however, in time, they will come to understand the very thing they ridiculed
Do they not realize how many generations We destroyed before them--to whom We gave a [bountiful] place on earth, more so than you, and to whom We sent abundant rain, and at whose feet We made running rivers flow? We destroyed them because of their sins, and We raised up other generations after them
Even if We had sent down to you [Prophet] a written scripture that they could have touched with their own hands, the unbelievers would have said, "This is clearly nothing but a trick
They say, "Why was no angel sent down to him?" But had We sent down an angel, it would have been over, with no further time given to them
and, If We had sent an angel, We would have certainly made him appear as a man, and thus We would have only confused them in the same way as they are now confusing themselves
Messengers have been ridiculed before you, but those who mocked them were overwhelmed by the very punishment they mocked
Say, "Travel throughout the land and see what finally happened to those who rejected the truth
Say, "To whom belongs everything that is in the heavens and on earth?" Say, "God! He decreed Himself to be Merciful-to-all." However, He will summon all of you to a definite Day of Resurrection. Those who have lost their soul will not believe
All that rests during the night and the day belong To Him and He alone, is All-Hearing and All-Knowing
Say, "Why should I take a master for myself other than God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, when it is He who feeds and needs not to be fed?" Say, "I am commanded to be the first [among you] to submit myself to Him and not be among the idolaters
Say, "If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of the Great Day
God will be truly merciful to whoever is spared on that Day. This is the greatest victory
If God touches you with hardship, only He can remove it; and if He blesses you, it is His choice. He can do anything He wills
He alone is the Supreme Master over His creatures and He alone is All-Wise, the All-Aware
Say, "What counts most as a witness to the truth?" Say, "God is witness between you and me. This Qur'an has been revealed to me to warn you and everyone it reaches." Could you in truth bear witness that there are other gods besides God? Say, "I bear no [such] witness." Say, "He is only One God, and I have nothing to do with whatever you associate with Him
Those to whom We have previously given the Book before, know this as well as they know their own children; yet those who deceive themselves refuse to believe
Who does greater wrong than someone who fabricates lies against God or denies His revelations? Those who do such wrong will not prosper
One Day We will gather them all together and say to the idolaters, "Where are those beings you imagined to be partners with God
In their utter confusion, they will only say, "By God, our Lord, we did not mean to associate partners with Him
See how they have lied to themselves and how the gods they invented have abandoned them
Among them are some who [appear] to listen to your [message, Prophet], but We have laid covers over their hearts and deafness in their ears which prevent them from grasping the truth. Even if they saw every sign, they would still not believe it. When they come to you, they argue with you. The unbelievers say, "These are nothing but fairy tales
They tell others not to listen, while they stay away. They destroy no one but themselves, though they fail to realize this
If you could only see them when they will have to stand before the fire and say, "If only we were brought back, we would not reject the revelations of our Lord, but would be among the believers
The truth they used to conceal will become obvious to them, and if they were brought back, they would return to the very thing that was forbidden to them. They are such liars
Others used to say, "There is nothing beyond our life in this world. We will not be raised from the dead
If you could only see when they are made to stand before their Lord, [and] He will say, "Is not this the Truth?" They will answer, "Yes, by our Lord." He will say, "Then taste the miseries that come from your having denied the truth
Those who deny the encounter with their Lord, until, when the Last Hour suddenly comes upon them, are lost. They cry, "How sorry we are for ignoring this!" They will bear the burdens of their sins on their backs. How dreadful those burdens will be
The life of this world is nothing but play and amusement; and the life in the Hereafter is best for those who are mindful of God. Do you not understand
We know that you are saddened by what these people say [Prophet]. It is not you they disbelieve; these unjust people are denying God's revelations
There were other messengers before you who were disbelieved and who patiently endured all the lying accusations and persecution until We gave them victory. No one can alter God's words! You have already learned some of what happened to these messengers
If you find rejection by the unbelievers so unbearable, then seek a tunnel into the ground or a ladder into the sky in order to bring them a sign, but [remember that], had God willed it, He would have guided all of them. Do not be among the ignorant
Only those who can hear will respond; and as for the dead, God [alone] will raise them from the dead, and to Him they will return
They also say, "Why has no miraculous sign been sent down to him from his Lord" Say, "God has the power to send down a sign," though most people do not know this
Every beast that crawls on the earth and every birds that flies with its two wings have formed communities like you. We have left nothing out of the Book. Later, they will be gathered to their Lord
Those who reject Our messages are deaf, dumb and deep in darkness. Whomever God wills, He lets go astray, and whomever He wills, He places upon a straight path
Say, "Can you see yourselves invoking any but God when God's punishment falls on you [in this world], or when the Last Hour comes upon you, if you are truthful
No! It is to Him alone that you would call. If it were His will, He may remove whatever harm that caused you to call on Him; and you will have forgotten all that you now associate with Him
We sent Our Messengers unto people before your time [Prophet] and afflicted their people with misfortune and hardship so that they might humble themselves
When the misfortune fell on them, they did not humble themselves, but instead their hearts became hardened, and Satan made their bad deeds alluring to them
When they had forgotten all that they have been told to take to heart, we opened the gates to everything they wanted. Then, as they rejoiced in what had been granted, We struck them suddenly and they were in despair
The evildoers were wiped out. All praise is due to God, the Lord of the Worlds
Say, "Considered this-what if God should take away your hearing and your sight and seal your hearts? What god other than God is there that could bring it all back to you?" See how We explain Our revelations in many ways, and yet still they turn away in disdain
Say, "Consider this, what if the punishment of God should come to you suddenly or gradually? Would anyone but the evildoers be destroyed
We send Our Messengers only to give good news and to warn. All who believe and live righteously do not need to fear, nor will they grieve
As for those who rejected Our messages, suffering will afflict them as a result of all their sinful actions
[Prophet] Say, "I do not say to you, 'God's treasures are with me,' nor [do I say], 'I know the things that are beyond human perception,' nor do I say to you, ' Behold, I am an angel'; I only follow what is revealed to me. Say, "Can the blind and seeing be considered equal? Why will you not think
Use the Qur'an to warn those who fear being gathered before their Lord with no one to protect them from Him or to intercede with Him, so that they might become [fully] aware of Him
Don't drive away [any of] those who call upon their Lord morning or evening, seeking His face. You are in no way accountable for them, just as they are in no way accountable for you. You have no right to drive them away, for then you would be among the unjust
We have made some of them a test for others, to make the unbelievers say, "Is it these men that God has favored among us?" Does God not know best who is grateful [to Him]
When those who believe in Our messages come to you, say, "Peace be upon you. Your Lord has willed upon Himself to be Merciful-to-all. If any of you sins out of ignorance and then repents and lives righteously, God is most forgiving, a purveyor of mercy
We clearly spell out Our messages and [We do it] so that the path of those who force others to reject God's messages may be made clear
Say, "I am forbidden to worship those you call on instead of God." Say, "I do not follow your vain desires, for if I did, I would stray from among those who have found the right path
Say, "Behold, I take my stand based on clear evidence from my Lord, but still you deny it. I don't have in my power what you want me to hasten: judgment rests with none but God. He will declare the Truth, since it is He who is the best judge between Truth and falsehood
Say, "If what you seek to rush were in my power, everything would have been decided between you and me, but God knows best who does wrong
He holds the keys to the unknown. No one knows those keys but Him. He knows all that is on land and in the sea, and not a leaf falls without Him knowing about it. There is not a grain in the earth's deep darkness, or anything living or dead that is not written in a clear record
It is He who calls your souls back by night and knows what you have done by day and He brings you back to life each day until your fixed term is fulfilled. In the end, you must return to Him, and then He will make you understand all that you were doing [in life]
He is the Supreme Master over His worshipers. He sends out heavenly forces to watch over you until, when death approaches any of you, those sent by Us take his soul. They don't overlook [anyone]
Then they will be brought before God, their true Lord. Judgment is truly His alone. He is the swiftest in taking accounts
Say, "Who saves you from the dark dangers of the land and the sea when you humbly and secretly call upon Him, and say, 'If He will save us from this [distress], we will be among the grateful
Say, "God [alone] can save you from this and from every distress and still you attribute divinity to others besides Him
Say, "It is He alone who has the power to afflict you with suffering from above or from beneath your feet, or to divide you into divisive factions and let you taste the fear of one another." See how We explain these messages so that they might understand
yet your people still reject it even though it is the Truth. Say, "I am not your keeper
Every news [from God] has a fixed time to be fulfilled, and in time you will come to realize [the truth]
Whenever you encounter those who speak with disrespect about Our revelations, turn away from them until they move on to another topic, and if Satan should ever cause you to forget, then, do not remain with those unjust people after realizing what they are doing
Those who are mindful of God are not accountable for the wrongdoers. However, this is a reminder to them so that they may become mindful of God
Leave behind those who turn their religion into amusement and a diversion and are mesmerized by the life of this world. Remind them with it, lest a soul be damned for what it has earned. It will have no one to protect it from God, and no one to intercede besides Him. Whatever ransom he may offer will not be accepted. Such people will be held accountable for their actions. For them will be a drink of boiling water, and painful punishment awaits them because of their persistence in denying the truth
Say, "Instead of God, will we call on something that can neither benefit nor harm us, and turn back after God has guided us. [This would be] like someone seduced, having been tempted by Satan's earthly lusts, though his companions are calling him to guidance [saying], 'Come to us!'" Say, "God's guidance is the only guidance, and we are commanded to surrender ourselves to the Lord of the Worlds
and to keep up prayers and be mindful of Him. It is to Him that you all will be gathered
It is He Who has created the heavens and the earth in Truth, and whenever He says, "Be!" it will be. His word is the Truth. All control on the Day the Trumpet is blown belongs to Him. He knows all that is beyond human's perception, as well as all that can be witnessed by human senses, for He alone is The-Wise, All-Aware
Remember when Abraham spoke to his father Azar, and said, "How can you take idols as gods? I see that you and your people are clearly lost
In this way We made Abraham to understand God's mighty dominion over the heavens and the earth, so that he might become a firm believer
When the night overshadowed him, he saw a star and said, "This is my Lord!" But when it went down he said, "I do not like things that disappear
Then, when he saw the moon rising he said, "This is my Lord" but when it set, he said, "If my Lord does not guide me, I will definitely become one of those lost people
Then, when he saw the sun rising he said, "This is my Lord! This is greater!" But when it [too] set, he said, "My people, I disown all that you worship other than God
I have turned my face to Him who brought into existence the heavens and the earth, and I have turned away from all that is false. I am not one of the idolaters
His people argued with him, and he said, "How can you argue with me about God when it is He who has guided me? I do not fear anything you associate with Him [for no evil can affect me] unless my Lord so wills. My Lord embraces everything within His knowledge. How can you not notice
Why should I fear anything that you worship besides Him? Why are you not afraid to associate partners with Him when He never sent you authority to do so? Tell me, if you know the answer, which side is more entitled to feel secure
It is those who have faith, and who have not mixed their faith with idolatry. It is they who will be secure, since it is they who have found the right path
Such was the argument We gave to Abraham against his people. We raise in rank whoever We will. Your Lord is All-Wise, All-knowing
We gave him Isaac and Jacob. We guided each just as We had guided Noah before. Among his descendants were David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. In this way We reward those who do good
Zachariah, John, Jesus and Elijah-- every one of them was righteous
Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot--We favored every one of them above other people
and also some of their forefathers, their offspring and their brothers. We chose them and guided them on a straight path
Such is God's guidance. He guides whomever He wills of his worshipers. Had they ascribed divinity to others besides Him, all their good works would have been in vain
Those are the ones to whom We gave the Book, wisdom and prophethood. Even if these people now chose to deny the truth, We will entrust it to others who will never deny the truth
These were the people God guided. Follow their guidance and say, "I ask no reward for it from you. It is a reminder to all people
They had not truly appreciated God when they said; God has never revealed anything to a mortal." Say, "Who was it then that sent down the Book which Moses brought as a enlightenment and guidance to men--Yet, you treat it as [mere] leaves of paper, showing some but hiding many. You were taught things that neither you nor your forefathers had ever known. Say, "God!" [has revealed the Book] Then leave them engrossed in their vain talk
This is a blessed Book that We sent down to confirm what is available (of earlier revelations] in order that you may warn the foremost of cities and its surroundings. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe it [this Book] and keep their prayers
Who could be more wicked than someone who invents lies about God or says, "This has been revealed to me," when no revelations have been sent to him, or says, "I can also reveal something equal to God's revelation?" If you could only see [how it will be] when these evildoers find themselves in the agonies of death, and the angels stretch out their hands to them [and call], "Give up your souls. Today you will be repaid with humiliating suffering for attributing something to God that is not true and for arrogantly resisting His Message
God will say, "Now you returned to Us alone, just as We first created you, and you have left behind all that We gave you [in your lifetime]. We don't see those intercessors of yours that you claimed were partners with God. All the bonds between you [and your earthly life] are now severed, and all those you formerly fancied have deserted you
God is the One who splits the grain, and the seeds open. He brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the living. This is God, so how can you turn away from the truth
He causes dawns to break, and He makes the night for rest, and He made the sun and the moon run precise courses. That is the design of the Almighty, the All-Knowing
It is He who set up the stars for you so that you might be guided by them in the midst of the deep darkness of the land and the sea. We have spelled out these messages for those who have knowledge
It is He who brought you [all] into existence from a single soul and [has appoint each of you] a time-limit [on earth] and a resting place [after death]. We have made Our revelations clear to those who comprehend
It is He who sends down water from the sky. With it, We sustain all living growth, then bring greenery from it, and from that We bring out grains, one riding on the other in close-packed rows.From the palm tree comes dates in thick clusters, and there are gardens of vines and olive trees, and pomegranates, all so alike and yet so different. Watch their fruit while it ripens. In all this there are signs for the people who would believe
Some [people] have come to think of jinn as partners with God, although it is He who has created them, and in their ignorance they attribute sons and daughters to Him. May he be exalted in His glory and far higher than anything that men may ascribe to Him
the Originator of the heavens and earth. How could He have had a child without ever having a mate, since It is He who created everything, and He alone knows everything
This is God, your Lord, and there is no God but Him, the Creator of everything. Worship Him alone. He is in charge of everything
No human vision perceives Him, whereas He perceives all they see. He is the All-Subtle, the All- Aware
Insights have come to you from your Lord. Whoever chooses to see does so for his own good, and whoever chooses to remain blind, does so to his own loss. "I am not your keeper
We have explained Our revelations in various ways, so they will say, "You have received instructions" and to clarify it to people who have knowledge
Follow what has been revealed to you by your Lord. There is no God but Him, and turn away from those who associate others with God
If God had so willed, they would not have ascribed divinity to anyone but Him. We have not made you their keeper, and neither are you responsible for their conduct
Don't insult those they worship other than God, lest in their hostility and ignorance, [they) insult God. Thus We made their deeds seem pleasing to each community, but in the end, they must return to their Lord and then He will make them [truly] understand all that they were doing
They swear by God with their most solemn oaths that if a miracle were to be shown to them, they would believe in this Book. Say, "Miracles are up to God alone." And, for all you know, even if a miracle were shown to them, they would not believe
We will keep their hearts and their eyes turning. Just as they did not believe in the first place, We will leave them in their overwhelming arrogance, stumbling blindly
Even if We send angels to them, and if the dead were to speak to them and We were to assemble before them, face to face, all the things that were ever created, they would still not believe in God unless God so willed, but most of them are ignorant
Thus, We assigned evil humans and evil jinn as enemies to every prophet. They whisper enticing words to one another in order to deceive. But they cannot do this unless your Lord had so willed. Therefore, desert them and their invented lies
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter may incline towards their deceit, being content to continue doing whatever they are doing
[Say], "Will I seek any judge other than God, when It is He who has sent down the Book, clearly spelling out the truth?" Those to whom We gave the Book before know that this is revealed by your Lord with the Truth. Don't be one of those who doubt
Your Lord's word has been fulfilled in Truth and justice. There is no power that could change His words. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing
If you obeyed the majority of those on earth, they will lead you away from the path of God. They follow nothing but speculation, and they are merely guessing
Your Lord knows best who strays from his path and who is rightly-guided
[Believers] eat any [meat] over which God's name has been pronounced, if you truly believe in His messages
Why not eat that over which God's name has been pronounced, knowing that He has clearly spelled out to you what He has forbidden you to eat, and even that you may eat if you are compelled to do so? But many mislead others through their whims, even though they do not really know. Your Lord, however, is fully aware of these transgressors
Abstain from sins, openly or in secret. Those who commit sins will be punished for all they have committed
Do not eat that over which God's name has not been pronounced, for this would be sinful conduct. The devils incite their followers to argue with you and if you listen to them, you, too, will become one of those idolaters
Is a dead person whom We brought back to life and given enlightenment so that he might see his way among men, comparable to someone who is lost in deep darkness from which he cannot emerge? This is how it is. The evil deeds of the unbelievers are made to seem enticing to them
so We placed the greatest opponents in every town to execute their schemes, but they only scheme against themselves without realizing it
Whenever a revelation comes to them, they say, "We will not believe unless we are given the same revelation as God's Messengers were given." God knows best where to place His messages. Humiliation before God and severe punishment will befall those who are guilty of opposition through their schemes
When God wishes to guide someone, He opens his heart to surrender to Him [Islam]. And whomever He wills to let go astray, He tightens and constricts his chest, as if he were ascending up to the sky. This is how God inflicts horror upon those who will not believe
[Prophet], this is your Lord's path. We have clearly explained Our revelations to those who take them to heart
They will have the Home of Peace with their Lord, and as a result of their deeds He will be their Protector
On the Day when He will gather them together [and say], "Company of jinn, you have seduced many humans." And their allies among the people will say, "Our Lord, some of us made use of others, and we have [now] reached the appointed time that You have decreed for us." He will say, "The Fire is your residence, and there you will remain eternally, unless God wills it otherwise. your Lord is All-Wise and All-Knowing
In this way, We cause the unjust to seduce each other by means of their own doing
You who have lived in close company with jinn and like-minded humans, did not messengers not come from among you to recite My message and warn you of the coming of this Day [of Judgment]?" They will answer, "We bear witness against ourselves." The life of this world has seduced them, and so they will bear witness against themselves that they had rejected the truth
This is because Your Lord would never destroy a community for its wrongdoing while its people are unaware
Everyone will be judged according to their deeds. Your Lord is well aware of all they do
Your Lord alone is rich beyond need, limitless in His grace. If He wills, He may put an end to all of you and put others in your place, just as He produced you from the offspring of other people
What you are promised is bound to come and you cannot escape it
Say, "My people, continue to do what you are doing, and so will I, and in time you will come to know to whom the future belongs." The unjust will never prosper
They allocate to God a share of the fruits of the field and the cattle, saying, "This belongs to God," they claim, "and this is for our idols that, we are convinced, have a share in God's divinity." Their idols' share does not reach God, but God's share does reach their idols. How badly they judge
In the same way, their belief in idols has seduced the pagans to kill their children, thus bringing them to ruin and confusing them in their faith. If God had so willed, they would not be doing all of this. So abandon them and all their lies
They also falsely claim, "These cattle and fruits are sacred, and only those we allow may eat them." They also [declare that] certain cattle are exempt from labor, and there are some cattle over which they do not pronounce God's name, falsely attributing this to Him. He will repay them for all their lies
They also say, "What is in the womb of such and such cattle is reserved for our men and forbidden to our women, but if the offspring is stillborn, then they may have a share of it." [God] will punish them for all that they [falsely] attribute [to Him]: He is All-Wise, All- Knowing
Those who kill their children out of ignorance and declare as forbidden what God has provided for them as sustenance, falsely ascribing [such prohibitions] to God, are lost. They have gone astray and have not found the right path
He has brought gardens into existence, both the cultivated ones and those that grow wild, as well as the palm-tree, fields with diverse produce, the olives, and pomegranate: all similar to one another and yet so different. Eat from their fruit when it becomes ripe and give what is due on harvest day. Do not be wasteful; He does not love the wasteful
He gave you livestock for work and for meat, so eat whatever God has provided you. Do not follow in Satan's footsteps: he is your sworn enemy
There are eight animals, in [four] pairs: a pair of sheep and a pair of goats. Ask [them, Prophet], "Has He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or that which is in the wombs of the two females? Tell me what you know in this respect
And a pair of camels and a pair of cattle. Ask, "Has He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or that which is in the wombs of the two females? Were you present when God gave you these commands?" Who then is more wicked than a person who, in his ignorance, attributes his own invented lies to God, and thus misleads people? God does not guide such wicked people
Say, "In all that has been revealed to me, I do not find anything forbidden to eat, except for a dead animal, flowing blood, and pork- It is impure, or a sinful offering dedicated to idols. However, if one is driven by necessity and neither desire nor excess, your Lord is very forgiving and most Merciful-to-all
We forbade the Jews all animals that have claws and We forbade them the fat of both cattle and sheep, except what is on their backs and in their intestines or what sticks to their bones: thus, We punish them for their injustice. We are true to Our word
If they accuse you of lying, say, "Your Lord is limitless in His mercy, but His punishment cannot be averted from those who force others to reject His messages
Those who are bent on ascribing divinity to other than God will say, "If God had willed it, we would not have ascribed divinity to anyone beside Him, nor would our forefathers [have done so], and we also would not have declared anything He has allowed as forbidden." In the same way, those who came before them continued to deny the truth until they came to taste Our punishment. Say, "Do you have any knowledge that you can offer us? You follow suppositions, and you only guess
Say, "The final evidence rests with God alone. Had He so willed, He would have guided you all
Say, "Bring forward your witnesses who can testify that God has forbidden all this," and if they [falsely] testify, do not testify with them. Do not follow the sinful views of those who have rejected Our messages, nor of those who do not believe in the Hereafter while they equate others with their Lord
Say, "Come; let me tell you what God has forbidden you. Do not ascribe divinity to any one besides Him, relate to your parents in the best possible way, do not kill your children out of fear of poverty, since it is We who will provide sustenance for you and them. Do not commit any shameful deeds, whether they are in open or in secret, and do not take any human life which God has declared as sacred, other than in the pursuit of justice. This is what He commands you to do so that you may remember
Stay away from the property of orphans, except to improve it, until he or she comes of age." Give full measure and weight in accordance with equity. We do not burden any soul with more than it is able to bear. When you voice an opinion, be just, even if it concerns a relative. Fulfill your pledge to God. This is what He has commanded you to do so that you will remember
This is My Straight Path; Follow it, and do not follow any other way, because it will cause you to deviate from it. This is what He commands you, so that you will be mindful of Him
Then, We gave Moses the Book, complete and perfect or those who do good, clearly explaining everything, a guidance and mercy, so that they may have faith in their encounter with their Lord
This, too, is a blessed Book which We have sent down: follow it and be mindful of God, so that you might be graced with His mercy
so that you do not say, "a Book was only sent down to two groups before our time and we're unaware of their teachings
or, so that you do not say, "If a Book had been sent down to us, we would have followed its guidance better than they did." Clear evidence, guidance and mercy has come to you from your Lord. Who could be more unjust than someone who rejects God's messages and turns away in contempt? We will recompense those who turn away from Our verses with the worst of punishment for their having turned away
Are they waiting for the angels to appear to them, or for your Lord to appear or for some of your Lord's signs to appear? On the Day when your Lord's signs appear, believing will be of no help to any human being who did not believe before, or who, while believing, did not do good deeds. Say, "Wait. We are also waiting
As for those who have broken the unity of their faith and have divided into different sects, you [Prophet] should have nothing to do with them. Their case rests with God, and in time He will make them understand what they were doing wrong
Whoever comes [before God] with a good deed will gain ten times its credit, but whoever comes with an evil deed will be punished with no more than its equivalent. They will not be treated unfairly
Say, "My Lord has guided me on to a straight path through an ever--true faith-- the way of Abraham, who turned away from all that is false and was not one of the idolaters
Say, "My prayer and my acts of worship and my living and my dying belong to God, the Lord of the Worlds
in whose divinity no one has a share. I have been commanded and I will be the first to surrender myself to Him
Say, "Why would I look for a Lord other than God when He is the Lord of all things?" Each soul is responsible for its own actions, and no bearer of burdens will bear the burdens of another. In time you must all return to your Lord, and He will make you understand the truth about your differences
It is He who has made you inherit the earth and has raised some of you in rank above others so that He might test you by means of what He has given to you. Your Lord is swift in punishment, but He is also forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Alif Lam Mim Saad
A Book has been revealed to you. Let it cause no anxiety in your heart, as you will use it to warn and remind the believers
Follow what has been sent down to you by your Lord, and follow no masters other than Him. How seldom do you remember
So many [rebellious] towns have We destroyed. Our punishment came to them at night or while they were resting in the afternoon
Their only cry when Our punishment came to them was "How unjust we were
We will certainly question those to whom a message was sent, and We will certainly question the messengers
We know and will tell them in detail and knowledge, as We were never absent
On that Day, everyone's deeds will be weighed in the balance of Truth. Those whose good deeds weigh on the heavier side will be successful
whereas; those whose good deeds are on the lighter side will suffer loss because of their willful rejection of Our messages
We have given you a place on earth and appointed a means of livelihood for you, [yet] you are seldom grateful
We have created you and formed you, and then We said to the angels, "Bow down before Adam," at which point, they all bowed down except for Iblis: he was not among those who bowed down
[God] said, "What has stopped you from bowing down when I commanded you?" He answered, "I am better than him. You created me out of fire, but you only created him out of clay
[God] said, "Get down from here, you are not allowed to be arrogant in this place. Get out, you are disgraced
Iblis said, "Give me until the day they will be resurrected
[God] replied, "You will have the time you want
Iblis said, "Now that You have caused me to fall into this, I will sit for them on Your straight path
I will come at them openly as well as secretly, from their right and from their left and You will find that most of them are ungrateful
[God] said, "Get out of here, you disgraced and disowned! As for those who will follow you, I will definitely fill Hell with all of you
And Adam, you and your wife will live in this garden, and both of you eat whatever you may wish, but do not approach this one tree or you will become unjust
Then, Satan whispered to them to expose their nakedness, which had been hidden from them, and he said, "Your Lord has forbidden you this tree so that you do not become angels or immortal
He swore to them, "I am a sincere advisor
and he succeeded in deceiving them. As soon as the two had tasted [the fruit] of the tree, their nakedness became obvious to them, and they started covering themselves with leaves from the Garden.Their Lord called to them, "Did I not forbid that tree to you and tell you, 'Satan is your clear enemy
The two replied, "Lord, We have sinned against ourselves and unless You forgive us and have mercy on us, we will definitely be lost
God said, "You get down to earth, as enemies to one another. You will live and have your home there for a while
There you will live," He added, "and there you will die, and from it you will be brought forth [on Resurrection Day]
Children of Adam, We have sent down clothes to you to cover your nakedness and as a thing of beauty, but the garment of awareness of God is the best of all. These are blessings from God, so that you may remember
Children of Adam, do not allow Satan to seduce you in the same way he caused your ancestors to be driven out of the Garden. He deprived them of their garment [of God-consciousness] in order to make them aware of their nakedness. He and his tribe watch you from where you cannot see them. We have made satanic forces allies to those who do not believe
Whenever they commit a shameful deed, they say, "We found our forefathers doing it," and, "God has commanded us to do this." Say, "God does not command disgraceful deeds. How could you attribute something to God about which you have no knowledge
Say, "My Lord has commanded righteousness." Face Him, and direct your worship straight to Him. Call on Him, devoting yourself only to Him. Just as He first created you, so you will return
Some [of you] He graced with guidance, while, others are doomed to stray. They have taken devils for their masters instead of God, thinking all the while that they have found the right path
Children of Adam, dress well for every act of worship. Eat and drink, but do not waste. He does not love the wasteful
Say, "Who is there to forbid the adornment and nourishment that God has provided for His worshipers?" Say, "They are given to those who believe during the life of this world, to be theirs alone on Resurrection Day." We clearly spell out these messages to people who understand
Say, "My Lord has forbidden immoral acts-- openly or in secret-- sinning and unjustified aggression, and ascribing divinity to others besides Him, and saying things about Him that you do not know
A term has been set for every nation, and when the end of their term approaches, they can neither delay it nor hasten it by a single moment
Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among yourselves, conveying My messages to you, then all who are mindful of Me and live righteously don't need to fear not will they grieve
but those who reject Our messages and arrogantly disrespect them are destined for the fire, and there they will remain
Who could be more unjust than those who attribute their own lies to God or who reject His messages? Such people will have whatever has been allotted for them. Then when Our angels arrive to take them to die, they will ask, "Where are those beings that you invoked besides God?" [Those sinners] will reply, "They have deserted us," and [thus) they will bear witness against themselves that they had been denying the truth
[God] says, "Join the crowds of jinn and humans who have gone before you into the fire." Every time a crowd enters, it will curse its fellow beings, so that when they have all gathered inside, the last of them will say about the first, "Lord, It is they who have led us astray. Give them double suffering through fire." He will reply, "Every one of you deserves double suffering, though you don't know it
The first of them will say to the last of them, "You were in no way better than us. Taste the punishment for all that you have earned
The gates of Heaven will not be opened for those who rejected Our messages and arrogantly scorned them. They will not enter Paradise any more than a thick, twisted thread can pass through a needle's eye. This is how We pay those who force others to reject Our messages
Hell will be their resting place and covering as well. This is how We punish the unjust
We do not burden any soul with more than it is able to bear. Those who believe and do righteous deeds are destined for Paradise, where they will live
We will have removed all ill feeling from their hearts. Streams will flow at their feet, and they will say, "All praise is due to God, who has guided us to this, for we would certainly not have found the right path unless God had guided us. Our Lord's Messengers brought the Truth. A voice will call out to them, "This is the Paradise which you have inherited because of your past deeds
The people of Paradise will call out to the people of the Fire, "Now We have found that what our Lord promised us has come true. Have you found that what your Lord promised you has come true?" They will answer, "Yes." A voice will proclaim from their midst, "God's rejection hangs over the unjust
who turn away from God's path and try to make it crooked, and who refuse to acknowledge the truth of the life to come
Between the two there will be a barrier and on the heights are people who can recognize each by their features. They will call out to the people of paradise, "Peace be upon you," not having entered it themselves, but hoping to do so
Whenever their eyes are turned towards the people of the fire, they will cry, "Lord, do not place us among the unjust people
Those who had possessed this ability of discernment will call out to those they recognize by their marks [as sinners], saying, "How has your collection [of wealth] and all your false pride benefitted you
Are these the people you swore God would never bless? [For now they have been told,] 'Enter paradise. There is no need to fear or grieve
The people of the fire will call out to the people of Paradise, "Pour some water on us or some of the sustenance which God has provided for you." They said, "God has denied both to the unbelievers
They are those who, enticed by the life of this world, took their religion lightly, like a mere game, and were deluded by worldly living. [God will say], "We will be ignoring them today as they ignored the coming of this Day, just as they denied Our messages
We conveyed to them a Book in which We clearly and wisely spelled out guidance and grace to people who believe
Are they [the unbelievers] waiting for the final prophecy to unfold? On the Day when its final meaning will unfolded, those who ignored it before will say, "Our Lord's Messengers spoke the Truth. Is there anyone to intercede for us now? Or, could we be brought back [to life] so that we might behave differently than how we behaved before?" They will have lost their souls and all the lies they had invented will have forsaken them
Your Lord is God, who has created the heavens and the earth in six days and is established on the throne of His majesty. He covers the day with the night in swift pursuit, with the sun and the moon and the stars subservient to His command. All creation is His and He commends all. Blessed is God, the Lord of all the worlds
Call unto your Lord humbly, and in the secrecy of your hearts. He does not love those who transgress the limits of what is right
Do not spread corruption on earth after it has been so well ordered. Call unto Him with fear and longing. The mercy of God is close to those who do good
It is God who sends the winds, bearing good news of His coming mercy, and when they have gathered the heavy clouds, We drive them to a dead land where We cause rain to fall, bringing out all kinds of fruit, just as We will bring out the dead. Will you not remember
As for the good land, vegetation comes out by its Lord's will, but poor land produces in agony. We explain Our messages in various ways to those people who are grateful
We sent Noah to his people, and he said, "My people, worship God alone. You have no god other than Him. I am concerned that you will have the punishment on that Awesome Day
The notable ones among his people replied, "We see that you are obviously lost in error
[Noah] said, "My people, there is no error in me. I am a Messenger from the Lord of all the worlds
I am delivering to you my Lord's messages and giving you good advice. I know [through revelation] from God what you do not know
Why do you think it is strange that a message from your Lord would come to you through a man from among yourselves, so that he might warn you and so that you might become mindful of God and so that you might be graced with His mercy
Yet, they called him a liar. We saved him and those who stood by him, in the ark, while We caused those who rejected Our messages to drown. They were blind
To the people of 'Aad [We sent] their brother, Hud. He said, "My people, worship God alone. You have no god other than Him. Will you not be mindful of Him
The notables among his people who refused to acknowledge the truth said, "We see that you are weak-minded, and we think you are a liar
[Hud] said, "My people, there is no weak-mindedness in me. I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I am delivering my Lord's messages to you and advising you truly and well
Why are you surprised that your Lord would send you a reminder and a warning through one of your own? Remember how He made you heirs to Noah's people and increased your stature. Remember God's grace so that you might prosper
They answered, "Have you come to us asking that we worship God alone and give up all that our forefathers worshiped? Then bring the [punishment] with which you have threatened us, if you are a man of truth
[Hud] said, "You are already set to receive your Lord's condemnation and wrath. Do you argue with me about the names which you and your forefathers have invented, names for which God has given no authority? Wait, then, [for what will happen,] I will wait with you
By Our grace, We saved him and those who stood by him, while We wiped out the last remnant of those who rejected Our messages and would not believe
To the people of Thamud [We sent] their brother Salih who said, "My people, Worship God alone. You have no god other than Him. Clear evidence has now come to you from your Lord. The she-camel belonging to God is to be a sign for you. Let her graze on God's earth, and do not do her harm in any way or you will be struck by a painful punishment
Remember how He made you heirs to [the tribe of] 'Aad and settled you in the land, so that you were able to build castles for yourselves on its plains and carve houses out of the mountains. Remember God's grace, and do not spread corruption on earth
The notables from among his people, who reveled in their arrogance towards all who were deemed weak, said to the believers among them, "Do you [really] know that Salih has been sent by his Lord?" They answered, "We believe in the message which he brought to us
The arrogant ones said, "We refuse to regard as true what you have come to believe in
They, then, cruelly slaughtered the she-camel and turned with disdain from their Lord's commandment and said, "Salih, bring about that [punishment] that you had threatened us with, if you are truly one of God's Messengers
An earthquake seized them, and they lay lifeless in their homes
[Salih] turned away from them and said, "My people, I delivered to you my Lord's message and gave you good advice but you did not love those who gave [you] good advice
And Lot, when he said to his people, "How can you practice this outrage? No one in the world has outdone you in this
You lust after men instead of women. You transgress all bounds
His people's only answer was, "Expel them from your land. These people want to make themselves out to be pure
We saved him and his household, except his wife who was among those that stayed behind
We showered upon the others a rain [of destruction]. Consider the fate of those who force others to reject God's messages
To [the people of] Midian, [We sent] their brother Shu'ayb. He said, "My people, worship God alone. You have no god other than Him. Clear evidence of the Truth has now come to you from your Lord. Give full measure and weight, and do not deprive people of what is rightfully theirs, and do not spread corruption on earth after it has been well ordered. [All] of this is for your own good if you would only believe
Do not lurk on every trail, threatening and trying to turn away all who believe in God from His path and trying to make it appear crooked. Remember when you were few and He made you many. Look at what happened in the end to those who spread corruption
If there are some among you who have come to believe in the message which I bear, while others do not believe, then have patience in hard times till God judges between us. He is the best of all judges
The notables among his people who gloried in their arrogance said, "Shu'ayb, We will most certainly expel you and your fellow-believers from our land unless you return to our ways." [Shu'ayb said, "Why, even if we find it detestable]
If we were to return to your ways after God has saved us from them we would be guilty of blaspheming against God. It is inconceivable to return to them, unless God, our Lord, so wills." Our Lord comprehends everything within His knowledge. We place our trust in God. Lord, expose the Truth and judge between us and our people, for You are the best judge
The notables among his people who were bent on denying the truth, said [to his followers], "If you follow Shu'ayb, you will be the losers
An earthquake overtook them and they lay lifeless in their homes
It was as if those who had rejected Shu'ayb never lived there. They were the losers
He turned away from them and said, "My people, I delivered to you my Lord's message and gave you good advice. How could I mourn for the people who have denied the truth
We have never sent a prophet to any community without first sending misfortune and hardship to its people so that they might humble themselves
We then transformed their hardship into prosperity, so that they were able to thrive but then they said [to themselves], "Misfortune and hardship befell our forefathers as well." Then We seized them suddenly when they were not expecting it
If the people of those communities had believed and been mindful of Us, We would have showered them with grace out of heaven and earth, but they rejected the truth, and so We punished them for their misdeeds
Can the people of any community ever feel secure that Our punishment will not come upon them by night while they are asleep
Can the people of any community ever feel secure that Our punishment will not come upon them in broad daylight, while they are at play
Can they ever feel secure from God's plan? Only the people who are lost feel secure from God's plan
Has it not become obvious to those who inherited the earth from former generations that if We willed, We could punish them [as well] for their sins, sealing their hearts so that they cannot hear
To those [earlier] communities, some of whose stories We relate to you, messengers from among them came with evidence of the truth, but they would not believe in anything which they had already rejected. God seals the hearts of the unbelievers
and in most of them We found that they did not honor their commitments. We found that most of them were defiant
Later, We sent Moses with Our messages to Pharaoh and his inner circle, and they rejected them. Consider what happened to those who used to spread corruption
Moses said, "Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I cannot say anything about God but the Truth. I have now come to you with clear evidence from your Lord. Send the children of Israel with me
[Pharaoh] said, "If you have come with a sign, produce it, if you are a man of truth
[Moses] threw down his staff, and it was clearly a snake
He pulled out his hand and it was white for all to see
The notables among Pharaoh's people said, "This is definitely a sorcerer with great knowledge
who wants to drive you out of your land. [Pharaoh said], "What do you advise
They answered, "Let him and his brother wait a while, and send messengers to all cities
who will bring you every sorcerer of great knowledge
The sorcerers came to Pharaoh [and] said, "We should be rewarded if we win
[Pharaoh] answered, "Yes, and you will be among those who are near to me
They said, "Moses, either you will throw [your staff first], or We will throw [first]
He answered, "You throw [first]."When they threw down [their staffs], they cast a spell upon the people's eyes, and struck them with fear, producing mighty sorcery
[Then] We inspired Moses, "Throw down your staff," and it swallowed up all their deceptions
The Truth was confirmed and what they had produced came to nothing
They were vanquished there and then, and they became utterly humiliated
The sorcerers fell down bowing themselves
[and] said, "We have come to believe in the Lord of the worlds
the Lord of Moses and Aaron
Pharaoh said, "How dare you believe in him before I give you permission. This is a plot which you have cunningly devised in [my] town in order to drive out its people. In time you will come to know [my revenge]
I will cut off your hands and feet in great numbers because of [your] perverseness, and then I will certainly crucify you together in great numbers
They answered, "We return to Our Lord
You take revenge against us only because we have come to believe in our Lord's messages as soon as they came to us. Lord, shower us with patience in hard times and make us die as men who have surrendered themselves to You
The notables among Pharaoh's people said, "Will you allow Moses and his people to spread corruption on earth and to [cause your people to] abandon you and your gods?" (Pharaoh] replied, "We will kill their sons in great numbers and will spare [only] their women. We have complete power over them
Moses said to his people, "Turn to God for help, and have patience in hard times. All of the earth belongs to God. He gives it as a heritage to whomever He wills of His worshipers. The future belongs to those who are mindful of Him
[The children of Israel] said, "We were being persecuted long before you came to us, and since then too." [Moses] replied, "Your Lord may well destroy your enemy and make you successors to the land to see how you behave
We inflicted Pharaoh's people with drought and crop failure, so that they might take heed
Whenever good fortune came to them, they would say, "This is our due." Whenever affliction befell them, they would blame their bad fortune on Moses and those who followed him. Their [evil] fortune had been decreed by God, but most of them did not know it
They said [to Moses], "We will not believe you, no matter what sign you produce to cast a spell on us
We let loose on them floods, [plagues of] locusts, lice, frogs, and [water turning into] blood- all distinct signs, but they reveled in their arrogance for they were people lost in sin
Whenever a plague struck them, they would cry, "Moses, pray for us to your Lord by virtue of the promise He has made with you. If you remove this plague from us, We will truly believe in you and will let the children of Israel go with you
When We removed the plague from them, giving them time to fulfill their promise, they would break their word
We exacted vengeance on them and caused them to drown in the sea, because they had rejected Our messages and paid no heed to them
For the people who had been deemed utterly low [in the past], We gave them the eastern and western parts of the land that We had blessed, as their heritage. Your Lord's good promise to the children of Israel was fulfilled as a result of their patience in hard times. Whereas, We destroyed everything that Pharaoh and his people had created and built
We brought the children of Israel across the sea, where they came across people who were devoted to worshipping idols. [The children of Israel] said, "Moses, give us a god like the gods they have." He replied, "You are ignorant people
As for these here, what they are doing is doomed to destruction; and all that they have ever done is falsehood
He said, "Why should I seek for you a god other than God, since it is He who has favored you above all other people
[He reminded them of the word of God], "We saved you from Pharaoh's people who caused you cruel suffering, killing your sons in great numbers and sparing [only] your women, which was an awesome test from your Lord
We made an appointment for thirty nights [on Mount Sinai] for Moses, and We then added ten to them. The term set by his Lord was fulfilled in forty nights. Moses said to his brother Aaron, "Take my place among my people and act righteously, and do not follow the path of those that spread corruption
When Moses came at the appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said, "My Lord, show [Yourself] to me, so that I might see You." [God] said, "You can never see Me. However, behold this mountain. If it remains firm in its place, then you will see Me." As soon as his Lord revealed His limitless glory to the mountain, He caused it to crumble to dust and Moses fell down unconscious. After he recovered, he said, "May You be exalted in Your glory! I repent! I will be the first of the believers
[God] said, "Moses, I have chosen you above all people by virtue of the messages which I have entrusted to you and by virtue of My speaking [to you]. Hold on to what I have given you, and be among the grateful
We inscribed everything for him in the Tablets which taught and clearly explained everything. [We said,] "Hold on to them with [all your] strength, and tell your people to hold fast to those most excellent teachings." I will show you the fate of the disobedient people
All those on earth who have behaved arrogantly for no reason, I will turn away from My signs. Even if they see every sign, they will not believe in them. And if they see the path of righteousness they will not take it. Whereas, if they see a path of error, they will take it because they have rejected Our messages and have paid no attention to them
All of the deeds of those who reject Our messages, and thus the Truth of the life to come, will be in vain. Why should they be repaid for anything other than what they have done
In his absence, Moses' people started worshipping a calf, making lowing sounds. It was made from their jewelry. Did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them in any way. [Yet], they worshipped it because they were unjust
[Later,] wringing their hands in remorse, having realized that they had gone astray, they would say, "Unless our Lord has mercy on us and grants us forgiveness, we will be lost
When Moses returned to his people, full of wrath and sorrow, he exclaimed, "You have followed a foul and evil course in my absence! Have you abandoned your Lord's commandments?" He threw down the Tablets and seized his brother by the head, dragging him. Aaron cried, "Son of my mother! These people overpowered me and almost killed me! Do not let my enemies rejoice at my suffering, and do not include me with those unjust people
[Moses] said, "Lord, grant my brother and me forgiveness, and cover us with Your mercy. You are the most merciful of those who show mercy
[To Aaron, he said,] "As for those who worshiped the calf, they will experience their Lord's anger and be disgraced in this world." This is the way we repay all who instigate trouble
As for those who do bad deeds and afterwards repent and [truly] believe, your Lord is Forgiving and Merciful
When Moses' anger subsided, he picked up the Tablets, on which were guidance and mercy for those who stood in awe of their Lord
Moses chose seventy men for our appointment. When they were seized with trembling, he prayed, "Lord, had You willed, You would have destroyed them, and me as well. Will You destroy us for what the fools among us did? This is a trial from you, whereby You allow whomever You will to go astray and guide whomever You will. You are near to us. Grant us forgiveness, and have mercy on us for You are the most forgiving of all
Grant us good things in this world and in the life to come. We have turned to You in repentance." [God] answered, "I punish whomever I will, but My mercy encompasses everything. I grant it to those who are mindful of Me, give the purifying alms and who believe in Our messages
those who will follow the Messenger, the gentile Prophet they find described in the Torah and in the Gospel, the Prophet who will command them to do what is obviously right and forbid what is obviously wrong and allow them the good things in life and forbid them the bad things. He will release them from their burdens and shackles that bound them before. Those who will believe in him and honor him and support him and follow the enlightenment that has been sent down with him who will succeed
Say [Muhammad], "People, I am the Messenger of God to all, from Him who has control over the heavens and the earth. There is no god but Him. He [alone] gives life and causes death." Believe in God and His Messenger, the gentile Prophet who believed in God and His words. Follow Him, so that you may find guidance
Among the people of Moses, there is a group of people who would guide with the Truth and who act justly according to it
We divided them into twelve tribes. When his people asked Moses for water, We inspired him, "Strike the rock with your staff," and twelve springs gushed out so that all the people knew where to drink. We caused the clouds to comfort them with their shade, and We sent down to them manna and quail. We said, "Eat the good things We have provided for you." They did no wrong to Us; they only wronged themselves
When you were told, "Take this village as your home, and eat anywhere you like. But say, 'Remove the burden of our sins from us', and enter the gate humbly. Then We will forgive you of your sins and will abundantly reward those who do good
Those among them who were bent on doing wrong substituted another saying for that which they had been given, so We released from heaven a plague against them as a punishment for all their injustices
[Prophet] Ask them about the town that stood by the sea and how its people would disregard the Sabbath whenever their fish surfaced for them only on that day, and they would never come on other days. We tested them by means of their [own] disobedience
Whenever people among them asked [those who tried to restrain the people who broke the Sabbath], "Why do you preach to people whom God is about to destroy or [at least] to punish with severe suffering?" The pious ones would answer, "In order to be free from blame before your Lord and so that these [transgressors] might also become mindful of Him
When those [sinners] forgot all that they had been told to take to heart, We saved those that tried to prevent them doing evil, and severely punished the wrongdoers with dreadful suffering
When they scornfully persisted in doing what they had been forbidden to do, We said to them, "Be as despicable as apes
Your Lord made it known that until the Day of Resurrection, He would send people to punish them with cruel suffering. Your Lord is swift in punishment but He is most Forgiving and most Merciful-to-all
We dispersed them as [separate] communities all over earth; some of them were righteous and some of them less so. We tried them with blessings and/or misfortune so that they might return [to the right path]
They have been succeeded by generations who, [in spite of] having inherited the Book, hold onto the momentary treasures of this world [in preference to the Hereafter] and say, "We will be forgiven". Yet if the same opportunity comes around again they will take it. Didn't they make a commitment based on the Book, not to say anything about God that was not the Truth and [haven't they] studied its contents well? Since the life in the Hereafter is the better [of the two] for all who are mindful of God, will you not use your common sense
As for those who hold fast to the Book and are constant in prayer, We will not fail to reward those who do what is right
When We caused Mount Sinai to shake above the children of Israel as if it were a [mere] shadow, and they thought it would fall on to them, did we not say, "Hold fast with [all your] strength onto what We have given to you and remember all that is within so that you might remain mindful of God
When your Lord took out from the loins of the children of Adam all their descendants, He called upon them to bear witness about themselves, "Am I not your Lord?" To which they answer, "Yes, we bear witness of this." [We remind you of this] so that on the Day of Resurrection, you do not say, "We were unaware of this
or so that you do not say, "It was our forefathers who began to ascribe divinity to other beings beside God and we were only their children. Will You destroy us because of the falsehoods they invented
We clearly spell out these messages and [We do it] so that they [those who have sinned] might return [to Us]
Tell them the story of the man to whom We gave Our messages and who then cast them aside: Satan catches up with him and he strays, into error
Had We so willed, We could have used those [messages] to raise him high but he always clung to the earth and followed his own desires. He was like a dog-who pants with his tongue hanging out whether you drive him away or leave him alone. That's the image of those who reject Our messages. Tell this story so that they might reflect on it
The people who reject Our messages are an example of evil, for It is against themselves that they are sinning
Only He whom God guides is truly guided, whereas those whom He lets go astray are the losers
There are many jinn and men who have hearts that fail to grasp the truth. We have destined for Hell, those whose eyes fail to see and whose ears fail to hear. They are like cattle. No, they are even less mindful of the right path. It is they who are [truly] oblivious
The Most Beautiful Names belong to God: use them to call on Him and avoid those who take His name in vain. They will be punished for all that they do
Among those whom We created, there are people who guide [others] in the way of the Truth and act justly in its light
As for those who are bent on denying Our messages, We will bring them low, step by step, without their perceiving how it happened
even if I give them more time. My subtle plan is unshakeable
Has it never occurred to them that their companion [referring to the Prophet] is not mad but is giving them clear warning
Have they never considered [God's] mighty dominion over the heavens and the earth and all that God has created and [asked themselves] whether the end of their own term might be near? What [other revelation] will they believe in if they do not believe in this
For those whom God lets go astray, there is no guide and He will leave them in their presumptuous arrogance, blindly stumbling to and fro
They will ask you [Prophet] about the Last Hour: "When will it come?" Say, "Knowledge of this rests with my Lord along. Only He will reveal it in its time. It will weigh heavily on the heavens and the earth [and] it will fall upon you suddenly." They will continually ask you, as if you could gain insight into this [mystery]. Say, "Knowledge of this rests with my Lord alone but most people are unaware [of this]
Say [Prophet], "It is not with my power to bring benefit to, or avert harm from myself except as God may please. If I had knowledge of what is hidden, I would have abundant good things and no evil would ever touch me. I am only one who sounds a warning and a messenger of good news to people who will believe
He has created [all] of you out of one living entity and out of it brought into being its mate, so that man might incline towards women [with love]. When he has embraced her, she conceives [what begins as] a light burden, and continues to bear it. Then, when she grows heavy [with child], they both call onto God, their Lord, "If You grant us a healthy [child], We will be among the grateful
Yet, as soon as He has granted them an upright child; they begin to give credit to associates alongside Him, giving them a share in bringing about what He has granted them. However, God is far above the partners they ascribe alongside Him
Will they ascribe divinity alongside Him to beings that cannot create anything since they are created
and are unable to give them help nor can they help themselves
If you [Believers] offer guidance to such people, they won't follow you: it makes no difference whether you offer it to them or remain silent
All those that you call [idolaters] on beside God are only created beings like yourselves. Call on them and let them answer your prayers if what you claim is true
Do They have feet to walk on? Do They have hands with which they can grasp? Do They have eyes with which they can see? Do They have ears with which they can hear? Say [Prophet], "Call to your aid all those to whom you ascribe a share in God's divinity," and then scheme [anything you may wish] against me. Do not spare me
My protector is God, who has given me this Book from on high, for It is He who protects the righteous
All those whom you call on instead of Him are neither able to give you help nor can they help themselves
and if you pray to them for guidance, they do not hear and although you may imagine that they see you, they do not see
Be tolerant of man's nature and command the doing of what is right and leave alone all those who choose to remain ignorant
If it should happen that a prompting from Satan stirs you up [to blind anger], seek refuge with God. He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
Those who are mindful of God think [of Him] when Satan prompts them to do something and immediately they begin to see [things] clearly
even though their [godless] brethren would like to draw them into error
When you [Prophet] do not produce a miracle for them, some [people] will say, "Why do not you seek to obtain it [from God]?" Say, "I only follow whatever is being revealed to me from my Lord. This [revelation] is a means of insight from your Lord and a guidance and grace onto people who will believe
Hence, when the Qur'an is recited, pay attention and listen to it in silence, so that you might be graced with [God's] mercy
[Prophet] remember your Lord humbly and with awe and without raising your voice in the morning and in the evening. Do not allow yourself to be inattentive
Those who are in the presence of your Lord are never too proud to worship Him. They praise His limitless glory and bow down before Him
They will ask you [Prophet] about the spoils of war. Say, "This is a matter that will be dealt with by God and His Messenger." So, remain mindful of God and settle your differences, and obey God and His Messenger if you are Believers
Believers are those whose hearts tremble with awe whenever God is mentioned, and whose faith is strengthened whenever His revelations are recited and who place their trust in their Lord
who keep up their prayer and spend out of what We provide them
Those are truly Believers. They have a high standing with their Lord, forgiveness of sins, and a generous provision
It is your Lord who took you out of your home to fight for the Truth, while some of the believers disliked it
arguing with you about the Truth after it was made clear to them, as if they were being driven towards death while staring it in the face
God promised you that one of the two enemy groups would fall to you, and you wanted to fight the weaker one. God willed the Truth to prevail in accordance with His words and to wipe out the unbelievers
so He might prove the Truth to be true and falsehood to be false , no matter how much resistance came from those who force others to reject God's messages
When you prayed to your Lord for help He responded favorably; "I will help you with a thousand angels in formation
God meant this as a message of hope and assurance for your hearts, so you would know that victory is only from God. God is Almighty and Wise
Then He made drowsiness overcome you as a blessing from Him to calm you down and sent rain so that He may cleanse you from Satan's whispers; to strengthen your hearts and make you steadfast
Your Lord revealed to the angels, "I am with you. Make the Believers stand firm; I will put terror into the hearts of the unbelievers. So strike above their necks and cut off their fingers
This is because they opposed God and His Messenger, and if anyone opposes God and His Messenger, God's punishment is severe
This is it. Taste it." The punishment of fire awaits the unbelievers
Believers, when you meet the unbelievers in battle, do not turn your backs on them
for whoever turns his back on them, unless it is a battle tactic or an attempt to join another group, will earn the wrath of God and his home will be Hell, a terrible destination
Believers, it was not you who killed the enemy, but God who killed them, and it was not you [Prophet] who threw terror into them but it was God who threw it, and He did all of this in order to test the believers. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
This is your reward. God will weaken the unbelievers' plots
Believers, if you have been praying for victory, it has now come to you. If you abstain from sin, it will be for your own good, but if you return to sin, We will withdraw Our promise of help and your community will be of no use to you, regardless of their numbers. God is only with those who believe
Believers obey God and His Messenger and now that you hear His message, do not turn away from Him
Do not be like those who say, "We have heard," when they were not listening
The worst of all creatures in God's sight are those deaf and dumb ones who do not think
If God had seen any good in them, He would have made them hear, but even if He had, they would still have turned away and paid no attention
Believers, respond to God and His Messenger whenever he calls you to that which will give you life. Know that God intervenes between a man and the desires of his heart and that you will be gathered to Him
Beware of discord that will not only afflict those who are unjust among you; and know that God is severe in punishment
Remember when you were just a few and helpless, afraid that people might snatch you away but He sheltered you and strengthened you with His help and provided you with good things so that you might be grateful
Believers, do not betray God and His Messenger, or knowingly betray [other people's] trust in you
and know that your worldly possessions and your children are only a test and a temptation and that there is a tremendous reward with God
Believers, if you remain mindful of God, He will give you a standard by which to determine right from wrong, will wipe away your misdeeds and will forgive your sins. God's grace is limitless
As the unbelievers where plotting against you [Prophet] in order to prevent you [from delivering the message], or to kill you, or to drive you away. They plotted and so did God. He is the best of plotters
Whenever Our messages were conveyed to them, they would say, "We have heard this before and if we want, we can say things like this- these are nothing but ancient tales
They would also say, "God, if this is the Truth from You, then rain down on us stones from the heavens or inflict some painful suffering on us
God did not choose to punish them when you [Prophet] were still among them, nor would God punish them when they [might still] ask for forgiveness
Why would God not punish them, when they are preventing people from reaching the Holy Sanctuary, even though they are not its guardians? Only those mindful of God can be its guardians but most of the unbelievers do not understand
Their prayers before the House are nothing but whistling and clapping. 'So taste the punishment for your persistent denial of the truth
The unbelievers spend their wealth to turn people away from God's path. They will continue to spend it until it becomes a source of sorrow for them: in the end they will be overcome and will be gathered in Hell
as God might separate the good from the bad and stack the bad together, herding them all to Hell; these are the truly lost
Tell the unbelievers that if they stop, all their past will be forgiven, but if they persist they have an example in the fate of those who went before
Fight them until there is no more persecution and all worship is devoted to God alone. If they stop, then God sees all that they do
but if they refuse, know that God is your protector, the best protector and the best helper
You should know that whatever spoils you acquire, one-fifth belongs to God and the Messenger, to close relatives and orphans, to the needy, and to the stranded travelers. [This you must observe] if you believe in God and what We revealed to Our servant on the day of distinction [when Truth was distinguished from falsehood]- the day when two forces met in battle. God has power over all things
You were near the end of the valley [of Badr] and they were at the far end, and the caravan was below you. Even if you had made a prior arrangement to meet there, you would have missed it, but [You have met] so that God might bring about a matter already decided. This was so that those who would die might die in clear sight of the Truth and that he who would remain alive might live in clear sight of the Truth. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
God made them to appear as few in your dream: had He made them appear as many, you would have lost heart and would have disagreed with one another about what to do. It is God who saved you from this. He fully knows the secrets of the hearts
When you met in battle, He made them appear as few in your eyes, just as He made you appear as few in their eyes, so that God might bring about a matter already decided. These matters are decided by God
Believers, when you come against an enemy in battle, be steadfast and remember to call on God without ceasing so that you may prosper
Obey God and His Messenger, and do not quarrel with one another so that you do not lose momentum. Be patient; God is with those who are patient in hard times
Do not be like those who came from their homeland full of arrogance and a desire to be seen and praised by men while they were turning others away from the path of God. God is fully aware of everything they do
Satan made them think they were doing the right thing. He told you, "No one can overcome you today because I am with you," but as soon as the two forces came within sight of one another, he turned around and said, "I am not responsible for you. I see something that you do not see. I am afraid of God. God is severe in punishment
The hypocrites and those with sick hearts say: "The Believers' faith has surely misled them," While he who trusts God will find that God is Almighty, Wise
If you could only see how it will be when the angels retrieve the unbelievers' souls, they will beat them on their faces and backs and [will say], "Experience the pain of burning
in return for what your own hands have done. God is never unjust to his worshipers
They are like Pharaoh's people and those who lived before them: they rejected God's signs so God punished them for their sins. God is powerful and severe in his punishment
God never stops dispensing His grace to people unless their souls' rebel. God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
They are like Pharaoh's people and those who lived before them. They denied the Lord's signs. So We destroyed them because of their sins and caused Pharaoh's people to drown. They were all unjust
In God's sight, the worst beasts are the unbelievers who refuse to believe
Those You have made a covenant with who break this covenant on every occasion, not being mindful of God's presence
If you face them at war, make a fearsome example of them for those who follow them, so that they may remember the Truth
If you have reason to fear treachery from people [with whom you made a treaty], let them know that you intend to cancel the treaty so you will be on even terms. God does not love the treacherous
The unbelievers shouldn't think that they will escape God. This they can never do
Prepare whatever forces you can so that you might frighten God's enemies and yours, and to frighten others unknown to you but known to God. Whatever you may do in God's cause, will be repaid to you in full and you will not be wronged
But if they incline towards peace, you incline to it as well and place your trust in God. He alone is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
If they intend to deceive you, God will suffice as your protector. It is He who has strengthened you with His help by giving you followers
whose hearts He has brought together. Even if you had given away everything on earth, you could not have brought their hearts together. God brought them together. He is Almighty, Wise
Prophet, God is a sufficient protector for you and for the believers who follow you
Urge the believers to fight, if there are twenty of you who are patient in hard times, they will overcome two hundred, and if there are one hundred of you, they will overcome one thousand unbelievers, for the unbelievers are people who do not comprehend
God has lightened your burden for now. He knows that there is a weakness in you. If there are one hundred of you who are patient in hard times, you will overcome two hundred, and if there are one thousand of you, you will overcome two thousand by God's permission. God is with those who are patient in hard times
It is not right for a prophet to take prisoners of war before he has conquered the land. You [people] desire the temporary gains of this world, but God desires for you the good of the life to come. God is Almighty and Wise
Had it not been for a predetermined decree from God, a severe punishment would have come upon you for what you took
Enjoy all the good and lawful spoils of war that you acquired, and remain mindful of God. God is the Forgiver and the Merciful-to-all
Prophet, tell the prisoners you have taken, "If God finds good in your hearts, He will give you something better than all that has been taken from you and He will forgive you. God is the Forgiver and the Merciful-to-all
If they try to betray you, they have betrayed God before, and He gave you power over them. God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
Those who believed and who emigrated [to Medina] and struggled for God's cause with their possessions and lives, and those who have given refuge and help, are all allies of one another. As far as those who believed but did not emigrate, you do not owe them any protection until they have emigrated. If they are prevented from freely practicing their faith and ask you for help, you must help them, except against people with whom you have a treaty. God sees all that you do
Unbelievers support each other. Unless you do likewise, there will be turmoil, and much corruption on earth
Those who believed and emigrated, and struggled for God's cause, as well as those who gave them refuge and help, are true believers. Forgiveness awaits them as well as excellent sustenance
As for those who came to believe afterwards and emigrated and struggled alongside you, they are one with you. But in the Book of God, family members are nearer to one another. God knows everything
God and His Messenger repudiate the treaty made with the idolaters
You are free to move around for four months, but you can never escape God, and God will disgrace all who deny the truth
On the day of the great pilgrimage, there will be a proclamation from God and His Messenger to all humankind: "God and His Messenger are released from all treaty obligations with the idolaters. If you repent, it will be for your own good, but if you persist, know that you can never escape God." Warn the unbelievers that they will have a painful punishment
As for those who have honored their treaty obligations, and have not assisted anyone against you, fulfill your agreement with them to the end of its term. God loves those who are mindful of Him
But, once the sacred months are over, kill those idolaters wherever you find them, besiege them, ambush them, and imprison them. However, if they repent and pray, and pay the prescribed purifying alms, let them go on their way, for God is the Forgiver and the Mercy-Giver
If any of those idolaters seek your protection, protect him so that he will be able to hear the words of God. Take him to a place where he is safe, because they are people who do not know the truth
How can there be a treaty between God and His Messenger with the idolaters, except for those with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred House? As long as they remain true to you, be true to them. God loves those who are mindful of Him
What sort of a treaty is this, since, if they gain the upper hand, they would not respect any agreement or obligation to protect [you]. They please you with what they say, while their hearts remain averse [to you]. Most of them are disobedient
They have sold God's messages for small change and have turned others away from His path. What they have done is truly evil
They respect neither kinship nor treaty with believers, and it is they who are offenders
If they repent, and pray, and pay the prescribed purifying alms, they become your brothers in faith; We spell out these messages clearly for people who understand
If they violate their oaths after having made a treaty with you and condemn your faith, then fight against these leaders of ungodliness, who have no regard for their own oaths, so that they will stop their aggression
Won't you fight against people who have broken their solemn oaths, and done all they can to drive the Messenger out, and attacked you first? Are you afraid of them? It is God whom you should fear if you are [truly] believers
Fight them. God will use your hands to punish them, and will disgrace them, and will give you victory over them. He will heal the believers' hearts
and will remove the fury from their hearts. God redeems whomever He wills. God knows and is wise
Believers, do you think you will be spared without God testing your loyalty to the struggle in His cause, your loyalty to Him, His Messenger and the believers? God is totally aware of everything you do
It is not for the idolaters to visit or tend God's places of worship while they testify that they deny the truth. Their deeds will come to nothing, and they will be eternally in the fire
Only those who believe in God and the Last Day, who perform their prayers, give the purifying alms, and who are in awe of God and no one else, shall visit and tend God's places of worship. Only such people can expect to be included among those who are guided by God
Do you think that providing water to pilgrims and tending to the Sacred House is the same thing as believing in God and the Last Day, and persevering in God's path? They are not the same in God's sight. God does not grace unjust people with guidance
Those who have believed, migrated and persevered in God's cause with their possessions and their lives have the highest rank with God. They are the ones who are victorious
Their Lord brings them the good news of the grace that flows from Him and His approval, and of Gardens that await them, full of everlasting pleasure
where they will live forever. God has a tremendous reward [for them]
Believers, do not take your fathers and brothers for allies if unbelief is dearer to them than faith; those of you who do so are unjust
Say, "If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your spouses, your kin, the worldly goods you have acquired, the trade you fear will decline, and the dwellings you love are dearer to you than God and His Messenger and the struggle in His cause, then just wait until God brings about His punishment. God does not guide defiantly disobedient people
God has helped you on many battlefields and on the day of the Battle of Hunayn, when you were so pleased with your great numbers-which proved to be of no use to you. The earth, despite its vastness, seemed so narrow to you that day. You turned around and ran
Then God sent down His serenity on His Messenger and the believers, and He sent down invisible forces to punish those who reject the truth. This is what they deserve
Then, after this, God in His mercy is free to forgive whomever He will. God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Believers: idolaters are impure. From this year on, do not let them come near the Sacred House. If you fear poverty, then God, if He wills, will enrich you out of His favor. God knows everything and is wise
Fight those People of the Book who do not believe in God and the Last Day, those who do not forbid that which has been forbidden by God and His Messenger, and do not follow the religion of Truth, until they pay the exemption tax after having been subdued
Some Jews say, "Ezra is God's son," while some Christians say, "The Messiah is God's son." This is what they say with their own mouths. They repeat the assertions made before by unbelievers. "May God destroy them". How perverted are their minds
They have taken their rabbis and their monks, and even Christ, the son of Mary, for their lords instead of God, when they were commanded to worship only one God. There is no god but Him. May He be exalted in His glory above all the partners they may ascribe to Him
They want to suppress God's enlightenment with their words, but God will not allow it, for He wants to spread His enlightenment in all its fullness, no matter how much the unbelievers hate it
He has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true faith, that he may exalt it above all religions, no matter how much the idolaters hate it
Believers, many of the rabbis and monks wrongfully take men's wealth and turn people away from the path of God. Tell those who hoard gold and silver, and do not spend it in the path of God, tell them that they will have a very painful punishment
On the day when their gold and silver will be heated in the fire of Hell and used to brand their foreheads, sides and backs, [they will be told:] "These are the treasures which you have hoarded. Now you will taste what you have hoarded
According to God on the day when He created heavens and earth, the number of months is twelve. Of these, four are sacred; this is the correct way. So, do not wrong one another during them. However, fight against the unbelievers collectively as they fight against you collectively. You should know that God is with those who are mindful of Him
Postponing sacred months is an increase in the rejection of the truth, a means by which those rejecters are further mislead. They declare it lawful one year and unlawful the next, in order to correspond to the number of month made unlawful by God. They allow what God has forbidden. They are enticed by their own sins. God does not guide people who refuse to acknowledge the truth
Believers, what is the matter with you? When you are told to march forth to war in God's cause, you continue to cling to the earth. Are you content with this present life to the point that you prefer it to the life to come? The enjoyment of the present life is practically nothing in comparison to the life to come
If you do not go forth [to fight], He will punish you severely and will replace you with others, [although] you will not bother Him at all. God is able to do all things
[It does not matter] if you do not support the Messenger, [since] God already supported him when the unbelievers expelled him. He was one of two men hiding in a cave, and he said to his companion, "Do not be panic, God is with us." Then God sent His peace down on him and supported him with forces that were invisible to you. He made the unbelievers' word the lowest and God's word supreme. God is Almighty and All-Wise
March forth, whether young or old, and commit your possessions and your lives to God's cause; if only you knew how much this is for your own good
Had there been immediate profit and an easy journey, they would have followed you. But the distance was too far for them. Later, they will swear by God, "Had we been able, we would surely have marched with you." They will be damning their own souls. God knows they are liars
God forgives you [Prophet] for permitting them to stay behind before it was obvious which of them were truthful and which were liars
Those who believe in God and the Last Day do not ask you for exemption from committing their possessions and their lives to the struggle. God knows who is mindful of Him
Only those who do not believe in God and the Last Day ask you for exemption. Their hearts are full of doubts, and they are hesitant
If they had truly wanted to march with you, they would have prepared. [But, knowing what was in their hearts,] God hated for them to join, so He held them back, and they were told, "Stay behind with those who remain
Had they gone with you, they would have only made things more difficult. They would have spread rumors, causing divisions, because some of you are avid listeners to them. God knows exactly who the transgressors are
They tried before to create conflict and hatch plots against you, until the Truth was revealed and God's command became evident, even though they despised it
Some of them said, "Grant me leave and do not cause me to doubt." They were already doubting. Hell will always be ready to embrace those who refuse to believe
If anything good happens to you, it will grieve them, and, should you have misfortune, they will say: "We knew it, and that is why we took precaution." They will turn away in delight
Say, "Only what God has decreed will happen to us. He is our Supreme Lord. Let the believers place their trust in God
Say, "Do you expect something other than one of the two glorious rewards (victory or death in God's cause] to be ours? We, too, are waiting to see whether your punishment will come directly from God or at our hands. Wait, then; we wait with you
Say, "You may give [your contribution] willingly or unwillingly, but it will never be accepted from you. You are disobedient people
The only thing that prevents their giving from being accepted is their refusal to acknowledge God and His Messenger. They never pray without reluctance, and they never spend without resentment
Do not let their worldly goods or their children impress you. God intends to punish them with it in this world, and for their souls to depart while they are still unbelievers
They swear to God that they are part of you, but they are not. They are petrified
and, if they could find a place of refuge, or a cave, or something to crawl into, they would run towards it quickly
Some of them criticize you concerning the distribution of charitable gifts. They are content if they are given something, and they are very angry if they are given nothing
If only they had been satisfied with what God and His Messenger gave them and said, "God is enough for us. We trust that God will give us out of His bounty, and so will His Messenger. We turn to God alone, with hope
The purifying alms funds are meant only for the poor and the needy, for those who administer the fund, for reconciling hearts, for freeing slaves, for helping those in debt to spend in God's cause, and for travelers in need. This is ordered by God. God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
There are others who insult the Prophet by saying, "He will listen to anything." Say, "He listens for your own good. He believes in God and trusts the Believers, and he is a mercy to those of you who believe." And those who abuse the Messenger of God, will have a painful punishment
They swear by God, hoping to please you, but it is proper for them to please God and His Messenger, if they are Believers
Did they not know that whoever opposes God and His Messenger will go to the fire of Hell [and] remain there forever? This is the greatest disgrace
The hypocrites fear lest a chapter be revealed that will expose what is in their hearts. Say, "Mock all you want. God will bring about what you fear
If you were to question them, they would surely answer, "We were just joking and having fun." Say, "Is it God, His messages and His Messenger that you were joking about
Do not offer excuses. You have denied the truth after believing." Even though We may forgive some of you, We will punish others because they were guilty
The hypocrites, both men and women, are all the same: they ordain what is wrong and forbid what is right. They are tight fisted. They have forgotten God, and so He has forgotten them. They are defiantly disobedient
God has promised both the hypocrites-men and women-[and] the unbelievers the fire of Hell, where they will stay forever. This is sufficient for them. God has rejected them, and ever-lasting suffering awaits them
[Unbelievers] you are just like your predecessors. They were more powerful than you and had more wealth and children. They enjoyed their share of worldly pleasures, just as you have been enjoying yours. You are as indulgent as they were. It is those people whose works became worthless in this world and in the Hereafter, and it is they who are the losers
Have they not heard the stories of those who came before them? Noah's people, Ad's and Thamud's, Abraham's people, Midian's inhabitants, and the people of the destroyed towns. Their messengers came to them with clear evidence of the truth, and so it was not God Who was unfair to them, but they were unfair to themselves
The believers, both men and women, support each other; they order what is obviously right and forbid what is obviously wrong, and they perform prayers, pay the prescribed purifying alms, and obey God and His Messenger. God will have mercy on them. He is Almighty and All-Wise
God has promised the believers, men and women, Gardens with flowing rivers and nice homes in Gardens of Eden. But the greatest pleasure is God's continuous approval of them. That is the ultimate victory
Prophet, struggle hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be tough with them. If they do not repent, their final home will be Hell, a miserable destination
The hypocrites swear by God that they have said nothing wrong, but they have definitely uttered words of blasphemy and become unbelievers after having submitted. They plotted that which was beyond their ability. They resented that God and His Messenger had enriched them out of His favor. If they repent, it would be for their own good, but if they turn away, God will cause them to suffer painfully in this world and in the life to come, and no one on earth will be able to help or protect them
Some among them pledged to God, "If He give us out of His bounty, We will definitely spend on charity and will be among the righteous
but when He gave them out of His bounty, they were stingy with it and defiantly turned away
Because of their failure to fulfill their pledge to Him, and because of the lies they told, He caused hypocrisy to overtake their hearts until the Day they will meet Him
Do they not know that God knows all their secrets and their private conversations and that God is most knowing of everything that is beyond their perception
They criticize the believers who voluntarily contribute, and ridicule the ones who had nothing to give except their own efforts. Instead, God ridicules them, and a painful punishment awaits them
Praying or not praying for their forgiveness will make no difference. Even if you were to pray seventy times for their forgiveness, God will not forgive them because they reject God and His Messenger. God does not guide those who are defiantly disobedient people
After God's Messenger had left, those who remained behind were glad, because they hated to strive in God's way with their possessions and their lives. They had even said, "Do not go to war in this heat." Say, "The fire of Hell is a lot hotter!" If they could only understand
Let them laugh a little because they will weep a lot in return for what they have earned
So, [Prophet,] if God brings you face to face with them again, and they should ask you for permission to go to war with you, say, "You will never come with me, nor will you fight an enemy with me. You were happy to stay at home the first time, so, stay at home now with those who remain behind
Do not ever pray over any of them who died, and do not stand at their graves; they rejected God and His Messenger, and they died defiantly disobedient
Do not let their worldly possessions and their children impress you. God wants to use such things to punish them in this world, and for their souls to depart in anguish while they are still denying the truth
When a new revelation is given asking them to believe in God and to strive hard alongside His Messenger, even those of them with means ask your permission to stay, saying "Allow us to stay with those who remain at home
They were happy to remain with those who were left behind, because their hearts have been sealed, and they do not understand
However, the Messenger and all who share his faith strive hard in God's cause with their possessions and their lives, and great things await them in the life to come. It is they who will prosper
God has prepared Gardens with rivers flowing through them. There, they will remain eternally. This is the ultimate victory
Some of the Bedouins, too, came [to the Messenger] to make excuses, asking to be granted exemption. Those who lied to God and His Messenger stayed behind at home. A painful punishment will fall on those who rejected faith
No blame will be placed on the weak, or the sick, or those who have no means to equip themselves, provided that they are sincere towards God and His Messenger. In no way the righteous should be blamed. God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Blame will not be placed on those who come to you [Prophet, with the request] that you provide them with riding animals, and to whom you say, "I do not have rides for you." They turned away with their eyes overflowing with tears out of sorrow that they had nothing they could contribute
The ones to be blamed are those wealthy [persons] who asked you for an exemption. They are happy to remain with those who are left behind. God has sealed their hearts and they don't realize it
They will offer you excuses when you return. Say, "Do not give us any excuses, we will not believe you. God has already told us about you. God will be watching your deeds, and so will His Messenger, and, in the end, you will be brought before Him the Knower of the unknown and the known. He will make you truly understand [the negative impact of] what you were doing
[Believers], when you return to them, they will swear by God in order to make you leave them alone. Leave them alone. They are despicable, and their destiny is Hell, fit payment for their actions
They will swear to you to in order to make you accept them. God will never accept those who are defiantly disobedient
The Bedouins are the most hypocritical and stubborn in [their] rejection of faith and the least likely to comprehend the limits [of laws] that God has sent down to His Messenger. God knows everything, and He is wise
Among the Bedouins, there are some who consider what they spend [in God's cause] to be a loss and expect that you will run into trouble, but it is they who will be overwhelmed by trouble. God hears everything and knows everything
Yet, there are also Bedouins who believe in God and the Last Day and regard everything they spend [in God's cause] to be means of drawing them closer to God and the Messenger's prayers. It will definitely bring them nearer to God, admitting them to His mercy. God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
It is the first of the early emigrants and supporters, as well as those who followed them in righteousness, with whom God is very pleased, and they are pleased with Him. He has prepared Gardens with flowing rivers for them, where they will stay forever. This is the ultimate victory
Among the Bedouins who live around you, some are hypocrites, as are some of the people of Medina, who have grown accustomed to hypocrisy. You do not [always] know them [but] We know them. We will cause them to suffer twice as much [in this world,] and then they will face a severe punishment
And there are others, who, after having done both good and bad deeds, confessed their sins. God may accept their repentance because God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Accept their offerings for the sake of God, that it may cleanse them and cause them to grow in purity, and pray for them. Your prayer will comfort them. God hears everything, and He knows everything
Do they not know that God alone can accept the repentance of His worshipers and is the [true] recipient of what is offered for His sake, and that God alone is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful-to-all
Say: "Act! And God will see your deeds, and so will His Messenger and the believers. [In the end], you will be brought before Him who knows the unknown and the known, and He will tell you what you have been doing
And yet, there are others who are waiting for God's decree, either to punish them or to show them His mercy. God knows everything, and He is wise
(As for those hypocrites) who have established a [separate] house of worship in order to create trouble, causing unbelief and disunity among the believers, and providing a base for those who previously fought God and His Messenger. They will definitely swear, "We have only the best of intentions," while God testifies that they are lying
[Prophet,] never pray in that mosque. Rather, you should pray only in a mosque founded from its very first day on consciousness of God. That is a place where men want to grow in purity. God loves everyone who purifies himself
Which is better, one who has founded his building on God-consciousness and a desire for His acceptance, or he who has founded his building on the edge of a crumbling cliff that will tumble down with him into Hellfire? God does not guide people who are [deliberately] unjust
The building they built will always be a source of skepticism within their hearts until their hearts are torn to pieces. God knows everything, and He is wise
God has purchased the souls and possessions of the believers, promising them paradise in return. They fight in God's cause, and they kill and are killed. It is a true promise given by Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Qur'an. Who could be more faithful to his promise than God? Rejoice in this good news! This is the bargain you have made with Him. This is the ultimate victory
Those are the ones who turn to God in repentance, who worship and praise Him. They journey, bow before Him and prostrate themselves in adoration. They order what is obviously right and forbid what is obviously wrong, and stay within the boundaries set by God. So, give good news to the believers
It is not for the Prophet and the believers to pray for forgiveness for the idolaters-even if they are related-after it has been made clear to them that those [sinners] are destined for Hell
Abraham's prayer that his father would be forgiven was due to a promise that he had given his father. However, when it became clear to him that his father was one of God's enemies, he renounced him, even though Abraham was tender-hearted, tolerant
God would not lead astray those He has already guided to the faith, unless He first makes it entirely clear to them what they should avoid. God knows everything
To God, alone, belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He, alone, has the power over life and death. There is none besides Him who can protect you or help you
God has forgiven the Prophet, as well as those emigrants and supporters who followed him in the hour of distress, after the hearts of some of them had hesitated. Then He forgave them. He is compassionate, merciful
He also forgave the three who stayed behind. They had [come to feel that] the earth, for all its vastness, was closing in on them, and that their souls were narrowing [as well], until they realized that the only refuge from God was to be with Him. He turned to them in mercy so that they would return to Him. God alone is the accepter of repentance and is merciful
Believers, remain mindful of God and be among those who are truthful
It is not appropriate for the people of Medina and the Bedouins [who live] around them to stay behind [and refuse to follow] God's Messenger. Nor should they care about themselves more than they care for him. This is because a righteous deed is registered to their favor every time they suffer from thirst, weariness or hunger in God's cause, or take any step that angers the unbelievers, or cause any harm to any enemy. God never loses track of the rewards [due] those who do good
They will spend no amount, large or small [for God's sake], nor cross any valley [in God's cause] that will not be credited to them. God will reward them according to the best of their deeds
The believers shouldn't all go to battle. From within every group, some should devote themselves to acquiring deeper knowledge of the Faith; to teach their people when they return. So they might be on their guard
Believers, fight against the unbelievers who live nearer to you, and let them find you tough in your determination. Know that God is with those who are mindful of Him
Whenever a chapter is revealed, some ask, "Which of you has this increased in faith?" As for those who believe, it strengthens them in their faith, and they rejoice in the good news [it brings them]
As for those who have diseased hearts, [each new revelation] adds only [more] disbelief to their disbelief, and they die as unbelievers
Do not they realize that they are being tested once or twice a year? Yet, they do not repent, nor do they remember
and whenever a chapter is revealed, they look at one another and say, "Is anyone watching you?" And then they leave. God has turned their hearts away from the truth because they are people who will not be able to understand
A messenger has come to you from among yourselves. Your suffering weighs heavily upon him. He is deeply concerned for you and full of compassion and mercy towards the believers
If they turn away, say, "God is sufficient for me. There is no God but Him. In Him I have put my trust, for He is the Lord of the magnificent Throne of His majesty
Alif Lam Ra, these are the verses of the Wise Book
Do people find it really amazing that We sent revelations to a man from among them, saying: "Warn all people, and give good news to those who believe that in the sight of their Lord, they are considered truthful." But the unbelievers say, "He is clearly a sorcerer
Your Lord is God, who has created the heavens and the earth in six days. He then settled on the throne of His majesty, governing everything that exists. No one can intercede with Him unless He first gives His permission. This is God, your Lord: worship Him. Will you not, then, keep this in mind
You will all return to Him: this is a true promise from God. He begins the process of creation, and then He repeats it so that He may justly reward all who believe and do good works. However, those who refuse to believe will have boiling drinks and grievous suffering because of their refusal to acknowledge the truth
He has made the sun radiant light and the moon a source of enlightenment for He has plotted out its phases so that you may know how to calculate the years and measure time. There is a purpose to everything God created in Truth. He explains His messages to those who are willing to know
In the succession of night and day, and in all that God has created in the heavens and on the earth, there are signs for those who are aware of Him
Those who do not believe that they are destined to meet Us-being content with their worldly life and unable to see beyond it, paying no attention to Our signs
will have the fire for their home in return for all they have deserved
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, their Lord guides them because of their faith. Streams will flow at their feet in Gardens of pleasure
There they will call out, "Glory be to You, God," their greeting will be "Peace," and the last part of their prayer will be, "All praise is due to God, the Lord of the worlds
Were God to rush punishment for people in the same way they rush toward what they consider good, their time would already be up. We will leave those who do not believe they are destined to meet Us to wander blindly in their arrogance
When trouble afflicts man, he cries to Us, whether he is lying on his side, or sitting, or standing, but, as soon as We have freed him of his trouble, he carries on as though he had never called on Us to save him from his trouble. In this way the deeds of such overindulgent people seem right in their own eyes
We destroyed earlier generations when they transgressed in spite of the evidence of truth brought to them by their messengers, whom they refused to believe. This is how we punish those who force others to reject God's messages
We then made you their successors on earth, so We could see what you would do
Whenever Our messages are clearly conveyed to them, those who do not believe that they are destined to meet Us will say, "Bring us a different Qur'an, or change it." Say [Prophet], "It is not up to me to change it of my own accord; I follow only what is revealed to me. I fear the punishment of that Monumental Day [of Judgment] if I were to disobey my Lord
Say, "If God had willed it, I would not have conveyed this [Book] to you, nor would He have brought it to your knowledge. I was among you for an entire lifetime before it came to me. Why cannot you think
Who could be more unjust than someone who makes up lies against God or denies His revelations? Those who force others to reject God's messages will never prosper
[nor will] they [who] worship things other than God-things that can neither harm nor benefit them-saying, "These are our intercessors with God." Say, "Do you [think that you could] inform God about something in the heavens or on earth that He does not know? May He be exalted in His glory, and far higher above all they associate with Him
People were once a single community, but later they began to hold divergent views. Had it not been for a prior decree from your Lord, their differences would already have been settled
They ask, "Why has his Lord never given him any miraculous sign?" Say, "The unknown belongs to God, so wait, and I will wait with you
Whenever We let [such] people experience Our grace after they have endured hardship, they then turn to plot against Our messages. Say, "God plots even faster. Our [heavenly] messengers are tracking all of your plotting
He enables you to travel on land and sea, until-while they are sailing on ships and rejoicing in favorable winds-a storm arrives, and waves come towards them from all directions, so that you think you are facing death. Then they cry out to God in all sincerity, claiming faith in Him alone: "If You save us from this, We will be truly thankful
Once He has saved them, they return to being corruptive on earth in defiance to the Truth. People! All your outrageous deeds will be counted against you; your enjoyment is limited to life in this world. Then you will return to Us, and We will confront you with everything You have done
The example of life on earth is like rain that We send down, which stimulates the growth of plants that humans and animals eat. Then, [just] as the earth takes on its finest appearance and is beautifully adorned, and its people think they have power over it, Our judgment comes to it suddenly, by night or day, and We reduce it to stubble, as if it had not flourished just the day before. We make Our messages clear to people who reflect on them
God invites you to dwell in peace, and He guides whoever chooses to a straight path
For those who do good, there is ultimate good in store, and even more besides. No darkness or shame will overshadow their faces [on Resurrection Day]. They are destined for Heaven, where they will remain forever
As for those who have done evil deeds, one iniquity deserves another, shame will overshadow them, [and] they will have no one to protect them from God. Their faces will appear as if they were covered by the night's darkness. They are destined to live in the fire, and there they will remain
On the [Judgment] Day We will gather them all together, [and] We will say to those who associated other [beings] with God, "Stay where you are, you and your associates." Then We will separate them from one another. The partners will say, "You were not supposed to worship us
God is witness enough between you and us. We were unaware that you were worshipping us
There, every soul will answer for its past deeds, and they will all return to God, their true Supreme Lord, and all their false deities will desert them
Say, "Who provides you with sustenance out of heaven and earth, or who has full power over hearing and sight? Who brings forward the living from the dead, and the dead from the living? Who administers all matters?" They will say, "God." Then say, "will you not then be mindful of Him
This is God, your Lord, the Ultimate Truth. What is beyond Truth except falsehood? How can you lose sight of the Truth
Thus, your Lord's word proved to be true against those who defiantly disobeyed Him; they will not believe
Say, "Can any of your 'partners-gods' initiate creation, and then repeat it?" Say, "God initiates creation, and then repeats it. What falsehood are you preaching
Say, "Who among those 'partners-gods' you associated with Him guides you to the Truth?" Say, "It is God who guides to the Truth. Which is more worthy to be followed; He who guides you to the Truth, or he who cannot find the path unless he's guided? What is the matter with you? How do you judge
Most of them follow nothing but speculations, which can never substitute for the Truth. God has full knowledge of all that they do
This Qur'an could have never been created by anyone but God as a confirmation of what is available to him from earlier revelations and a detailed explanation of the Book that-let there be no doubt-is from the Lord of all the worlds
Or do they say, "He [the Prophet] has invented it?" Say, "Then produce a chapter of similar merit, and call on anyone you can other than God if what you say is true
They are, in fact, denying what they cannot comprehend while its inner meaning has yet to become clear to them. In that same way, those who lived before them rejected belief, so reflect on the final fate of those who were unjust
There are some among them who will eventually come to believe, just as there are some who will never believe. Your Lord is fully aware of those who cause corruption
If they deny you, say, "I act based on my own belief, and your acts are based on yours. You are not accountable for what I do, and I am not accountable for whatever you do
Some of them listen to you, but, can you cause the deaf to hear if they do not understand
Some of them look at you, but can you show the blind the right way even though they cannot see
God does not wrong people at all but it is they who wrong themselves
On the Day He gathers them together, it will be as if they have stayed [in this world] no longer than a single hour of the day, and they will recognize one another. Those who denied that they would ever meet God will be the losers, for they were not guided
Whether We show you something of what We have promised them or retrieve you [first], they will still return to Us. Then God will be a witness to all that they have done
Every nation has had a messenger, and, only after their messenger appeared [and delivered his message] will they be justly judged; they will not be dealt with unfairly
They ask, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are telling the truth
Say, "I have no power to harm or help myself, except as God wills. An appointed time has been set for every nation, and, when they reach their appointed time, they can neither delay it by a single hour nor speed it up
Say, "Have you ever considered how you would feel if His punishment were to befall you by night or by day? What part of it would those who force others to reject God's messages wish to speed up
Say, "Will you believe [only] when it actually befalls you. Now [at the Judgment, you believe], whereas [before] you tried to hasten it
Then the wrongdoers will be told, "Taste eternal punishment. Why should you be repaid [with anything] other than what you have earned
Some people ask you, "Is this really true?" Say, "Yes, by my Lord, it is definitely true, and you cannot prevent it
Even if each soul that had done wrong possessed everything on earth, it would surely offer it [that day] in ransom. They will show remorse when they see the punishment; they will be judged justly, and they will not be treated unfairly
Everything that is in the heavens and on earth belongs to God. God's promise always comes true, but most of them do not know this
He is the One who grants life and deals death, and you will all be returned to Him
People, a lesson has now come to you from your Lord, and a cure for what is in your hearts, and guidance and grace to the believers
Say, "It is grace and mercy from God, so let them rejoice; it is better than all [the wealth] that they have accumulated
Say, "Have you considered the sustenance that God has sent down to you, some [of which] you have made unlawful and some lawful?" Say, "Has God given you permission [to do this], or are you inventing lies about God
What would those people who invent lies about God think on the Day of Resurrection? God's grace is limitless towards people, but most of them are ungrateful
Whatever you [Prophet] are doing, or whatever part of the Qur'an you may be reciting, and whatever you [people] are doing, We are watching you when you are doing it. Not an atom's weight escapes your Lord on earth or in heaven, nor is there anything even smaller or larger [that is not] recoded in a clear book
Truly, those who are loyal to God do not need to fear, and they will not grieve
[For] those who believe and are ever mindful of God
there is good news in the life of this world and the life to come. There is no changing the words of God; this is truly the supreme triumph
And you [Prophet] should not be grieved by what they say. All might belongs entirely to God: He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
Verily, everyone in heaven and on earth belongs to God. Those who invoke other [beings] besides God are not really calling on His associates; they are only following their guess, and they only tell lies
It is He who has made the night for you, so that you might rest, and the day, to give you sight. Truly there are messages in this for people who hear
They say, "God has taken a son. May He be exalted in His glory. He is self-sufficient beyond needs. Everything that is in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him." You have no authority to say this. How dare you say about God what you do not know
Say, "Those who invent lies about God will never prosper
They may have brief enjoyment in this world, but they will return to Us, and We will make them taste severe suffering because of their denial of the truth
Tell them the story of Noah, when he said to his people, "My people, if my presence [among you] and my reminding you of God's messages has become too much for you to bear, then my trust is really placed in God. So, decide with your 'partner-gods' what you want to do, and do not be hesitant; do with me whatever you decide, and do not keep me waiting
If you turn away, I have asked for nothing from you; my reward is from God, for I was commanded to be among those who have surrendered themselves to Him
[Nevertheless,] they denied him, so We rescued him and all those with him in the ark and made them successors, while We drowned those who denied our messages. See what happened to those who were forewarned
After him, We sent [other] messengers, each to his own people, who brought them evidence of the truth, but they were not going to believe anything they had already rejected. It is in this way that We seal the hearts of the transgressors
Afterward, We sent Moses and Aaron with Our messages to Pharaoh and his inner circle, but they acted arrogantly because they had decided to severe all relations to God and to reject Him
So, when the Truth came to them from Us, they said, "This is nothing but clear sorcery
Moses said, "You are calling it sorcery when the Truth was being given to you? Sorcerers can never prosper
They said, "Have you come to turn us away from what we found our forefathers believing so that the two of you might become supreme in this land? We do not believe in the two of you
So Pharaoh commanded, "Bring every sorcerer of great knowledge before me
When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them, "Throw whatever you may throw
When they had thrown down, Moses said to them, "Everything you have done is sorcery, and God will show it to be false. God does not support the works of those who cause corruption
God confirms the Truth by His words, even though those who force others to reject God's messages hate it
Only a handful of Moses' people declared their faith in him, [while others held back] for fear that Pharaoh would persecute them and their own people. Pharaoh was mighty on earth and prone to excesses
Moses said, "My people, if you believe in God, place your trust in Him if you have [truly] surrendered yourselves to Him
They answered, "We have placed our trust in God. Our Lord, do not make us an object of persecution for the people who do evil
and save us, by Your grace, from people who deny the truth
We revealed to Moses and his brother, "Make homes for your people in Egypt and [tell them], 'Turn your houses into places of worship and be constant in prayer.' Give good news to the believers
Moses prayed, "Lord, You have given Pharaoh and his inner circle splendor and wealth in this life, and they are leading others astray from your path. Lord, wipe out their riches and harden their hearts, so that they will not attain faith until they see painful suffering
God said, "Your [and Aaron's] prayer is accepted. Continue steadfastly on the right path, and do not follow the path of those who have no knowledge
We then brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and Pharaoh and his troops pursued them in arrogance and aggression, until, when he was about to drown, [Pharaoh] cried out, "I believe that there is no God except the one the Children of Israel believe in, and I am of those who surrender themselves to Him
[And God said], "[Only] now? When [before] you rebelled and lived among those who caused corruption
Today We will save only your body, so that you may be a sign to those who will come after you. Many people fail to heed Our signs
We then settled the Children of Israel in a good place and provided them with good things to sustain them. And it was not until knowledge [of God's revelation] had come to them that they began to bicker among themselves. Your Lord will judge between them on Resurrection Day regarding all of their differences
So if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to you, ask those who been reading the Book [revealed] before your time. The Truth has certainly come to you from your Lord, so do not be one of the doubters
or [one of] those who deny God's messages, lest you be among the doomed
Those against whom the words of your Lord are justly carried out will not believe
even though every sign comes to them, until they see the agonizing suffering
There had never been a single community that believed and benefited from its faith except Jonah's people. When they believed, We relieved them from the disgrace of suffering in the life of this world and allowed them to enjoy their life for a time
Had your Lord willed, all the people on earth would have believed, all of them entirely. Is it, then, up to you [Prophet] to compel People to believe
No soul can ever believe except with God's permission, and He brings disgrace on those who will not use their reason
Say, "Look at what there is in the heavens and on earth." But signs and warnings will not help the people who will not believe
What are they waiting for other than the punishment which came to those before them? Say, "Wait, then, and I will be waiting with you
Then We will save Our Messengers and those who believe. It is incumbent upon us to save the believers
Say, "People, if you are in doubt as to what my faith is, then [know that] I do not worship those you worship besides God, but I worship God alone, Who will eventually retrieve you back to Him, and I am commanded to be among the believers
[Prophet,] set your face towards this faith, as a man inclined to the truth. Do not be among those who violate God's unity
Do not call on any besides God who can neither benefit you nor harm you. If you do it, you will be among the unjust
If God inflicts harm on you, no one can remove it except for Him, and, if He intends good for you, no one can turn away His favor. He grants His bounty to any of His worshipers whom He wills. He alone is truly forgiving, the true Purveyor of Mercy
Say, "People, the Truth has come to you from your Lord. Whoever chooses to follow the path of guidance follows it for his own good, and whoever chooses to go astray does so to his own loss. I am not responsible for your conduct
Follow what is being revealed to you, and be patient in hard times until God gives His judgment. He is the best of all judges
Alif Lam Ra, [this is] a Book whose verses are perfectly constructed, then detailed directly from the grace of the Wise, the Most Expert
so that you may worship no one but God. I am sent to you from Him to warn you and to give you good news
Ask your Lord to forgive your sins and turn towards Him in repentance. He will let you enjoy a good life until a specified time, and will bestow His abundant grace on all who have virtues. But, if you turn away, I dread the suffering [which is bound to befall you] on that Mighty Day
You must all return to God, as He has power over everything
See how they turn away, trying to hide from Him. Even when they cover themselves with their clothes, He knows all that they hide and what they reveal. He has full knowledge of what is in men's hearts
Every living creature on earth depends on God for sustenance and He knows where it lives and where it dies. It is all in a clear record
He created the heavens and the earth in six days and the throne of His majesty of His Mightiness extended over the water. [He created this] in order to test which of you is best in deeds. And If you [Prophet] say, "You will be resurrected after death," the unbelievers will answer, "This is clearly nothing but sorcery
If We defer their suffering for a specified time, they are sure to say, "What is preventing it [from coming now]?" On the Day when it befalls them there will be nothing to divert it from them and they will be overwhelmed by the very thing they mocked
If We let man taste some of Our mercy and then take it away from him, he will abandon all hope, forgetting all gratitude
If We let him taste ease and plenty after hardship has touched him, he is sure to say, "Misfortune has gone away from me." He becomes overjoyed and boastful
Except those who are patient in hard times and do righteous deeds: forgiveness of sins awaits them and a great reward
Perhaps you are thinking about omitting part of what is being revealed to you, and you feel a tightness in your chest about it because they say, "If only a treasure were sent down to him, or an angel came with him [then we would believe]." [Prophet,] you are only a warner, it is God who is in charge of everything
Or, they [may] say, "He invented it." Say, "Produce ten invented chapters of similar merit, and call in whoever you can besides God to help you, if what you say is true
But if they [whom you called] do not respond to you, then know that [this Qur'an) has been revealed with God's knowledge and that there is no God but Him. Then will you submit to Him
As for those who care only for the life of this world and its bounties, We will repay [them] fully for everything they did, and they will be given nothing less
But, in the life to come, they will have nothing but the fire; their works will be fruitless, and their deeds futile
Can they be compared to those who have clear evidence from their Lord, conveyed through [this] testimony from Him-as was the book previously revealed to Moses-to be a guide and mercy [to humanity]? Those [who understand] believe in it, whereas those parties that deny its truth are promised the fire. Have no doubt about [this revelation]; it is the Truth from your Lord, though most people do not believe so
Who could be more unjust than he who attributes his own lie to God? [Such people] will be arraigned before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, "They uttered lies about their Lord." God's rejection is what the unjust deserve
[those] who turn others away from the path of God-trying to make it crooked-and refuse to acknowledge the truth of the life to come
They can never escape [their final reckoning, even if they remain unharmed] on earth; they will never find anyone who can protect them from God. Double suffering will be imposed on them for having lost the ability to hear [the truth] and failed to see [it]
They have allowed themselves to be lost. All their invented gods will have deserted them
Assuredly, in the life to come, they will lose the most
[Only] those who believe and do righteous deeds and humble themselves before their Lord are destined for Heaven, where they will remain for eternity
These two groups are like the blind and deaf in comparison to those who see and hear. Can they be alike? How can you not pay attention
[In like manner], We sent Noah to his people, [saying], "I come to you with the plain warning
that you may worship no one but God. I fear that you may suffer on a painful Day
The notables among his people who denied the truth said, "We do not see anything in you but a mortal man like ourselves, and it is clear to see that only the worst among us follow you. We do not see that you could be superior to us in any way. On the contrary, we think you are a liar
[Noah] said, "My people, have you considered that I might have a clear sign from my Lord, and that He has given me grace of His own even though it is not apparent to you? [In that case,] could we compel you to accept it against your will
My people, I ask you no reward for it. My reward rests with none but God. I will not chase away the faithful. They know they are destined to meet their Lord, and I can see that you are foolish
People, who could protect me from God if I chased [the faithful] away? Will you not take heed
I do not say to you, 'God's treasures are with me,' nor [do I say], 'I have knowledge of what is hidden,' nor do I say, 'I am an angel,' nor do I say of those you hold in contempt, 'God will not grant them any good.' God is fully aware of what is in their hearts. If I did this, I would be among the unjust
[The notables] said, "Noah, you have argued with us for too long. Bring down on us the punishment with which you threaten us if you are a man of truth
He answered, "Only God will bring it upon you, if He so wills and you will not escape it
My advice will be no use to you if God wills that you remain lost in your delusions. He is your Lord, and to Him you must return
Or do they [the idolaters] say he has invented this [story]?" Say [Muhammad] "If I have invented it, I am responsible for my own crime, but I am innocent of the crime of which you are guilty
It was revealed to Noah, "None of your people will believe other than those who have already done so. Do not be distressed by anything that they may do
Build the Ark under Our observation and Our inspiration, and do not appeal to Me on behalf of the transgressors. They are destined to be drowned
[Noah] began to build the Ark, and every time the notables of his people passed by him, they mocked him. He said, "If you are mocking us now, we will come to mock you [and your ignorance] just as you are mocking us
In time you will know who will receive a humiliating punishment, and on whom a lasting suffering will descend
When Our judgment came, and waters gushed up, We said, "Place on board this [Ark] a pair of each species, as well as your family-except those against whom the sentence has already been passed-and the Believers," though only a few [of Noah's people] shared his faith
He said [to his followers], "Board this Ark. In the name of God it will sail and anchor. My Lord is much-forgiving, a dispenser of grace
It sailed with them on waves that were like mountains. Noah cried out to his son, who stayed behind, "Come aboard with us my son, and do not stay with the unbelievers
[The son] answered, "I will take myself to a mountain that will protect me from the waters." [Noah] said, "Today there is no protection [for anyone] from God's judgment, except [for) those who have earned [His] mercy." A wave rose up between them, and [the son] was among those who drowned
Then it was said [by God], "Earth, swallow up your water, and sky, stop [your rain]." The waters sank into the earth, and the will [of God] was done, and the ark came to rest on Mount Judi. It was said [by God], "Away with those evildoing folk
Noah called out to his Lord and said, "My Lord, my son was my family; Your promise always comes true, and You are the most just of all judges
[God] answered, "Noah, he was not your family, because he was unrighteous in his conduct. Do not ask me for things you know nothing about. I am warning you not to be foolish
[Noah] said, "My Lord, I seek refuge with You from ever [again] asking You anything about which I know nothing. Unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will be among the lost
It was said [by God], "Noah, descend in peace from Us and with blessings on you as well as on [some of the] nations [that descend] from among those who are with you. [But as for] others [of their descendants], We will allow them to enjoy life [for a little while], and then a painful punishment from Us will afflict them
These accounts are part of what was beyond your knowledge [Muhammad]. We revealed them to you. Neither you nor your people knew them, so be patient [like Noah] in hard times. The future belongs to those who are mindful of God
To [the tribe of] 'Ad, [We sent] their brother, Hud. He said, "My people worship God [alone]. You have no God other than Him. You are making up lies
I ask no reward from you. My reward rests only with Him who created me. Why don't you use your common sense
My people, ask your Lord to forgive your sins, and then turn towards Him in repentance. He will shower you with abundant heavenly grace and will add strength to your strength. Do not turn away and be lost in sin
They replied, "Hud, you have brought us no clear evidence [that you are a prophet], and we are not going to forsake our gods on the strength of your word alone, nor do we believe in you
All we can say is that one of our gods has inflicted some harm on you." [Hud] answered, "I call God to witness, and you too are my witnesses, that I disown those to whom you ascribe divinity
except for God. Plot [anything that you may wish] against me, and give me no respite
I have placed my trust in God, [who is] my Lord and your Lord. There is no living creature that He does not control. My Lord's way is a straight path
But if they turn away, then say, "I have delivered to you the messages with which I was sent, and my Lord will bring along another people to take your place, whereas you will in no way harm Him. My lord watches over all things
When Our judgment came to pass, by Our grace We saved Hud and his fellow believers. We saved them from severe suffering [in the life to come] as well
That was [the end of 'Ad, [who] rejected their Lord's messages, and rebelled against His Messengers, and followed the command of every arrogant enemy of the truth
They were rejected in this world, and so will they be on the Day of Resurrection. 'Ad denied their Lord. So away with 'Ad, the people of Hud
To [the tribe of] Thamud [We sent] their brother Salih. He said, "My people, worship God [alone]. You have no God other than Him. He created you out of the earth and made you inhabit it. Ask Him to forgive your sins, and turn towards Him in repentance. My Lord is near, and ready to answer [whoever calls to Him]
They answered, "Salih, We used to have such great hopes in you. Would you forbid us to worship what our forefathers worshipped? We are in grave doubt, amounting to suspicion, about what you are asking us to do
He retorted, "My people, just think, if I am taking my stand based on clear evidence from my Lord, and if He had given me mercy of His own, who could protect me from God if I disobeyed Him? You would only make my loss greater
My people, this camel belongs to God; it will be a sign for you. Leave it to pasture on God's land and do her no harm, or you will soon be punished
However, they cruelly slaughtered her. [Salih] said, "You will enjoy life in your homes for only three [more] days; this is a judgment which will not prove false
When Our command was fulfilled, We saved Salih and those who shared his faith as a mercy from us, and [We saved them] from the disgrace of [Our rejection on] that Day [of Resurrection]. Your Lord alone is powerful, almighty
The blast [of God's punishment] overtook the evildoers, and they lay lifeless in their homes and on the ground
as though they had never lived there. Thamud denied their Lord, so away with Thamud
To Abraham, Our [heavenly] Messengers brought good news. They said, "Peace," and he answered, "[And upon you be] peace." Without delay he placed a roasted calf before them
When he saw that their hands did not reach out towards it, he found this strange and became apprehensive of them. They said, "Do not fear. We are sent against the people of Lot
His wife, standing [nearby], laughed [with happiness]. We gave her the good news of [the birth of] Isaac, and, after Isaac, of [Isaac's son] Jacob
She said, "Alas for me. How am I to bear a child when I am now an old woman, and this husband of mine is an old man? That would be an astonishing thing
[The Messengers] said, "Are you astonished at God's command? May the mercy of God and His blessing be upon you, people of this house. For He is worthy of all praise and Glory
When the fear left Abraham and the good news had been conveyed to him, he began to plead with Us for Lot's people
Abraham was forbearing, tender-hearted, and devout
[God's Messengers replied,] "Abraham, stop this [pleading]. Your Lord's judgment has already passed. Punishment is coming to them, which cannot be turned back
When Our Messengers came to Lot, he was sad for [his people], seeing that it was beyond his power to protect them, and he said, "This is a truly terrible day
His people came running to him; they were accustomed to committing foul deeds. [Lot] said, "My people, take my daughters instead. They are purer for you [than men]. Fear God, and do not disgrace me with my guests. Is there not a single right-minded man among you
They answered, "You have always known that we have no right to your daughters. You know very well what we want
[Lot] exclaimed, "If only I had the strength to defeat you or could rely on mightier support
[The angels] said, "Lot, we are Messengers from your Lord. [Your enemies] will never reach you. Leave with your household in the dead of night, and do not look back. [Take all of your family with you] with the exception of your wife. The fate which will befall [the people of Sodom] will befall her [as well]. Their appointed time is the morning. Is not the morning near
When Our judgment came about, We turned those [sinful towns] upside down and rained down on them stones of hard clay, layer after layer, [which were]
designated by your Lord [to punish sinners]. [Such punishment] is never far from the unjust
To [the people of] Midian [We sent] their brother Shu'ayb. He said, "My people, worship God [alone]. You have no God other than Him. Do not give [false] measure or weight [in your dealings with people]. I see that you are prospering, but I fear for your suffering on a day that will encompass you [with doom]
Hence, my people, [always] give full measure and weight, with equity, and do not deprive people of what is rightfully theirs, and do not act wickedly on earth by spreading corruption
What rests with God is best for you, if you are believers. I am not your keeper
They said, "Shu'ayb, does your prayer really command you that we give up what our forefathers worshipped or to refrain from doing with our wealth whatever we please? You certainly sound like the perfect tolerant and right-minded man
He answered, "My people, what if I am acting on clear evidence from my Lord, and He Himself has given me good provision? I have no desire to differ from you concerning what I have forbidden you. I want no more than to set things right as much as I can. I cannot succeed without God's help. I have placed my trust in Him, and I always turn to Him
My people, do not let [your] disagreement with me drive you into sin and bring upon you a fate similar to that of the people of Noah or Hud or Salih, and [remember that] the people of Lot did not live very far from you
Ask your Lord to forgive your sins, and then turn towards Him in repentance. My Lord is the Mercy-Giver and Most-Loving
[His people] said, "Shu'ayb, We cannot understand much of what you say. In fact, we find you weak [and poorly connected] among us, and, were it not for your clan, we would have stoned you to death, considering that you have no status among us
He said, "My people, do you hold my clan in greater esteem than God, that you turned your backs on Him? My Lord is fully aware of all that you do
Hence, do what you think is best, and I will do what I think is best. In time you will certainly know who will receive a punishment to disgrace him, and who is a liar. Watch [for what is coming]. I will watch with you
When Our judgment came to pass, by Our mercy We saved Shu'ayb and those who shared his faith, while the blast [of Our punishment] overtook those who had done wrong, and they lay lifeless in their homes
as though they had never lived there. Away with [the people of] Midian, as was done away with [the people of] Thamud
We sent Moses with Our messages and clear authority
to Pharaoh and his inner circle, but they followed Pharaoh's orders, and Pharaoh's orders were misguided
On the Day of Resurrection, he will go before his people, having led them towards the fire. Miserable is the destination to which they are led
They were pursued by [God's] rejection in this [world], and [will be overtaken by it] on the Day of Resurrection. What a rotten gift to be given
These are parts of the accounts of those [ancient] communities that We are relating to you; some still remain, and some are [extinct, like] a field mown down
We did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. When your Lord's judgment was ordained, those deities of theirs, which they called on instead of God, proved to be of no use to them and only increased their ruin
Such is the punishment of your Lord when He decides to punish a community for their transgression. His punishment is painful and severe
In that is a sign for anyone who fears the suffering [which may befall them] in the Hereafter. That is the Day on which people will be gathered together-that is a Day to be witnessed
[and] which We will not delay beyond a specified period
When that Day comes, not a soul will speak except by His permission. Some will be miserable, and some will be blessed
As for those who will have brought misery upon themselves, [they will live] in the fire, moaning and groaning
where they will remain as long as the heavens and the earth endure, unless your Lord wills otherwise. Your Lord is the doer of what He wills
As for those who will be blessed, [they will live] in Heaven, to stay as long as the heavens and the earth endure, unless your Lord wills otherwise-an uninterrupted blessing
[Prophet], have no doubt about what these [misguided people] worship. They worship as their forefathers worshipped before them, and We will certainly give them their full share [for whatever good or evil they have earned], with no reduction
We gave Moses the Book before you, but they were in dispute about it. Were it not for a prior decree from your Lord, it would have been settled between them. Still they had suspicious doubts about it [the Torah]
Your Lord will give everyone their full due for whatever [good or evil] they may have done. He is aware of everything they do
Remain steadfast, as you have been commanded [by God], together with all those along with you who have turned to Him. Do not let anyone overstep the limits, because He sees all that you do
Do not incline towards those who do evil, lest the fire touch you. You will [then] have no one to protect you from God, nor will you be helped
Be constant in prayer at the beginning and end of the day, as well as during parts of the night. Good deeds drive away evil deeds. This is a reminder to the mindful
Be patient in hard times. God does not fail to repay those who do good
If only-among the generations before your time-there had been people with good sense to speak out against corruption on earth, [as did] the few of them whom We saved. [Instead,] the unjust only pursued pleasures that corrupted their entire beings, and that led them to sin
Your Lord would never destroy towns unjustly so long as their people behaved righteously [towards one another]
Had your Lord willed, He could have made all of human beings one single community, but [He willed it otherwise, and so] they continue to have divergent views
except those on whom your Lord has mercy. To this end He created them. The word of your Lord will be fulfilled: "I will definitely fill Hell with both jinn and humans
So, [Prophet], We have relayed the accounts of the [earlier] messengers to you in order to make your heart firm. The Truth comes to you through these accounts, as well as lessons and reminders for the believers
Say to those who will not believe, "Do anything that is within your power, while we labor [in God's way]
and wait [for what is coming]. We are waiting too
God alone comprehends the hidden reality of the heavens and the earth. Everything that exists goes back to Him, so worship Him and place your trust in Him alone. Your Lord is never unaware of what you [people] are doing
Alif Lam Ra, these are the verses of the Book that is awe-inspiringly clear
We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur'an, so that you might understand it
We tell you the best of stories in what We have revealed to you of this Qur'an, seeing that you were among those who were unaware
Joseph said to his father, "Father, I saw [in a dream] eleven stars, as well as the sun and the moon. I saw them bow before me
[Jacob] replied, "My son, do not tell your brothers your dream, or they may plot to harm you [out of envy]. Satan is man's open enemy
And thus Your Lord will choose you, and will teach you to interpret some events, and will perfect His grace on you and on the House of Jacob, just as He perfected it earlier upon your forefathers Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is All-Knowing, All-Wise
In [the story of] Joseph and his brothers, there are messages for all who search [for the truth]
[Joseph's brothers] said [to one another], "Joseph and his brother [Benjamin] are dearer to our father than we are, even though we are so many. Our father is clearly wrong
[One of them said],"Kill Joseph or drive him away to some [faraway] land, so that your father's attention will be free to turn to you. After this is done, you will be [free to repent and to live once again as] righteous people
Another of them said, "Do not kill Joseph. If you must do something, throw him into the dark depths of this well, where some caravan may pick him up
[They agreed on this course, and] they spoke [to Jacob], "Father, why don't you trust us with Joseph, seeing as we wish him well
Let him go out with us tomorrow, so that he may play and enjoy himself, and We will protect him well
[Jacob] said, "The thought of you taking him away with you worries me. I am afraid a wolf may eat him at a moment when you are not paying attention
They said, "If the wolf were to devour him when there are so many of us, we would be the real losers
When they went away with him and decided to throw him into the dark depths of a well, We inspired him, saying, "One day, you will remind them of their deed at a time when they will least expect it
At nightfall they returned to their father, weeping
[and] said, "Father, we were racing with one another, and left Joseph behind with our things, and a wolf devoured him. [We know that] you will not believe us even though we are telling the truth
and they produced his shirt deceptively stained with blood. [Jacob] exclaimed, "Rather your souls have enticed you to something. But patience is beautiful and it is to God [alone] that I pray for strength to cope with what you are saying to me
A caravan came, and they sent someone to draw water. He sent down his bucket into the well, [and, when he saw Joseph] he said, "Good news, there is a boy." They hid him with the intention of selling him, but God had full knowledge of everything that they were doing
They sold him for a small price-a few pieces of silver-so little did they value him
The man from Egypt who bought him said to his wife, "Look after him well. He may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." In this way We gave Joseph a firm place on earth, and [We did this] so that We could teach him the inner meaning of things. God always prevails in His purpose, but most people do not know this
When he reached full manhood, We gave him the ability to judge [between right and wrong], as well as knowledge; thus We reward those who do good
The woman in whose house he was living tried to seduce him; she bolted the doors and said, "Come to me." [Joseph] answered, "God forbid! My master has been good to me. No good can come of [such a] wrong
She desired him, and he desired her [and he would have succumbed] had he not seen evidence of his Lord's truth. We did this in order to keep evil and indecency away from him. He was truly one of Our chosen worshipers
They both rushed to the door, and she tore his shirt from behind, and, at the door, they met her husband. She said, "What, other than prison or painful punishment, should be the reward of someone who tried to dishonor your wife
[Joseph] said, "It was she who tried to seduce me." A member of her household suggested that, "If his shirt has been torn from the front, then she is telling the truth and he is a liar
but if his shirt has been torn from behind, then she is lying and he is telling the truth
When [her husband] saw that his shirt was torn from behind, he said, "This is another instance of women's treachery. Your treachery is truly great
Joseph, overlook this. While you, [wife,] ask forgiveness for your sin-you are greatly at fault
Some women of the town said [to one another], "The governor's wife is trying to seduce her slave. Her love for him consumes her. We see that she is clearly lost
When she heard about their gossip, she sent for them, and prepared a banquet for them, and handed each of them a knife. She said [to Joseph], "Come out before them." When the women saw him, they were awestruck [by his beauty] and [so flustered that] they cut their hands [with their knives], saying, "God save us. This is not a mortal man. He must be a precious angel
She said, "Here is the one you blamed me for. I sought to seduce him, but he firmly refused. Now, if he does not do what I order, he will be put in prison and will be humiliated
He said, "Lord, prison is more desirable to me than what these women are inviting me to do. If you do not protect me from their treachery, I might yield to their allure and so become one of the ignorant
His Lord responded to his prayer and protected him from their treachery. He alone is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
It occurred to the governor and his household after they had seen all the signs [of Joseph's innocence] that they should imprison him for a while
Two young men happened to go to prison at the same time as Joseph. One of them said, "I saw myself [in a dream] pressing wine." The other said, "I saw myself [in a dream] carrying bread on my head, and birds were eating it." (They said to Joseph,] "Tell us the real meaning of this. We see that you are a knowledgeable man
[Joseph] answered, "I will inform you of the interpreted meaning of your dreams before your meal arrives, for this is [part] of the knowledge which my Lord has taught me. I have left behind the way of people who do not believe in God and who persistently deny the truth of the life to come
and I follow the faith of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. It is not conceivable that we should ascribe divinity [to anything] beside God. Such is God's grace to us and all humanity, but most people are ungrateful
Fellow prisoners, which is more reasonable: [belief in the existence of numerous divine] lords that are different from one another, or [in] the One God, who holds absolute power over all that exists
All that you worship instead of God is nothing but [empty] names which you and your forefathers have invented, names for which God has sent down no authority. Judgment [as to what is right and what is wrong] rests with God alone, [and] He has ordered that you worship none but Him. This is the true faith, though most People do not realize it
Fellow prisoners, [I will tell you the meaning of your dreams.] One of you will serve his master with wine to drink, but the other will be crucified, and birds will eat off of his head. [Whatever your future holds,] the matter on which you asked my opinion has been decided [by God]
[Joseph] said to the one he knew would be saved, "Mention me to your master [when you are free]," but Satan caused him to forget to mention [Joseph] to his master, and so he remained in prison for a few [more] years
[One day] the King said, "I saw [in a dream] seven fat cows being devoured by seven [that were] lean; and seven green spikes [of grain] and [seven] others that were dry. Noblemen, enlighten me about [the meaning of] my dream if you are able to interpret dreams." They answered
These are confusing dreams, and we have no deep knowledge of dream interpretation
The prisoner who had been saved [suddenly] remembered [Joseph] after all that time, and said, "I can inform you of the real meaning of this [dream], so send me forth
[He went to see Joseph in prison and said to him], "Truthful Joseph. Enlighten us about [the meaning of a dream in which] seven fat cows were being devoured by seven [that were] lean, and seven green spikes [of grain] and [seven] others that were dry, so that I may return [with your explanation] to the people [who sent me, and] inform them
[Joseph] replied, "You will sow for seven years as usual, but let all [the grain] that you harvest remain [untouched] in its spikes, except for a little that you may eat
For, after that [period of seven good years], there will be seven years of hardship, which will consume all but a little of what you stored up for them
After that will come a year in which the people will have abundant rain and will press grapes
[As soon as Joseph's interpretation was conveyed to him,] the King said, "Bring him before me." When the [King's] messenger came to him, [Joseph] said, "Go back to your master and ask him [first to find out the truth] about those women who cut their hands-my Lord knows all about their treachery
[The King sent for the women, and, when they came,] he asked, "What was it that you hoped to achieve when you tried to seduce Joseph?" The women answered, "God save us. We know nothing bad of him." The wife of Joseph's former master said, "Now the truth is out. It was I who tried to seduce him. He is an honest man
[When Joseph learned what had happened, he said, "I asked for] this so that [my former master] can know that I did not betray him behind his back. God does not guide the mischief of the treacherous
I am not trying to absolve myself. Man's soul incites him to evil unless my Lord shows mercy. My Lord is much-forgiving, a Dispenser of Grace
The King said, "Bring him to me. I will have him serve me personally." When he had spoken with him, [the King] said, "[From] now on you will have our trust and favor
[Joseph] replied, "Put me in charge of the nation's store-houses. I will be a knowledgeable keeper
We established Joseph securely in that land to live wherever he wished. We grant Our grace upon whomever We will, and We do not fail to reward those who do good
In the eyes of those who believe and have always been mindful of Us, a reward in the life to come is a far greater good [than any reward in this world]
[After some years], Joseph's brothers came [to Egypt] and presented themselves before him, and he knew them [at once], but they did not recognize him
When he had provided them with their provisions, he said, "[When you come here next,] bring me the brother of yours from your father's side. Have you not seen me giving generous measure and being the best of hosts
If you do not bring him to me, you will never again receive a single measure [of grain] from me, nor will you [be allowed to] come near me
They answered, "We will try to persuade his father to part with him, and We will do [our best]
[Joseph] said to his servants, "Place their merchandise in their camel-packs, so that they may recognize them when they go back to their family, and be eager to return
When they returned to their father, [Joseph's brothers] said, "Father, all grain will be withheld from us [in the future unless we bring Benjamin with us]. Send our brother with us, so that we may be given another measure. We will guard him carefully
[Jacob] replied, "Will I trust you with him in the same way I trusted you with his brother [Joseph] before? No, but God's guardianship is better [than yours]. He is the Most Merciful to those who show mercy
When they opened their packs, they discovered that their merchandise had been returned to them, [and] they said, "Father, what more could we desire? Here is our merchandise; it has been returned to us. [If you send Benjamin with us,] We will [again] be able to bring food for our family, and will guard our brother [well], and receive an additional camel-load of grain-an extra measure so easily achieved
[Jacob] said, "I will not send him with you until you give me a solemn pledge, before God, that you will bring him back to me, unless you are overwhelmed [by enemies]." When they gave him their solemn pledge, [Jacob] said, "God is witness to everything we say
He added, "My sons, do not enter [the town] through one gate, but enter through different gates. I cannot help you against the will of God. Judgment [as to what is to happen] rests with none but God. I have placed my trust in Him. Everyone who has trust [in His existence] must place their trust in Him alone." (:] Although they entered [the town] in the way their father had told them, it did not help them against the will of God, it merely satisfied a wish of Jacob's [to protect them]. He knew well what We had taught him, though most people do not
When [the sons of Jacob] presented themselves before Joseph, he drew his brother [Benjamin] to himself, saying [to him in secret], "I am your brother, so do not be saddened by their past actions
[Later,] when he had provided them with their provisions, he placed the [king's] drinking-cup in his brother's camel-pack. As [they were leaving the town,] a watchman called out, "People of the caravan, you are thieves
Turning towards the man and his companions, [the brothers] asked, "What are you missing
They answered, "We are missing the king's cup, and he who produces it will receive a camel-load [of grain as a reward]. I [Joseph]
pledge myself to this [promise]
[The brothers] said, "By God, you must know that we have not come to commit corrupt deeds in this land, and that we have not been stealing
[The Egyptians] said, "What will be the penalty for this [deed] if you are [proved to be] liars
[The brothers] replied, "The penalty will be [the enslavement of] the person in whose bag the cup is found: this is how we punish wrongdoers
[They were brought before Joseph to be searched, and] he began with the bags of his half-brothers before the bag of his brother [Benjamin]. In the end he produced the drinking cup from his brother's bag. In this way We schemed on Joseph's behalf-if God had not so willed, he could not have detained his brother as a penalty under the king's law. We raise the rank of whomever We will, but, above everyone who is endowed with knowledge, there is One who knows everything
[As soon as the cup was produced from Benjamin's bag, the brothers] said, "If he is a thief, then his brother was a thief before him." Joseph said to himself, without revealing his thought to them, "You are far worse in this respect, and God is fully aware of what you are saying
They said, "Mighty governor, he has a father who is a very old man. Therefore, detain one of us instead. We can see that you are a very good man
[Joseph] answered, "May God preserve us from [the sin of] detaining anyone other than the person on whom we found our property; that would be unjust of us
When they lost all hope of [persuading] him, they withdrew to take counsel [among themselves]. The eldest of them said, "Do not you remember that your father took a solemn pledge from you before God, and how before that you failed with regards to Joseph? I will not depart from this land until my father gives me leave, or God passes judgment in my favor. He is the best of all judges
[As for you others,] return to your father and say, "Father, your son has stolen [the king's cup]. We can tell you only what we saw. How could we guard against the unforeseen
Ask in the town we were in [at the time], and the people of the caravan that we travelled with, and [you will find that] we are telling the truth
[When they returned to their father and told him what had happened], he said, "No, your souls have enticed you to such a [terrible] thing. [As for me], patience in hard times is most godly. Perhaps God will bring them all [back] to me. He alone is All-Knowing, All-Wise
He turned away from them and said, "Alas for Joseph," and his eyes clouded over with grief, and he was filled with sorrow
[His sons] said, "By God. You will never stop remembering Joseph until you are totally broken, or are dead
He answered, "It is only to God that I complain of my deep grief and sorrow. I know from God something that you do not know
My sons, go and try to obtain some news of Joseph and his brother, and do not lose hope of God's mercy. Only the unbelievers lose hope of God's life-giving mercy
[The sons of Jacob went back to Egypt and to Joseph], and, when they presented themselves before him, they said, "Mighty governor, hardship has afflicted us and our family, and we have brought only a little merchandise, but give us full measure [of grain] and be charitable to us. God rewards those who give in charity
He replied, "Do you remember what you did to Joseph and his brother when you were still ignorant
They said, "Could it be that you are Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this is my brother. God has been gracious to us. If one is mindful of Him and patient in hard times, God does not allow the reward of those who do good to be lost
[The brothers] said, "By God. God has certainly raised you above us, and we were sinners
He said, "No blame will be uttered today against you. May God forgive you for your sins. He is the Most Merciful of those who are merciful
[Now] take this shirt of mine and lay it over my father's face, and he will recover his sight. Then come [back] to me with all of your family
As soon as the caravan [with which Jacob's sons were travelling] was on its way, their father said [to the people around him], "You may think I am senile, but I can smell Joseph
They answered, "By God, you are still lost in that old illusion of yours
But when the bearer of good news came [with Joseph's shirt], he laid it over his face, and he regained his sight, and said, "Did I not tell you, 'I know, from God, something that you do not know
[His sons] answered, "Father, ask God to forgive us our sins. We were sinners
He said, "I will ask my Lord to forgive you. He alone is truly forgiving, a true Purveyor of Mercy
When they [arrived in Egypt and] presented themselves before Joseph, he drew his parent to him, saying, "Enter Egypt. If God wills, you will be secure
He raised his parents to the highest place of honor, and they [all] fell down before him, bowing. [Joseph] said, "My father, this is the real meaning of my dream long ago, which my Lord has made come true. He was good to me when He freed me from the prison, and [when] He brought you [all to me] from the desert after Satan sowed discord between me and my brothers. My Lord is most subtle in achieving whatever He wills. He alone is All-Knowing, All-Wise
My Lord, you have given me power, and have imparted to me some knowledge about the interpretation of dreams. Originator of the heavens and the earth, You are my protector in this world and in the life to come. Let me die as one who has surrendered himself to You, and allow me to join the righteous
[Prophet], We now reveal to you this account of something that was beyond your knowledge. You were not with Joseph's brothers when they decided what they were going to do and schemed [against him]
However eager you may be, most people will not believe [in this revelation]
although you do not ask them for any reward for [reciting] it. It is [God's] reminder to all people
How many signs are there in the heavens and on earth which they pass by and on which they turn their backs
Most of them do not even believe in God without associating others with Him
Do they have assurances that the all-enveloping punishment of God's will evade them, or that the Last Hour will not come upon them suddenly, when they least expect it
[Prophet], Say, "This is my way: I and all who follow me call [people] to God based on the clear insight. May God be exalted in His glory! I am not one of those who associate others with Him
[Even] before your time, We never sent [as Our Messengers] anyone except [mortal] men, whom We inspired, [and whom We always chose] from among the people of the [very] communities [to whom the message was to be brought]. Have the [unbelievers] not travelled through the land and seen the end of those who went before them? Those who are mindful of God prefer the life to come. Do you [people] not use your reason
[All the earlier messengers had to suffer persecution for a long time,] but, at last, when those messengers had lost all hope and saw themselves branded as liars, Our help came to them. We saved whomever We pleased, but Our punishment will not be turned away from those who force others to reject God's messages
In the stories of these men, there is a lesson for those who understand. [As for this Qur'an], it could not possibly be a discourse invented [by the Prophet]. No, it is a confirmation of what is available to him from prior revelations, clearly spelling out everything, and [offering] guidance and mercy to people who will believe
Alif Lam Meem Ra, these are the verses of the Book, and what has been sent down to you from your Lord is the Truth, yet most people will not believe
It is God Who has raised the heavens without any visible supports and then He settled on the Throne of His majesty. He has made the sun and the moon subservient [to His laws], each ordained by Him to run its course for an appointed time. He governs everything that exists. He clearly explains these messages, so that you can be sure that you are destined to meet your Lord [on Judgment Day]
He has spread the earth wide, placed firm mountains and running waters on it, and created two of every kind of fruit , [and He] causes the night to cover the day. Surely there are messages in all of this for people to contemplate
There are, on earth, neighboring plots, gardens of vineyards, crops, date palm trees sharing the same root or alone. They are all watered with the same water, yet We make some better tasting than others. Surely there are messages in all of this for people who use their reason
And if you are astonished [at God's creation], then it is [equally] astonishing to hear them [doubters] say, "Once we are dust, will we [really] be created anew?" These are the ones who have denied the truth about their Lord, and who will have shackles around their necks, and are in the fire, where they will reside eternally
They [the unbelievers] challenge you [Prophet], to hasten evil [in preference to] good, even though [they should know that] examples of punishments have [readily] occurred before. Your Lord is full of forgiveness for people in spite of their wrongdoing; nonetheless, your Lord is [also] severe in retribution
And the unbelievers say, "Why has a sign not been sent down to him from his Lord?" You [Prophet] are there only to give warning, and for every people there has been a guide
God knows what every female bears and what the wombs carry for a shorter or a longer term. And everything with Him has a due measure
[He is] Knower of all that is beyond human's perception, as well as all that can be witnessed by humans, the Grand, the Exalted
It is the same [to Him] whether one among you will conceal [his] speech or speak openly, and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuous [among others] by day
Each [person] has [angels arrayed] before and behind him to protect him by God's command. God does not change the condition of a people unless they change what is in themselves. And when God intends ill for a people, there is no avoiding it. Apart from Him, they have no protector
It is He Who shows you lightning, [causing] fear and hope, and [Who] generates the heavy clouds
The thunder glorifies and praises Him-as do the angels-in awe of Him. He sends thunderbolts and with them strikes whom He wills. Yet, they stubbornly argue about God, while He alone has the power to do whatever He wills
True prayer is to Him alone, and those who call upon anyone besides Him receive no response. [They are] like one who stretches his hands toward water hoping for it to reach his mouth, but it will not reach him. And the prayers of the unbelievers are simply lost
Everything in heaven and on earth submits to God, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings
Say, "Who is Lord of the heavens and earth?" Say, "God." Say, "Why do you then take protectors besides Him, who can neither benefit nor harm even themselves?" Say, "Are the blind the same as those who see? Or is ignorance equivalent to enlightenment?" Or, do they assign to God partners who have created a creation like His, so that the two creations appear similar to them? Say, "God is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the All-Compelling
He sends rain down from the sky and watercourses flow according to their capacity, and the torrent carries rising foam-like the foam that appears when people melt metal with fire to make ornaments or utensils. Thus God depicts Truth and falsehood. As for the foam, it vanishes, [being] cast off, but that which benefits human beings remains behind. In this way God presents analogies
Those who respond to their Lord will [have] the best [reward], but those who do not respond to Him-[even] if they had all that is in the earth, and as much again-would give it to ransom themselves. They have terribly miscalculated; Hell will be their dwelling, a most evil place
Can the one who knows that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the Truth be like one who is blind? Only people who are endowed with insight will keep this in mind
Those who fulfill their commitment to God and do not break the covenant
and those who join what God has ordered to be joined, and are in awe of their Lord, and fear a dire Reckoning
and those who are patient, seeking the pleasure of their Lord, and establish prayer, and spend [both] secretly and publicly from what We have provided for them, and prevent evil with good-these will have the best reward, the Ultimate [Heavenly] Home
the Gardens of Eden. Which they will enter with whoever was righteous among their forefathers, their spouses, and their descendants. The angels will go to them from every gate, [saying]
Peace be upon you for what you patiently endured. How excellent is your Ultimate Home
But those who break the covenant of God after agreeing to it, and sever that which God has ordered to be joined, and spread corruption on earth-for them is the curse, and they will have the Worst Home [in Hell]
God extends or restricts sustenance to whom He wills. They rejoice in the life of this world, but it is simply a passing pleasure compared to the Hereafter
And the unbelievers say, "Why has a sign not been sent down to him from his Lord?" Say, "God lets go astray him who wills as He guides to Himself whoever turns [to Him]
Those who have believed and whose hearts are assured by the remembrance of God. Truly, hearts find peace only in the remembrance of God
Those who have believed and done righteous deeds-joy and a blessed [final] return will await them
Thus, We have sent you [Prophet] into a community that rejects the Merciful-to-all, to recite to them what We have revealed to you, [as we have sent other prophets] before to other communities who have come and gone Say, "He [The Merciful] is my Lord; there is no God except Him. I put my trust in Him, and to Him I will return
Even if there were a Qur'an which moved mountains or shattered the earth or the dead made to speak [they would not believe]. In fact God alone decides about all matters. Do the believers not know that, had God willed, He would have guided all human beings? As for the unbelievers-calamity will not cease to strike them for what they have done, nor [cease] to descend near their home[s], until the promise of God is fulfilled. God does not fail to keep His promise
Messengers before you were ridiculed. I gave the unbelievers a little more time, and then I seized them. How terrible was My punishment
Is He who cares for every soul, according to what It deserves, [like any other?] And yet, they still associate partners to Him. Say, "Name them. Do you presume to tell Him something that He does not already know about the earth, or is this an empty display of words?" Rather, the unbelievers' ploy has been made to seem attractive to them, and so they have been diverted from the right path. Whomever God allows to stray, there will be no guide for him
For them will be punishment in the life of [this] world, but the punishment of the Hereafter is more severe. And they will not have any protector from God
The likeness of Paradise, which the righteous have been promised: rivers flow through it, [and its] fruit and shade are everlasting. Such is the reward for the righteous, and the reward for the unbelievers is the Fire
Those to whom We gave the Book rejoice at what has been sent down to you, but some of the opposing factions deny part of it. Say, "I have been commanded to worship God alone and not to associate anything with Him. To Him I invite others, and to Him I shall return
And thus We have revealed it as an Arabic code of law. And if you should follow [your people's] whims and desires after knowledge has come to you, you would not have any ally or any protector from God
We have already sent messengers before you and assigned to them wives and descendants. No messenger came with a sign except by permission of God. For every time period there has been a [suitable] revelation
God eliminates or confirms [His earlier revelations] [as] He wills, and with Him is the source of all revelation
And whether We show you part of what We promise them [those who reject God] or cause you to die [before that time], your only responsibility is to deliver the message. Ours is [to deliver] the reckoning
Have they not seen how We deal with the earth, eroding it at its extremities? God decides; no one can modify His decision. He is swift in calling to account
And those [who lived] before them [your people who reject God] schemed [against God's Messengers], but the ultimate scheme belongs to God. He knows what every soul earns, and the unbelievers will soon know to whom the future belongs
And those who have denied the truth say, "You are not a messenger." Say, "God is a sufficient Witness between you and me, and so is anyone else who has knowledge of the Book
Alif Lam Ra, a Book which We have sent down to you in order that you might, with your Lord's permission, bring people out of dark ignorance into enlightenment, onto the path that leads to the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
God, to Whom all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth belongs. And woe to the unbelievers, for a severe punishment
awaits those who love the life of this world, preferring it to the life to come. They turn others away from the path of God and make it seem irrelevant. These people have gone far astray
Every messenger whom We have sent used his own people's language, so that he might make [the Truth] clear to them, but God lets whoever wants to stray, go astray, and guides whoever wants [to be guided]. He alone is almighty, and The Wise
We sent Moses with Our messages: "Lead your people out of dark ignorance into enlightenment, and remind them of the Days of God." In this there are messages for all who are patient and grateful
Moses said to his people, "Remember the grace which God gave you when He saved you from Pharaoh's people who afflicted you with cruel suffering, and slaughtered your sons, and spared [only] your women, which was a severe test from your Lord
[Remember the time] when your Lord promised, "If you are grateful, I will certainly give you more and more, but if you are ungrateful, My punishment will definitely be severe
Moses added, "[Even] if you, and whoever else lives on earth, [ever] deny the truth, God is rich beyond need, worthy of all praise
Have you not heard of the stories of those who lived before you, the people of Noah, and of [the tribes of] Aad and Thamud, and of those who came after them, known only to God? A messenger came to them with all the evidence of the truth, but they covered their mouths with their hands and said, "We refuse to believe in the message with which you [claim to] have been entrusted, and we deeply suspect [the substance of] your call to us
Their messengers answered, "Can there be any doubt about God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? It is He who calls you, so that He may forgive you some of your sins and lets you enjoy your life until the appointed time." They said, "You are only mortal men like us. You want to turn us away from what our forefathers worshipped, well, then, bring us clear proof [that you are God's Messengers]
Their messengers answered, "True, we are nothing but mortal men like you, but God favors whoever of His worshipers He chooses. It is not within our power to bring you proof, unless God permits it [so] let the believers place all of their trust in God
How could we not place our trust in God, when it is He who has shown us our ways [to enlightenment]. "We will be steadfast however much you harm us, for those who trust must place their trust in God
The unbelievers said to their messengers, 'We will expel you from our land unless you return to our ways. But their Lord revealed to His Messengers, "We will destroy the unjust
and We will let you dwell on earth [long] after they have passed away. This is [My promise] to all who are in awe of My presence, and stand in awe of My warning
They prayed [to God for help] and each stubborn enemy of the truth failed
with Hell awaiting him. [There] he will be made to drink the water of most bitter distress
gulping it, little by little, but hardly able to swallow it. Death will creep in on him from every side, but he will not die, for more severe suffering lies ahead of him
The example of those who insist on denying their Lord is that all their works are like ashes which blow about in a fierce wind on a stormy day: they have no power over anything they have gained. This is the farthest one can go astray
Are not you aware that God has created the heavens and the earth in accordance with Truth? He can, if He so wills, do away with you and bring forth a new creation
That is not difficult for God
All [people] will appear before God [on the Day of Judgment]; the weak will say to those who had gloried in their arrogance, "We were your followers. Can you protect us from any of God's punishment? " They will say "If God had guided us, we would have guided you. It makes no difference now whether we rage or endure with patience: there is no escape for us
And when everything had been decided, Satan will say: "God promised you the Truth. I also made promises to you, but I deceived you. I had no power at all over you, but I called you, and you responded to me. Hence, do not blame me, blame yourselves. I cannot be called to your aid, nor can you come to mine. I have [always] rejected the way you associated me with God." A grave suffering awaits all the unjust
Those who believe and have done righteous deeds will be brought into Gardens through which running waters flow, where they will remain forever with their Lord's permission, and will be welcomed with the greeting, "Peace
Do you not see how God likens a good word to a good tree, firmly rooted, [reaching out] with its branches towards heaven
yielding its fruit at all times by its Lord's permission? God gives such examples for people, so that they may reflect on them
While the metaphor of a corrupt word is that of a rotten tree, uprooted from the face of the earth, unable to stand
God gives steadfastness to those who believe through the unshakable word, both here and in the Hereafter. But He lets the unjust go astray: for God does whatever He wills
Do you not see those who, in exchange for God's favor, offer only ingratitude and make their people end up in the home of ruin
Hell, where they will roast? What an evil place to be in
They claimed that there are powers that could rival God, and so they strayed from His path. Say, "Enjoy yourselves, for your destination is the Fire
Tell My worshipers who believe that they should perform the prayer and give secretly and openly, out of what We provide for them as sustenance. There will come a Day when there will be no bargaining, and no friendship
It is God Who has created the heavens and the earth, and Who sends down water from the sky and brings forth fruit for your sustenance. He has made the ships useful to you, so that you may sail though the sea at His command and has made the rivers useful to you
He has made the sun and the moon-- both of them constant in their courses-- useful to you and has made the night and the day useful to you
He has given you some of everything for which you asked Him for. If you tried to count God's blessings, you could never do it. Human beings are most persistent in wrongdoing and in their rejection of the truth
Recall that Abraham said, "My Lord, make this land secure, and keep me and my children from ever worshipping idols
because, my Lord, they have led my people astray. Hence, anyone who follows me is with me, but, for anyone who disobeys me, You are surely forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Lord I have settled some of my children in an uncultivated valley, close to Your Sacred Sanctuary so that, oh our Lord, they might devote themselves to prayer. Make some people's hearts drawn towards them, and provide them with sustenance, so that they may be grateful
Our Lord, You truly know all that we may hide [in our hearts], as well as all that we bring into the open: for nothing, on earth or in heaven, remains hidden from God
All praise is due to God, who has granted me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age. My Lord hears all prayer
Lord, grant that I may perform prayer, and so may my children. "Lord accept my supplication
Grant Your forgiveness to me, and my parents, and all the believers, on the Day of Reckoning
Do not think [Prophet] that God is unaware of what the unjust do; He only gives them respite until the Day when eyes will stare in horror
They run around confusedly, with their heads up, unable to look away, their hearts a gaping void
Warn people of the Day when this suffering may befall them, and when the unjust will say, "Our Lord, grant us respite for a little more time, so that we might respond to Your call and follow the Messengers." [God will say,] "Did you not swear in the past that your power would have no end
You have lived in the same places as those who wronged themselves, and it had become clear to you how We dealt with them and We gave you many examples
They planned their schemes, but God was aware of their scheming, even when their schemes were such as to make mountains vanish
Do not ever think that God will fail to fulfill His promise to His Messengers. God is Almighty, Exactor of Revenge
[It will be fulfilled] on the Day when the earth is changed to other than the earth, and the heavens too, and they all appear before God, the One, the All-Conquering
For on that Day, you will see all those who force others to reject God's messages linked together in chains
clothed in garments of tar, with fire veiling their faces
[All will be judged on that Day], so that God may reward every soul for what it earned: God is swift in His reckoning
This is a message to all people, so that they will be warned, and so they will know that He is One God. Let those of understanding be reminded
Alif Lam Ra, these are the signs of the Book and a clear Qur'an
Perhaps those who have rejected the truth will wish to submit themselves to God
Let them eat and enjoy themselves and be preoccupied with [false] hope, for they will [one day] know
We have never destroyed a town unless it had a known decree
No nation can speed up [the end of] its time, nor defer it
And [yet], they [who deny the truth] say, "You, to whom the message has been sent down, you are crazy
If you are honest, why do you not bring us angels
We do not send down the angels except in Truth and, [if We did so now, those who deny the truth) would have no reprieve
It is We who sent down this Reminder and We will preserve it
We sent [messengers] before you, to earlier communities
And every time a messenger came they mocked him
In that way, We insert discord into the hearts of those who force others to reject Our messages
They will not believe. This was what happened with those earlier people
And [even] if We had opened a gate to the sky for them, and they had continued to ascend though it
they would have said, "Our eyesight has only been befuddled," or, "We are under a spell
We have placed constellations in the sky and have beautified it for the observers
And We have secured it from every cursed satanic force
Except for anyone who tries to eavesdrop [to learn the unknown]-he is pursued by a clear flame
As for the earth - We have spread it wide and set firm mountains on it, and caused everything to grow in a well-balanced way
And We put sustenance in it for both you and all creatures for which you don't provide
We have the storehouse of everything that exists, and We send it down only in a known measure
We send the winds to fertilize, and we bring water from the sky for you to drink; but it is not you who control its sources
It is We who give life and cause death, and it is We alone who will inherit all
We know very well those of you who have gone ahead and those who are still to come
and, behold, it is your Lord who will gather them all together [on Judgment Day]. Truly, He is the All-Wise and the All-Knowing
We have created man out of dried clay, formed from dark mud
and, before that, we had created jinn from a scorching firestorm
And when Your Lord said to the angels: "Behold, I am about to create mortal man out of dried clay, formed from dark mud
and when I have fully formed him and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down and prostrate [yourselves] before him
Then the angels prostrated themselves, all of them
except Iblis. He refused to bow down with the others
God said, "Iblis! What prevents you from being among those who have prostrated themselves
[Iblis] replied, "I will not bow down before a mortal man whom You have created out of dried clay, formed from dark mud
God said, "Be gone! You are expelled from Our grace
and you will be cursed until the Day of Reckoning
Iblis said, "Then, my Lord, grant me relief until the Day when all will be raised again
God answered: "You will be granted relief
until the Day of the appointed time
[Whereupon Iblis] said, "Oh, my Lord! Since You led me on to this, I will make [all that is evil] on earth appear good to people, and will most certainly entice them into sin
all except the sincere among your worshipers
God said: "[Devotion] is a straight path to Me
Truly, you will have no power over My worshipers except for the misled who follow you
and Hell is the promised meeting place for all of you
There will be seven gates leading into Hell, each gate receiving its allotted share
Truly, those who are ever mindful of God will be amid Gardens and springs
Enter it in peace, [safe and] secure
And We will remove whatever resentment may have been [lingering] in their hearts, brethren resting on couches facing one another
no weariness will ever touch them there, and they will never be made to leave
Tell My worshipers that I am the Forgiving, the Mercy Giver
and that my punishment is truly painful
And tell them all [once again] about Abraham's guests
When they entered his presence and greeted him with "Peace", he answered, "We are afraid of you
They said: "Fear not! We bring you the good news of [the birth of] a son who will be endowed with profound knowledge
Abraham said: "Do you give me this good news despite the fact that I am overwhelmed with old age? What kind of good news is this
They answered: "We have given you the good news of Truth so do not be among those who despair
[He exclaimed]: "And who - other than those who have utterly lost their way -could ever abandon the hope of his Lord's grace
He added: "And, heavenly messengers, what [else] might you have in mind
They answered: "We are sent to a people who already cut all relations to God and rejected his messages
except for Lot's household. All of them will be saved
except for Lot's wife, [God] has ordained that she should be among those who stay behind
And when the Messengers [of God] came to the house of Lot
he said: "Who are you? I do not know you people
They said, "We have come to you with what they have always rejected but wondered whether it will happen to them
and we bring you certainty [of its fulfillment], for we speak the Truth
Go, then with your family while it is still night, follow behind them yourself; and do not permit anyone to look back, but go where you are told to go
And We revealed unto him the decree: "The very last of those [sinners] will be wiped out by the morning
The people of the town came [to Lot] hoping to have fun [with the strangers]
[Lot] said, "These are my guests. Do not bring shame on me
but fear God and do not disgrace me
They answered, "Have we not forbidden you [to offer protection] to any kind of people
[Lot] said, "Take my daughters instead, if you must
Do not pay attention to them [the messengers said], they are stumbling around in their wild intoxication
The blast [of Our punishment] overtook them around sunrise
and We turned the town upside down, and rained down upon them stones of baked clay
Truly, there are messages in this for those who discern
[the town] is still there standing by a road that still exists
Truly, there is a sign in this for all who believe
And the woods-dwellers were also unjust
and so We inflicted Our retribution on them. Both of these [sinful communities] were on a highway, [still) plain to see
And the people of Al-Hijr, likewise rejected our messengers
We gave them our signs, but they turned their backs to them
They carved dwellings in the mountains, thinking themselves secure
The blast [of Our punishment] overtook them early in the morning
and all [the power] that they had acquired was of no use to them
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without [an inner] truth; the Hour [when this will become clear to all] is yet to come. Hence, forgive [men's failings] gracefully
Truly, your Lord is the All-Knowing Creator of all things
And We have given you seven of the oft-repeated [verses], and this glorious Qur'an
[so] don't turn your eyes [longingly] towards what we have given some of them to enjoy. And neither grieve over those [who are rejecting your message], but spread your wings [of modesty and tenderness] over the believers
and say, "I am the clear Warner
Just as We have sent down warnings for the conspiring separatists
who reduced the Qur'an into fragments believing in some and rejecting others
By your Lord! We will call them to account, one and all
for whatever they have done
Hence, proclaim openly all that you have been told [to say], and leave the idolaters alone
Truly, We are sufficient for you against all who mock this revelation
who associate another deity with God, for in time they will know
And We know that your heart is distressed by the things they say
but celebrate your Lord's limitless glory, praise Him, and be among those who prostrate themselves [before Him] in worship
and worship your Lord until you die
God's judgment is coming; do not try to hurry it. May He be exalted in His Glory! He is far above anything they associate with Him
He sends down the angels with the Spirit that is of His command, on any of His worshipers, He may will, [saying] "Warn all [humanity] that there is no deity other than Me. Therefore, be mindful of me
He has created heaven and earth in Truth. He is magnificently exalted above anything they associate with Him
He created the human being out of a fertilized ovum, and suddenly he is an open adversary
And he creates livestock for you to provide warmth and other benefits and to eat
There is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home in the evenings and release them to pasture in the mornings
And they carry your cargoes to places that you would be unable to reach without great difficulties. Truly, your Lord is very compassionate, a purveyor of mercy
And he creates horses, mules and donkeys for you to ride and as adornment. And He will continue to create what you do not know
It rests with God alone to show you the right path. However, many will deviate from it. Had he so willed it, he would have guided you all
It is He who sends the rains from the skies; some you drink, and from it [grows] the shrubs on which you feed your cattle
And he causes your crops to grow: olive trees, date-palm, grapes, and all other types of fruit. In that there is a message for people who think
He has made the night and the day subservient to you and the sun, the moon and the stars subject to his laws. There are messages in that for people who comprehend
And all the beautiful colors that He has made for you on earth- in that, there is a message for people who consider
And it is He who made the sea of benefit to you, so that you may eat from it fresh and tender meat and obtain ornaments which you may wear. You see ships cleaving through it, so that you may search for His abundant provision and so you may be grateful
And He has placed solid mountains on the earth, so that it does not shift with you, and rivers and pathways, so that you can find your way
as well as other landmarks-- for it is by the stars that men are able to find their way
So, then, is He who creates like one who does not create? Will you not, then, consider
If you should ever try to count God's blessings, you could not count them, for God is truly forgiving and a purveyor of mercy
And God knows all that you keep secret and all that you declare
Now, those they call on beside God cannot create anything, since they themselves are created
They are in fact dead, not living, and they do not [even] know when they will be resurrected
Your God is the One God, but, because of their arrogance, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter refuse to admit this [truth]
Truly God knows all they conceal and all they declare. He does not love the arrogant
And whenever [the arrogant] are asked, "What has your Lord sent down?" They say, "Ancient legends
So, on the Day of Resurrection they will carry the full weight of their own burdens as well as some of the burdens of those ignorant whom they have misled. How heavy will be the weight of their burden
Those who lived before them also schemed and God destroyed their structure from its foundation and the roof fell on top of them. Suffering came at them suddenly from an unexpected source
On the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and say, "Where are those associates, for whose sake you denied Me and became so hostile? Those given knowledge will say, "Truly, disgrace and desolation have come today on the unbelievers
those who are wronging themselves while the angels gather them in death!" Then, the schemers will offer peace: "We did not do anything wrong!" [But they will hear an answer] "Yes you did, because God knows well what you were doing
Now enter the gates of Hell to remain there forever! How evil, will be the abode of the arrogant
Those who are mindful of God were asked, "What has your Lord sent down?" They say, "Absolute goodness!" There is good in this word for those who do good, and the next world is even better. How wonderful is the abode of those who are ever mindful of God
They will enter Gardens of Eden. Running waters flow and there they will have all things they wish. This is how God will reward those who are mindful of Him
Those who are gathered in death by the angels, being good, will be greeted with "Peace be upon you! Enter paradise by virtue of what you have done
Are the [unbelievers] expecting that the angels will appear or that God's judgment will be manifested? Those who lived before them behaved in the same way. God did not wrong them. They wronged themselves
They were struck by the consequences of the evil they had done, and they were overtaken by the very thing they used to ridicule
Now the very ones who associate deities with God say, "Had God willed it so, we would have worshipped Him alone, and we would never have declared anything as forbidden unless he had commanded us to do so". This is just what those who lived before them did. Are the messengers required to do more than deliver the message clearly
We sent a messenger to every nation, saying: "Worship God, and shun the powers of evil!" Some of them were guided by God, but others deserved to be misguided. Travel around the world and see what happened eventually to those who denied the truth
However eager you are for them to be guided, God does not confer his guidance on any whom He judges to have gone astray, and they will have none to help them
And so they swear by God, vowing most solemnly, "God will never raise the dead to life again!" But He will, for it is a binding promise that He will fulfill, but most people do not know
[On that day] He will make clear to them the things they differed about and the unbelievers will know that they were lying
Whenever We will anything to be, we simply say, "Be!" and it is
As for those who emigrated for God's sake after being persecuted, We will bless them with good fortune in this world, but their life in the Hereafter will be even greater still, if they only knew
They who, have been patient in hard times and placed their trust in their Lord
Even before your time [Prophet] we sent only men who were inspired, and if you [those in doubt] have not yet realized this, ask the followers of earlier revelation
[They brought] clear signs of the truth and books of divine wisdom. And we brought down to you this Reminder, so that you may clarify to people all that has been brought down to them that they may reflect on it
Do those who conceive evil plans feel secure that God will not cause the earth to swallow them, or that suffering will not overtake them from whence they least expect it
Or that He will not take them suddenly while they are coming and going-they being unable to escape him
or that He will not take them gradually? Your Sustainer is most Merciful-to-all, a purveyor of mercy
Have they not, then, ever considered the things that God has created-how even their shadows turn right or left, prostrating themselves before God, being absolutely submissive to His will
For all that is in the heavens and on earth prostrates itself before God- every beast, and the angels- without any arrogance
They fear their Lord above them and do whatever they are commanded to do
And God said, Do not worship two deities. There is only One god, so it is Me that you shall revere
They show their ingratitude for all that We have done for them! So, go ahead, enjoy your brief life, but eventually you will come to know [the Truth]
They assign a share in what We have two deities. There is only One God, so it is Me that you shall revere
And to Him belongs all that is in heaven and on earth, and to Him alone be obedient, it is His right. Why, then, will you heed anyone but God
For all good things come to you from God and whenever harm comes upon you, you cry to Him for help
but as soon as He has relieved you of your hardship, somegiven them for the [idols] about which they know nothing. By God, you will be asked about your lies
They also ascribe daughters to God-- May He be exalted in His glory--and they chose for themselves whatever they desire
Whenever one of them is given the good news of a daughter's birth, his face darkens and he fills with bottled-up anger
Ashamed, he avoids people because of the supposed bad news he has received, [and he debates with himself] should he keep her despite the disgrace [which he feels] or should he bury her in the ground? How dreadful is their judgment
Those who do not believe in the Hereafter set the worst example, whereas God sets the highest example, for He alone is Almighty and Wise
Now if God were to judge men immediately for all the evil they do on earth, He would not leave a single living creature alive. However, He gives them relief until a time appointed by Him, but when the end of their time approaches, they can neither delay it by a single second, nor can they hasten it
They attribute to God what they dislike, and [all the while] their tongues utter the lie that they deserve the best. Truly, they deserve the Fire where they will be abandoned
By God, We sent messengers unto [various] nations before your time, but Satan made their own deeds look good to them, so he is their master now as before and painful punishment awaits them
We sent down the Book to you, only to make clear to them the things about which they differ, and as guidance and mercy to people who will believe
And it is God who sends down water giving life to the earth, even after it has been lifeless. In this is a sign to those who will listen
And there is a lesson for you in the grazing cattle: We give you drink from what is in their bellies -between dung and their blood- pure milk, pleasant to those who drink it
And from the fruits of the palm trees and grapevines you obtain intoxicant as well as good provision. In this, too, there is a sign for people who think
[And consider how] your Lord has so inspired the bee [saying]: "Prepare for yourself dwellings in mountains and in trees, and in what people may build
then eat all kinds of fruit, and follow humbly the paths ordained for you by your Lord." From there within these bees emerges a drink, of many colors, a healing food for man. In all this is a sign for people who reflect
And God has created you, and in time you will die, and some of you will come to an abject state in old age, ceasing to know anything that you once knew. God is All-knowing, All- Powerful
And God has favored some of you in abundance over others. But those so favored will not share their wealth with those their right hands hold in trust, so [their dependents] will not be their equals. Will they, then, renounce God's blessings
And God has given you wives from among yourselves, and has given you, through your wives, children and grandchildren, and has provided for you all of the good things of life. Will they, then, continue to believe in falsehood and reject God's blessings
And will they worship instead of God something that has no power whatsoever to provide them any sustenance from earth or heaven and can do nothing at all
So, do not propose examples of what God is like! God knows and you do not
God set forth a parable [of two men]: one is a slave, unable to do anything of his own accord, and the other a [free] man to whom We have given ample wealth, so that he can spend at will, both secretly and openly. Can these two be considered equal? All praise is due to God, but most people do not know
And God provides another parable of two [other] men. One of them is mute, unable to do anything by himself, a burden to his caretaker. Whatever task he is directed to do, he accomplishes nothing beneficial. Can such a one be considered equal to one who commands justice [in his community], and is on the straight path
It is God alone who possesses the hidden reality of the heavens and the earth. The matter of the Last Hour will be like the twinkling of an eye, or closer still, for God has the power to will anything
And God brought you out of your mothers' wombs - knowing nothing, and He has endowed you with hearing, and sight, and minds so that you might have cause to be grateful
Have they not seen the birds, enabled by God to fly in mid-air, with none but God holding them aloft? In this there are messages for people who will believe
And God made your homes places to rest and enabled you to make dwellings from cattle hides-light, and easy to carry, whether you travel or camp, and [has supplied you with] furnishings and goods from the animals' rough and soft wool and its hair [to use] for a time
And, from what He has created, God has provided you with protection; [He has given you] shade [from the sun], places of refuge in the mountains, and gave you garments to protect you from the heat, as well as garments to protect you from your brutality towards each other. In this way He perfects His blessings on you, so that you will surrender yourselves to Him
But if you they turn away [Prophet], remember that your only responsibility is to deliver this revelation clearly
They [who turn away] are fully aware of God's grace, but they nevertheless refuse to recognize it because they are used to denying the truth
The Day [of Judgment] will come when We will raise up a witness from every nation. On that day, the unbelievers will not be able to make excuses or to make amends
And when those who were unjust see the suffering that awaits them, they will recognize that the severity of their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be given any relief
And when those who associated other beings with God see those they associated, they will say, "Our Lord these are our associates whom we used to call upon apart from You." But they will throw their words back at them: "You are liars
and on that day they will freely submit to God, and all their idols will forsake them
We will heap punishment upon punishment on all the unbelievers who turned others away from God's path, in return for the corruption they caused
On that day We will raise up from within each nation a witness against them, and We will bring you [Prophet] as a witness against them. We have sent down to you the Book as clarification for all things and as guidance and mercy and good news to all who would surrender themselves to God [Muslims]
God orders justice, good works, and generosity to relatives and He forbids vice, evil, and oppression. He warns you so that you will keep all this in mind
Fulfill the covenant of God whenever you commit to one. Do not break your oaths once they are confirmed, and you [will] have made God your guarantor. God knows all that you do
And do not be like the woman who untwisted the thread she had firmly spun just to unravel it-do not use your oaths as means to deceive one another, because some of you are more powerful than others. God is testing you through all this, and on the Day of Resurrection He will make clear to you those things about which you disagreed
Had God so desired, he could surely have made you all the same nation, but He lets stray those who wish to reject His messages, and He guides rightly those who wish to be guided, and all of you will be called to account for all things you have done
So do not use your oaths as a means of deceiving each other- or else your foot will slide after having been firmly in place, and you will then taste the miserable consequences of your having turned from God's path and incredible suffering will await you
Do not exchange the covenant of God for a small price. What is with God is best for you, if you only knew
All that you currently have will come to an end, but that which God has is eternal. And We will most certainly grant to those who were patient their reward according to the best they ever did
Whoever does good deeds, whether-man or woman-and is a believer, they will live a good life and will surely receive their reward in according with the best they have done
When you recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with God from Satan, the rebel expelled from God's mercy
He has no power over those who believe and who rely on their Lord
He has power only over those who ally themselves with him, and those who because of him associate others with God
And if we replace one revelation with another- and God knows best what he confers [from heaven]- they say, "You made it all up!" Truly, most of them have no understanding
Tell them, "The Holy Spirit has revealed it from your Lord in Truth, so that it might strengthen the believers, providing guidance and good news to all who have surrendered themselves to God [Muslims]
And We certainly know well what they say, "It is only a human being who is telling him what to say." The language of the one they allude to is a foreign one whereas this is in clear and lucid Arabic
Truly, as for those who refuse to believe God's revelations, God does not guide them, and grievous suffering will await them
It is only they who refuse to believe God's revelations, who speak these lies, and it is they who are lying
Whoever denies God after having once believed, [except for anyone who is forced to deny God while his heart remains true to his faith]- he who willingly opens up his heart to disbelief will have the wrath of God upon them and a grievous punishment awaiting them
That is because they favored this worldly life over the Hereafter, and because God will not guide unbelieving people
The ones whose hearts, ears and eyes are sealed by God-it is they who are the heedless
No doubt they will be doomed in the life to come
As for those who migrated after they were persecuted and who then struggled and persevered, to them your Lord is so very forgiving, a purveyor of mercy
On the Day when every soul will come to plead for itself, every soul will be fully rewarded for whatever it has done, and none will be wronged
And God proposes to you this parable: [Imagine, if you will,] a town that was once safe and secure, with its provisions coming to it abundantly from all places. Then it denied God's grace. So God caused it to experience all-encompassing misery-hunger and fear as a result of what they had done
And [imagine] that there had come a messenger from among them, but they denied him; so punishment overwhelmed them as they were unjust to themselves
Then eat of the lawful and good things that God has provided for you. And be grateful for the blessing of God, if it is Him whom you worship
He has only prohibited you from eating carrion, and blood, and the flesh of pigs, and that which has been dedicated to other than God, unless one is compelled to eat it out of necessity, [and then] neither desiring it nor feeding to excess. Truly God is Merciful-to-all, the Mercy Giver
So, do not lie by letting your tongues wag: "This is lawful and this is unlawful," thereby attributing your own lies to God. They who attribute their lies to God will never succeed
A brief enjoyment, but grievous punishment awaits them
We forbade to the Jews all that We have related to you previously. We did nothing wrong to them, but they wronged themselves
Then to those who sin in ignorance and afterwards repent and live righteously, your Lord is Merciful-to-all, a purveyor of mercy
Truly, Abraham was equal to a community in himself; he was devoted to obeying God. He turned from all that is wrong-and he was not among those idolaters
He was grateful for the grace poured out on him by God-God had chosen him and guided him along a straight path
And so We granted him favor in this world: truly, in the life to come he will be among the righteous
And We have given you inspiration, [Prophet]: "Follow the faith of Abraham, who turned from every false thing, and who was not among the idolaters
The Sabbath was made obligatory only on those who differed about it. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding to all matters about which they differed
Call people to the path of your Lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the most courteous way, for your Lord knows best who strays from His path, and knows best who is rightly guided
If you want to retaliate to an attack make your response proportionate. But if you can be patient, it is always better to be patient
[Prophet], be patient: your patience comes only from God. Do not grieve over the unbelievers, nor be distressed by their scheming
for, truly, God stands with those who are mindful of Him and who do good
Glory be to Him who took His servant on a night journey from the Sacred Sanctuary [at Mecca] to the Remote House of Worship [Al-Aqsa Mosque at Jerusalem], whose surroundings we have blessed, so that We could show him some of Our signs--for truly, He is the All-Hearing, the All- Seeing
And We gave the Book to Moses, and We made it guidance for the Children of Israel, [saying] "Trust yourselves to no one but Me
They are descendants from those whom we carried [in the ark] with Noah! He was [one of] Our most grateful worshipers
And we warned to the Children of Israel in the Book, "You will twice corrupt the earth, and you will rise to a great height
When the first promise came true, We sent certain of Our servants against you, who were fierce in battle, and they ravaged your homes. It was a promise fulfilled
And as time went on, We permitted you to prevail again against them, and We helped you with wealth and children, and We made you more numerous
[And we said:] "If you do good, you do it for yourselves, and if you do evil, it will be returned to you." Then, when the final promise came, [We sent your enemies] to sadden your faces and to enter the place of worship, as they entered it the first time, and to destroy completely the structures that were the source of your pride
Your Lord may well show mercy to you; but if you turn back [to sinning], We will turn back [to punishing you]. And [do not forget] We have predestined that Hell will be a prison for all who reject Our promises
Truly, this Qur'an shows the way of righteousness, and it brings good news to the believers who do good works that they will have a wonderful reward
and We have prepared grievous punishment for those who do not believe in the life to come
Human being is as hasty to pray for things that are wrong as he prays for things that are good. The human being is often hasty
We have ordained night and day as two miracles. We have darkened the night and made the day visible, so that you will seek to acquire abundance from your Lord, and so that you may know the number of years and the count of time. We have made everything very clear
We have tied every person's destiny about his neck and, on the Day of Judgment We will bring out a book for him, which he will find spread open in front of him
And it will be said, "Read your book. Today you are a witness against yourself
Whoever chooses to follow the right path, it will be for the good of his soul, and whoever goes astray will [reap] his own hurt, and no bearer of burdens will bear the burdens of another. We would never punish unless we had first sent a messenger
But when We decide to destroy a community, We first give Our final warning to all the decadent in it, but they defiantly disobey. Our sentence is justly carried out, and We then, destroy it utterly
How many generations have We annihilated after Noah's time! Your Lord is sufficiently aware of His worshipers' sins, and all seeing
As for anyone who prefers this momentary life, We readily grant whatever We will to whomever We will. Then We condemn him to the suffering of Hell which he will have to endure, disgraced and disowned
But as for those who desire the life to come, and who endeavor earnestly to obtain it, and [demonstrate] that they truly believe-they are the ones who find favor [with God]
To both those [who are mindful of God in this life] as well as those [who are not] We give some of your Lord's gifts. Your Lord's giving is never restricted
Observe how We give more abundance to some than to others, but [remember that] the life to come will be blessed with higher positions and greater favors
Do not acknowledge any other deity alongside God, lest you [want] to find yourself discredited and abandoned
Your Lord has decreed that you will worship none but Him, and show your parents tender kindness. Should one or both of them reach old age in your care, never say anything that shows impatience with them, never rebuke them, but [always] speak to them respectfully
And spread the wing of mercy in humility over to them, and say, "My Lord! Have your mercy on them, just as they [had mercy on me] when they raised me as a child
Your Lord is fully aware of what is in your hearts. If you seek [to live] righteously, [He will forgive your errors]: He is Merciful-to-all who return to Him over and over
Give what is due to your relatives, and the very poor, and to the traveler, and do not squander your money senselessly
Those who misuse [their wealth] are [following] Satan in the same way that Satan proved to be ungrateful to his Sustainer
But if you [must] turn away from the needy, while awaiting a blessing that you are hoping for from your Lord, at least speak kindly [to those in need]
Do not be either tightfisted or extend yourself to the point that you cannot even provide for yourself, so that you sit there blamed and impoverished
Your Lord blesses abundantly, or gives in limited portion unto whomever He wills and is able. He is fully mindful of the needs of his creatures-seeing them all
Do not kill your children out of fear of poverty. We will provide for them and you. Killing them is truly a great sin
And do not go anywhere near adultery, because it is a disgrace and immoral
And do not kill the soul which God has forbidden-unless in the pursuit of justice. If anyone has been killed unjustly, We have given legal recourse to his heir [to claim justice]; but, even then, he should not be excessive in taking life. For he is helped [by God's law]
And do not approach an orphan's property before he reaches maturity, except with the best possible way. And be true to all you have committed to do, for truly [on the Day of Judgment], you will have to answer for every promise that you have made
And whenever you measure, use accurate measurements and weigh with a level balance; this will be better and would be fairer
And do not pursue matters about which you do not know anything: your hearing, sight and heart- all will be accounted for [on the Day of Judgment]
Do not walk arrogantly about the earth; because, truthfully, you cannot tear up the earth or make yourself as tall as mountains
All of this is evil and detested in your Lord's sight
This is part of the wisdom your Lord has revealed to you. So, do not equate any other deity with God, unless [you desire] to be thrown into Hell, self-condemned [by your actions] and rejected [by God]
Has your Lord chosen you to have sons, while He takes daughters from among the angels? What a grave thing for you to say
We have made things clear in this Qur'an, so [that] those [who deny the truth] might take it to heart, but it is only making them more distant from the truth
Say, "If there had been, as they say, other gods with Him, certainly they would have sought a way to the Lord of the Throne
May He be exalted in His glory, far above what they say in greatness and sublimity
The seven heavens and the earth, and everyone in them declare His glory. There is nothing which does not glorify Him with praise, but you humans fail to understand the manner of their glorification. He is All-Forbearing, Most-Forgiving
And so it is [that] whenever you recite the Qur'an, We place an invisible veil between you and those who do not believe in the life Hereafter
for We have veiled their hearts to prevent them from understanding the meaning, and We have made their ears deaf. So, whenever you mention your Lord alone while you are reciting the Qur'an, they turn away in disdain
We know best why they listen when they listen to you, for when they are in private these unjust people say [to one another]: "You follow only a man bewitched
See how they refer to you? They have strayed and cannot find the way
And they say, "After we are but bones and dust, can we be resurrected to a new creation
Tell them: "Even if You have turned to stone or iron
or any created thing, which, in your minds, is more difficult, [it is still possible]. They will say, "Who will bring us back again?" Say: "He who brought you forth the first time." And [if] they shake their heads in disbelief, and ask you, "When will this happen?" Say, "It might be soon
It will be the day when He calls you, and you respond by praising Him and think you have been there only a short time
Tell my worshipers to say always that which is best: truly, Satan is always ready to stir trouble among them-Satan is clearly man's enemy
Your Lord knows you best. If He wills, He will give you mercy; and if He wills, He will punish you. And We have not sent you [Prophet] to be their protector
your Lord knows best whoever is in the heavens and on earth. We favored some of the prophets over others, and, to David, We gave the Book of Psalms
Say, "Call on those whom you claim to be deities beside Him. They do not have any power to remove or to avert any harm from you
Those to whom they pray are themselves seeking a way to approach their Lord- striving to be nearest, hoping for His mercy, and fearing His punishment for your Lord's punishment is certainly something to be concerned about
We will destroy or chastise with severe suffering any community [if it proves sinful] before the Day of Resurrection. All of this is written in the Book
Nothing has prevented Us from sending down signs, except that people in the past denied them. We gave the [community of] Thamud the she-camel as a visible sign, and they sinned against it. We sent signs as a means of warning
We have already told you [Muhammad] that your Lord knows all about human beings. The vision that We showed you-as well as the cursed tree in this Qur'an-are only a trial and temptation for men. We put Our fear in them but this only increases their tyranny
And we said to the angels, "Prostrate yourselves to Adam!" They all prostrated themselves except Iblis, who said, "Will I prostrate myself to one whom you have created from mud
He then added, "Do You see this one that You have honored over me? If You will allow me time until the Day of Resurrection, I will unquestionably lead his descendants -all but a few-by the nose to obey me
God said, "Go! But as for those who will follow you, Hell will be the repayment for you all, a repayment in full
Stir up those you can with your voice. Rally all your horses and men against them, and share with them their worldly treasures and children. Make all kinds of promises to them, for they will not know that which Satan promises is only an illusion
Know that you will have no power over my worshipers; Your Lord suffices as their guardian
Your Lord is He who causes ships to move across the sea for you, so that you are able to seek His blessings. Truly He is the Mercy Giver to you
And whenever you are in danger on the sea, all those you call upon vanish-except Him . But as soon as He brings you safely to shore, you turn away-for surely man is ungrateful
Can you, then, ever feel secure that He will not cause a tract of dry land to swallow you, or release the deadly winds of a storm upon you, from which you will find no one to protect you
Or can you even conceive of being certain that He will not make you go back to sea, and then release a raging hurricane upon you that will drown you for your lack of faith? You will find no one who will support you
We have honored the children of Adam, and carried them over land and sea, and provided sustenance for them out of life's good things, and favored them to a far greater extent than most of Our creation
On that day We will call all human beings to judgment with their book of deeds. Those who are given their book in their right hand will read their book and will not be wronged not even by so much as a hair's breadth
For whoever [refuses to see, and so] is blind in this world, will also be blind in the life to come, and still farther away from the [straight] path
[Prophet] they almost succeeded in tempting you to stray from [the Truth] that We have revealed to you, and to declare something else in Our name. In that case, they would have made you their friend
Had We not kept you steadfast, you would have almost begun to lean a little towards them
Had this happened, We would have made you doubly punished in life and doubly punished after death. You would have found no one to support you against Us
And they stirred you up enough and almost succeeded in driving you away from the land, but had they succeeded, they would have remained only briefly after you were gone
Nothing has changed. It was this way with the messengers We sent before you. You will find no changes in Our ways
Establish prayer from the time the sun declines until the darkening of the night, and also [remember] the [Qur'an) recitation at dawn. The dawn recitation is certainly witnessed [by Us]
Pray during the night, an extra voluntary prayer, as it may well be that your Lord will elevate you to a praiseworthy status
Say, "My Lord, Cause me to enter [in all I do] with truth, and cause me to finish with truth, and grant me strength out of Your sustaining grace
And say, "The Truth has come, and falsehood has vanished, for, falsehood is bound to vanish
We send down from the Qur'an what is a healing and mercy to the believers. And it only increases the unjust in their loss
for, when We bless a human being, he turns away, and arrogantly distances himself; and when he encounters calamity he despairs
Say, "Each one acts in a manner reflecting his own character. Your Lord is fully aware as to who is guided to the best path
And they will ask you about the spirit. Say, "The spirit is within my Lord's domain, and you have been given but little knowledge
And if We so desired, We could easily take away whatever We have revealed to you, and in that [case] you would not find anyone to plead your case with us
other than mercy from your Lord, His favor towards you is huge
Say, "If all people and all Jinn would band together with the intent of generating the likes of this Qur'an, they, would never be able to come out with anything like it, even if they backed each other up
We have mentioned in this Qur'an every kind of example to benefit people. However, most of the people persist in rejecting the truth
And so they say, "We will not believe you [Prophet] until you cause a spring to gush up from the earth
or, unless you have a garden of dates and grapes and cause rivers to pour through it abundantly
Or, until the skies fall down upon us-crushing us, as you have threatened to do. Or [until] you bring God and the angels face to face before us
or, to have a house of gold or you go to heaven-but we would not even believe in your ascension unless you return with a book that we can read! "Say, "May my Lord be exalted in His glory, am I other than a man appointed as a messenger
Yet nothing has prevented people from believing whenever guidance was sent to them, except for their saying, " Has God sent a mere mortal man as His Messenger
Say, "If angels walked the earth feeling at home, We would have then sent down an angel from heaven as Our Messenger
Say, "God is sufficient witness between you and me; truly, he is fully aware of His worshipers and He sees all
Whoever God guides is truly guided, but for those whom God allows to stray you will not find any protection for them apart from Him. We will gather them on the Day of Resurrection, flat on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf, with Hell as their [ultimate] dwelling; Whenever the fire subsides, We will increase it for them
This will be their reward for having rejected Our signs and for having said, "After We will have become bones and dust, will we, be raised up then as a new creation
Don't they see that God, Who created the heavens and the earth, has the power to create another just like them, and to assign a fixed term for them of which there is no doubt?" But the unjust refuse to accept anything except to reject the truth
Say, "If you were to possess the vast storehouses of my Lord's mercy, you would still hold on to them, fearing they run out. Man has always been tightfisted
We gave Moses nine self-evident signs. So, ask the Children of Israel [to tell you what happened] when Moses came to them [appealing to Pharaoh on their behalf) , and Pharaoh responded to him, "Truly, Moses, I think you are engaged in witchcraft
And [Moses] answered: "You know very well that no one but the Lord of heavens and earth can produce such miracles, as evidence so that you may see. So, Pharaoh, [since you have chosen rather to reject what you see], I know you are utterly lost
And then Pharaoh wanted to wipe [the Children of Israel] from the face of the earth, and We subsequently caused Pharaoh and all who joined him to drown
And after that, We told the Children of Israel, "Dwell safely on earth, but always [remember that] when the promise of the Last Day is due, We will bring you forth as [a part of] a diverse multitude
We sent down the Qur'an with the Truth and with Truth it has come down. We only sent you [Prophet] to bring good news and to give a warning
with a Qur'an which We have revealed gradually, so that you may read it to the people slowly, with reflection. We have sent it down with the actual words of God in the format that He chose
Say, "Believe it or do not believe it." When it is recited to those who have been given knowledge before, they fall down on their faces in prostration
saying, 'May our Lord be exalted in His glory! Truly, our Lord has fulfilled His promise
and they fall down, weeping. It [the Qur'an] fills them with humility
Say, "Call on God; or call on the Merciful-to-all. By whichever name you call upon [Him], the most beautiful names are His! And pray, not screaming or whispering, but in a moderate voice
and say, "All praise be to God, who has had no son and who has no partner in His kingdom, and who needs no protector from disgrace!" And proclaim His immeasurable greatness
[All] praise is [due] to God, who has sent down the Book to His servant and allowed no crookedness in it
but unerringly straight, to warn of severe punishment from Him and to give good news to the believers who do righteous deeds, that they will have excellent reward
where they will remain forever
And to warn those who say, "God has taken a son
They have no knowledge of this, nor had their forefathers. The word that comes out of their mouths is grievous; they say nothing but a lie
Then perhaps you are going to worry yourself to death chasing after them, if they do not believe in this message
We have adorned the earth with attractive things so that We may test people [as to) who will do best
but We will [later] reduce all of it into a wasteland
Or did you think that the fellows of the cave and [their devotion to] the scriptures were among our amazing signs
The young men retreated to a cave and said, "Our Lord, grant us Your mercy and help us see our way clear out of this ordeal
So, We sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years
Then We awakened them to know which of the two groups was better able to calculate the time they had stayed there
We now relate to you their story in Truth. They were young people who believed in their Lord, and We deepened their understanding
We emboldened them when they stood up [to their people] and said, "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. Never will we invoke any deity other than Him, for that would be a deplorable thing to do
Our people have taken gods besides Him. Why, can they not produce any clear evidence for their beliefs? Who, then, could be more unjust than someone who makes up lies about God
Now that you have withdrawn from them and that which they worship instead of God, take refuge in that cave. Your Lord will spread out His mercy for you and will help you find the best way out of your predicament
And [had you been present], you would have seen the sun, when it rose, veering away from their cave towards the right, and, when it set, passing away from them to the left, while they lay within an opening of that cave. This is one of God's signs. He whom God guides is the rightly guided, but he whom God leaves to stray, you will not find for him a guiding protector
And you would have thought that they were awake, whereas they were really asleep. And We turned them to the right side and to the left side, while their dog stretched his forelegs at the entrance. If you had looked at them, you would have turned and run away and been very afraid of them
In time We awakened them, so they may ask one another. One of them said: "How long have you remained here?" They said, "We have been here a day or part of a day." They said, "Your Lord knows best how long You have been here. So send one of you with this silver coin of yours to the town and let him find the best food, and bring some back to you, but let him be cautious. And let no one be aware of you
If they come to know, about you, they will stone you or force you to return to their religion. And then you would never succeed, ever
It is in this way that we caused them to be found, so that people would know that the promise of God is true and that there is no doubt about the Hour [of Resurrection]. As they were arguing among themselves about them, some said, "Build a structure over them. Their Lord knows best about them." But those who prevailed in the matter said: "We will build a place of worship over them
Some will say there were three [sleepers], the fourth one being their dog; while others will say there were five, the sixth one being their dog - Just guessing at the unknown. Still others will say there were seven, and the eighth one was their dog. Say, "My Lord knows their number best. Very few know [the truth] about them, so do not argue about them except in relation to what is clearly known, and do not seek the opinion of any of these people about them
Never say of anything, "I will do that tomorrow
without adding, "God willing." And whenever you forget, remember your Lord and say, "I pray that my Lord will guide me closer to what is right
And they remained in their cave for three hundred years plus an additional nine
Say, "God knows best how long they remained. All that is beyond our senses, in the heavens and on the earth belongs to Him. How perfectly He sees, and how perfectly He Hears! They have no protector besides Him, and He does not share His rule with anyone
Recite what has been revealed to you from your Lord's Book. No one can change His words, and you will never find any refuge except with Him
And patiently stay with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking His approval. And let not your eyes turn away from them, desiring worldly attractions. Do not obey anyone whose heart We have made oblivious of Our remembrance, who follows his own whims and desires, and who abandons all that is good
And say, "The Truth is from your Lord. Whoever wills - let him believe; and whoever wills - let him deny the truth." We have prepared a fire for the unjust whose walls will surround them. And if they call for relief, they will be relieved with water like molten brass, which scalds their faces. Terrible is that drink, and evil is that resting place
As for those who have believed and done righteous deeds - We do not let the reward - of anyone who does a good deed go to waste
They will have Gardens of Eden; beneath them rivers will flow. They will be adorned with bracelets of gold, and will wear green garments of fine silk and brocade, and recline on couches. What an excellent reward, and what a wonderful resting place
And present to them the parable of two men. To one of them, We gave two gardens of grapevines, and surrounded them with palm trees, and placed fields of crops between them
Each of the two gardens produced its fruit and did not fall short in anything. And We made a gushing river flow right through them
And he had plenty of fruit, so he said to his neighbor while conversing with him, "I am greater than you in wealth and mightier in [numbers of] men
He entered his garden and did himself harm by saying: "I do not think that this will ever perish
And neither do I think that the Hour will come. But even if I should be brought back to my Lord, I will surely get something better in return
His neighbor said to him in the course of the conversation: "Have you no faith in Him who created you from dust, and then from a fertilized ovum and then shaped you into a man
As for me, He is my Lord, and I don't associate anyone with my Lord
if only, you had said, when you entered your garden, 'It is all God's will; there is no power except in God'? Although you see me possessing less than you in wealth and children
it may well be that my Lord will give me something better than your garden and send down on it thunderbolts from the sky so that it becomes a heap of barren dust
or its water sinks deep into the ground, so that you will never be able to attain it
And [thus it happened]: his fruitful garden was surrounded [by ruin], and there he was, wringing his hands in grief over what he had spent on it, while it had collapsed upon its trellises. He said, "Oh, I wish I had not associated anyone with my Lord
for now there was no one other than God to help him, nor could he help himself
Thus it is, all protection there belongs to God, the Truth. He gives the best reward and the best outcome
Cite for them the parable of the life of this world, it is like water that We send down from the sky and is absorbed by the plants of the earth. But in time it becomes dry chaff, scattered by the winds. And it is God who has absolute power over all things
Wealth and children are adornments of this worldly life, but the enduring good deeds produce a greater reward from your Lord and a better hope
On the Day We will set the mountains in motion, and you see the earth emerging, and We will gather them all, leaving not a single one behind
They will be lined up before your Lord, [and He will say] "You have come to Us just as We created you in the first instance. Even though you claimed that We will not make such an appointment for you
And the Book [of deeds] will be laid [open], and you will see those who forced others to reject God's messages filled with dread at what is in it, and they will say, "Alas for us! What a record is this! It leaves out no deeds, small or great, but accounts for it!" They will find everything they ever did present [before them]. Your Lord will not be unjust to anyone
And [mention] when We told the angels, "Prostrate yourselves before Adam," and they all prostrated themselves, except for Iblis. He was of the jinn, but he disobeyed his Lord's command. Do you [seriously consider] choosing him and his descendants as allies instead of Me, when they are your enemies? How despicable a bargain this is for the unjust
I did not make them witness to the creation of the heavens and earth, nor to their own creation, and neither do I have any need to take those who lead others astray as my helpers
And [warn of] the Day when He will say, "Call 'My partners' whom you claimed," and they [the unjust] will call on them, but they [the partners] will not respond to them, for we shall place an unbridgeable divide between them
And those who forced others to reject Our messages will see the Fire, and they will know that they are bound to fall into it, and they will not find any escape from it
We have mentioned in this Qur'an all kind of examples for the benefit of people, but, more than anything else, man is argumentative
Now that guidance has come to them, What could it be that is preventing people from believing or from asking their Lord for forgiveness, other than that the fate of earlier generations has not yet befallen them, or the punishment has not yet come upon them
We sent Our message-bearers only to bring good news and to give warning, yet the unbelievers seek to refute the Truth with false arguments and mock My signs and warnings
And who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his Lord's messages but turns away from them, forgetting what he has done? We have placed veils over their hearts, lest they understand, and deafness in their ears. If you ask them to be guided, they will never be guided
Yet your Lord is the Most-Forgiving and full of mercy. Were He to take them to task for what they deserved, He would have hastened their punishment. Rather, they have an appointed time from which they will never find an escape
as [was the case with] those communities that We destroyed when they did wrong: We made an appointed time for their destruction
Recall when Moses said to his servant, "I will not give up until I reach the junction of the two seas, even if I must press on for years
But when they reached the junction where the two seas meet, they forgot their fish, which made its way into the sea and swam away
So when they had moved on, [Moses] said to his servant, "Bring us our lunch. We have certainly suffered hardship on this journey
He [the servant] said, "Remember when we rested by the rock? I forgot the fish there. And it was Satan who made me forget to pay attention to it. And amazingly, it found its way into the sea
[Moses] said, "That is what we were seeking." So they returned, following their own footprints
There, they found one of Our servants, whom We had blessed with mercy from Us, and unto whom We had imparted knowledge of our Own
Moses said to him, "May I follow you, so that you will teach me some of the right guidance You have been taught
He said, "You will not be able to wait patiently with me
for how can you have patience for what you do not understand
[Moses] said, "You will find me, God willing, patient, and I will not disobey you in [any] way
He said, "Then if you follow me, do not ask me about anything until I mention it to you
So they set out, until, when they had embarked on the ship, the man made a hole in it. [Moses] said "Did you knock a hole in it to drown its passengers? You have certainly done a dreadful thing
The man said, "Didn't I tell you that you would not be able to wait patiently with me
[Moses] said, "Forgive me for forgetting, and don't be too harsh with me
So they set out, until they met a boy, whom the man killed. [Moses] said, "You killed an innocent soul who never killed anyone. You have certainly done a deplorable thing
The man said, "Didn't I tell you that you would not be able to wait patiently with me
[Moses] said, "If I should ask you about anything after this, then you should no longer let me accompany you. You have a good excuse not to put up with me
So they set out, until they reached the inhabitants of a town and they asked them for food, but they refused to entertain them as guests. Then they found a wall about to collapse, so the man restored it. [Moses] said, "If you wished, you could have been paid for [fixing] it
He said, "This is where you and I will part company. I will tell you the interpretation of what you could not wait for patiently
As for the ship, it belonged to poor people working at sea. I damaged it because there was a king after them who seized every [good] ship by force
And as for the boy, his parents were believers, and we had reasons to fear that he would cause them extreme distress by transgression and unbelief
So, we wished that their Lord would give them a son better in purity and closer to mercy
As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys [living] in town, and there was a treasure beneath it belonging to them. Their father was a righteous man. So your Lord intended that they reach maturity and then to unearth their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. And I did not do [any of this] of my own accord. This is the interpretation of what you were not able to wait for patiently
And they ask you, about the Zul-Qarnayn [Two-Horned One]. Say: "I will tell you something about him
We gave him power and authority on earth, and We gave him a way to achieve anything
So he chose a way
until, when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it [as if] setting in a dark, muddy spring, and nearby he found some people. We said, "O Zul-Qarnayn, either cause [them] to suffer or treat them with kindness
He said, "We will punish the unjust. Then he will return to his Lord, and He will punish him with unspeakable suffering
But as for the one who believes and does righteousness, he will have the best of rewards. We shall require him to do only easy things
Then he followed a path
until he came to the rising of the sun. He found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no shade
And so it was, Our knowledge encompassed all that happened to him
Then he followed a path
until he reached a pass between two mountains, where he found a people who could hardly understand a word he was saying
They said, "O Zul-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog are corrupting this land. Can we pay you to erect a barrier between us and them
He said, "What my Lord has given me is better [than any compensation]. Just give me a strong helping hand and I will build a solid barrier between you and them
Bring me chunks of iron." When he had filled in [the gap] between the two mountain-sides, he said, "Blow!" When he had made [the iron] as red hot as fire, he said, "Bring me molten copper to pour over it
So [Gog and Magog] were able neither to scale the barrier, nor were they able to pierce it
He said, "This is a mercy from my Lord; but when the promise of my Lord comes, He will crush it [the barrier]. The promise of my Lord is surely true
And on that Day We will let them surge like waves over each other, and [then] the Horn will be blown, and We will gather them all together
On that Day We shall display Hell plainly to the unbelievers
those whose eyes had been veiled from My message, and who could not hear it
Do those who have denied the truth think that they can take My servants as protectors instead of Me? We have prepared Hell for the unbelievers as their lodging place
Say, "Shall we tell you who are the most failing in whatever they do
They are those whose efforts are lost in worldly pursuits, while they think that they are doing good work
Those are the ones who deny the signs of their Lord and deny that they will meet Him. Their actions will come to nothing and on the Day of Resurrection they will be of no consequence
Hell is their recompense for having denied the truth, and ridiculed My signs and My Messengers
Those who have believed and done righteous deeds will have Paradise for their lodging
where they will abide eternally, never wishing to leave
Say, "If the sea were ink for [writing] the words of my Lord, the sea would run out long before the words of my Lord ran out, even if We were to add another sea to it
Say, "I am only a man like you, to whom has been revealed that your god is one God. So, whoever looks forward with hope to meet his Lord, let him do righteous deeds and in the worship of his Lord not associate anyone with Him
Kaf Ha Ya 'Ayn Sad
Recount your Lord's mercy on His servant Zechariah
When he called to His Lord silently
he said, "My Lord, my bones have weakened, and my head shimmers with grey hair, but never, Lord, have I failed to be blessed in praying to you
And I fear what my kinsfolk [will do] after I am gone. My wife has been barren, so give me an heir as a gift from You
one who will receive my inheritance and he will be an heir to the family of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, pleasing to You
O Zechariah, We bring you good news of a son whose name will be John, a name We have never given to anyone else before
[Zechariah] said, "My Lord, how will I have a son when my wife has been barren and I have reached advanced old age
He said, "It will be so. Your Lord says: 'It is easy for Me, for I created you before, when you were nothing
[Zechariah] said, "My Lord, give me a sign." He said, "Your sign is that you will not speak to people for three full nights
So he came out from the sanctuary and signaled his people to glorify [God] in the morning and in the evening
John, take hold of the Book with steadfastness." And We gave him wisdom [while he was still] a boy
as well as affection from Us and purity, and he was always mindful of Us
and full of kindness towards his parents, and he was not domineering or rebellious
[God's] peace was upon him on the day he was born and the day of his death, and it will be upon him on the day he is raised alive
Mention in the Book the story of Mary, when she withdrew from her family to a place toward the east
and secluded herself from them. We then sent to her Our Spirit, who appeared to her in the shape of a perfect human being
She said, "I seek refuge from you in the Merciful, [leave me alone] if you are God fearing
He said, "I am only the Messenger of your Lord, [who says,] 'I will give you a son endowed with purity
She said, "How can I have a son when no man has touched me and I have not been a promiscuous woman
He said, "It will be so. Your Lord says, 'It is easy for Me, and We will make him a sign to people and a mercy from Us. The matter is already determined
So she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a remote place
Then the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She said, "Oh, I wish I had been dead and forgotten before all this
But a voice called to her from below, "Do not grieve; your Lord has provided a stream beneath you
Shake the trunk of the palm tree toward you; it will drop ripe, fresh dates to you
So eat and drink and be satisfied and say to anyone you may see, I have made a vow of silence to the Lord of Mercy and I will not talk to anyone today
Then she went back to her people, carrying him. They said, "Mary, you have done an unthinkable thing
Sister of Aaron, your father was not a bad man, nor was your mother a loose woman
She pointed to him. They said, "How can we speak to a child in the cradle
[Jesus] said, "I am the servant of God. He has given me the Book and made me a prophet
And He has made me blessed wherever I am and directed me to pray and to give charitable gifts as long as I live
and to be full of kindness toward .mother, and He has not made me domineering or rebellious
And [God's] peace was upon me the day I was born and the day I will die and it will be upon me the day I am raised alive
Such is Jesus, the son of Mary - the Word of Truth about which they are in dispute
It does not befit God to have a son; may He be exalted in His glory! When He decides on something, He simply says to it, "Be!" and it is
[Jesus continued]: "God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. That is a straight path
Then, the sects differed among themselves [concerning the nature of Jesus], so woe to those who reject the truth when they witness that awesome Day
How [clearly] they will hear and see on the Day they will come before Us. Today, however, they are in clear error
Warn them of the Day of Regret, when everything will have been decided; and [yet], they are heedless, and they do not believe
It is We who will inherit the earth and all those on it, and to Us they will be returned
And mention in the Book [the story of] Abraham. He was a man of truth and a prophet
He said to his father, "O my father, why do you worship that which does not hear and does not see and will not benefit you at all
Father, I have received knowledge which has not come to you, so follow me; I will guide you to an even path
O my father, do not worship Satan. Satan was disobedient to the Merciful
Father, I fear that a punishment from the Merciful will afflict you so that you will be Satan's companion [in Hell]
[His father] said, "Are you forsaking my gods, Abraham? If you do not stop this, I will surely stone you. Now get away from me and don't come back
He said, "Peace be upon you. I will ask my Lord to forgive you. He is always gracious to me
and I will leave you and those you call upon other than God and will call upon my Lord. Perhaps in calling on my Lord, I will be blessed
So when he had left them and those they worshipped other than God, We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and each [of them] We made a prophet
And We endowed them with Our mercy, and we made them highly honored
And mention in the Book, Moses. He was sincere, and he was a messenger and a prophet
We called out to him from the right hand side of the mount and We brought him near to Us in close communication
and out of Our mercy We gave him his brother Aaron as a prophet
And mention in the Book, Ishmael. He was true to his promise, and he was a messenger and a prophet
He used to order his people to pray and to give the purifying alms and he found favor with His Lord
And mention in the Book, Enoch (Idris) He was a man of truth and a prophet
and We raised him to a high position
These are some of the prophets whom God has blessed- from among the descendants of Adam, and those We carried with Noah, and the descendants of Abraham and Israel, and those whom We guided and chose. When the verses of the Merciful were recited to them, they fell down prostrating and weeping
But they were succeeded by generations who neglected prayer and pursued their own desires so they will meet with utter disillusionment
except for those who repent, believe and do righteous deeds; they will enter Paradise and will not be wronged in any way
[They will be in] the Gardens of Eden which the Merciful has promised His worshipers in a realm which is beyond the reach of human perception. His promise will be fulfilled
There they will hear no ill speech - only [greetings of] peace - and there they will have their provisions, morning and evening
Such is Paradise, which We give as an inheritance to those of Our worshipers who were ever mindful of God
And [the angels said], "We descend only at your Lord's command. To Him belongs what is before us and behind us and in between. And your Lord is never forgetful
[He is] Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them - so worship Him and persevere in His worship. Do you know of anyone equal to Him
Yet the human being continues to ask, "When I am dead, will I then be brought out alive again
Does the human being not remember that We created him before, when he was nothing
So by your Lord, We will surely round them up along with the devils, and then We will bring them around Hell on their knees
Then from every sect, We will drag out those who were the most defiant towards the Merciful
Surely, We know best who most deserves the fire of Hell
And all of you will go through it. This is a decree from your Lord that must be fulfilled
Then We will save those who were mindful of God and leave the unjust on their knees
And when Our verses, which are perfectly clear, are recited to them, the unbelievers say to those who believe, "Which of [our] two parties is in the better position and enjoys superior influence
And yet how many generations have We destroyed before them who surpassed them in possessions and [outward] appearance
Say, "As for him who is lost, let the Merciful-to-all lengthen the span of his days until they see what they were promised, punishment either [in this world] or at the Hour [of Judgment]. Then they will clearly see who is worse in possessions and who has the weaker forces
To those rightly guided, God increases guidance, and the good deeds that will last are those that are deemed best and most rewarding in your Lord's sight
Have you considered the man who denies the truth of Our signs and says, "I will surely be given wealth and children
Has he received extrasensory knowledge, or has he received a pledge from the Merciful
No! We will record what he says and extend the duration of his punishment
And We will inherit from him the things he's talks about, and he will come to Us alone
And they have taken gods other than God, hoping that they would be [a source of] strength for them
No! Those deities will reject their worship and will even turn against them
Do you not see that We have sent the devils to the unbelievers, inciting them to sin
So do not try to expedite their punishment. We are simply counting down the number of their days
On the Day [of Judgment,] We will gather all the righteous as [an honored] delegation to the Merciful
and will drive those who forced others to reject Our messages to Hell like a thirsty herd
None will have [power to] intercede on their behalf except him who has received permission from the Merciful
And they say, "The Merciful-to-all has taken [for Himself] a son
You have done an atrocious thing
It almost causes the heavens to rupture, the earth to split open and the mountains to collapse in devastation
that they attribute a son to the Merciful
It does not befit the Merciful to take a son
There is no one in the heavens and earth who will not come as a servant to the Merciful
He has numbered them and counted them precisely
so that every one of them will appear alone before Him on the Day of Resurrection
The Merciful-to-all will bestow His affection on those who have believed and done righteous deeds
And We have made [this Qur'an] easy to recite [Prophet] so that you may give good news to the righteous and warning to stubborn people
How many generations have We destroyed before them? Do you see any one of them or even hear from them even a whisper
Ta Ha
We have not sent down the Qur'an for you to be distressed
but only as a reminder to all who stand in awe [of God]
a revelation that was sent down gradually from Him who created the earth and highest heavens
the Merciful-to-all [who is] established on the throne of His majesty
To Him belongs what is in the heavens and what is on the earth, and what is between them, and what is beneath the soil
Whether or not you speak aloud, He knows what is secret as well as what is [even] more hidden
God there is no god except Him. All the attributes of perfection belong to Him
And has the story of Moses reached you
When he saw a fire and said to his family, "Wait here. I can see a fire; perhaps I will bring you a piece of it, or maybe I will find guidance there
But when he came to the fire, he was called, "Moses
I am truly your Lord, so remove your sandals. You are in the sacred valley of Tuwa
and I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed
Verily, I am God. There is no God except Me, so worship Me and establish prayer to remember Me
The Hour [of Judgment] is coming- though I have chosen to obscure it-when every soul may be rewarded according to its deeds
Do not let your focus be diverted from it by anyone who does not believe in its coming and follows his own whim, lest you perish
[God said] and what is that in your right hand, Moses
It is my staff; I lean upon it, I bring down leaves for my sheep and I have other uses for it
[God said,] "Throw it down, Moses
So he threw it down, and-behold- it turned into a snake, moving swiftly
[God] said, "Pick it up and do not be afraid; We will return it to its former condition
Now draw your hand to your side; it will come out white, unharmed - another sign
so that We may show you [some] of Our greater signs
Go to Pharaoh. He has transgressed all bounds
[Moses] said, "My Lord, put my heart at ease
and ease my task for me
and untie the knot from my tongue
so that they may understand my speech
and appoint for me a minister from my family
Aaron, my brother
Increase my strength through him
and let him share my task
so that we may glorify You much
and remember You much
You see and know all about us
[God] said, "You have been granted your request, Moses
And We have already favored you in a previous time
when We inspired your mother with this
Put him into the chest and cast it into the river. Let the river wash it to the bank, where he will be taken by an enemy of Mine and his." And I bestowed upon you My love, so that you would be brought up under My watchful eye
Then your sister walked by and said, "Shall I direct you to someone who will take care of him?" We returned you to your mother, so that she could rejoice and not grieve. Later, you killed someone, but We rescued you from distress but put you through other severe tests. And you remained some years among the people of Midian. Then you came [here] as I ordained, Moses
And I have chosen you for Myself
Go, you and your brother, with My signs and do not falter in remembering Me
Go, both of you, to Pharaoh. He has overstepped all My limits
And speak to him gently that perhaps he may remember or fear [God]
They said, "Our Lord, we are afraid that He will quickly do us harm or that he will overstep all boundaries
God said, "Fear not. I am with you both; I hear and I see
Go to him and tell him: "We are messengers of your Lord, so send the Children of Israel with us, and do not punish them. We have come to you with a sign from your Lord. And peace will be upon him who follows His guidance
It has been revealed to us that punishment will come upon whoever rejects the truth and turns away
[Pharaoh] said, "So who is the Lord of you two, Moses
He said, "Our Lord is He who gave each thing its form and then guided [it]
[Pharaoh] said, "Then what about the former generations
He said, "Their knowledge is with my Lord in a record. My Lord neither errs nor forgets
It is He who has made the earth as a cradle for you and traced pathways for you through it and sent down rain from the sky, with which We bring forth various kinds of plants
to eat as well as pasture for your cattle. In this there are signs for intelligent beings
From earth We created you, and to it We will return you, and from it We will bring you forth once again
We certainly showed Pharaoh all of Our signs, but he denied [them] and refused [to believe]
[Pharaoh] said, "Have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic, Moses
Then we will surely bring you magic like it. So let's set a time that neither [of us] will fail to keep in a mutually agreed-upon place
[Moses] said, "Your appointment is on the day of the festival, when the people assemble at mid-morning
So Pharaoh turned away, decided on his scheme, and then he returned
Moses said to the magicians summoned by Pharaoh, "Beware! Do not invent lies against God or He will afflict you with a grievous punishment. He who lies shall fail
So [the magicians] argued among themselves over their plan but kept their conversation secret
They said, "these are two magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic and to abolish your most exemplary way of life
So gather your resources and line up for the contest. And whoever succeeds today will prosper
They said, "Moses, either you throw, or we will be the first to throw
He said, "No, you throw." And, behold! Their ropes and staffs seemed to him from their sorcery to move [like snakes]
Moses felt fear within himself
but, God said, "Have no fear. You will have the upper hand
And throw what is in your right hand; it will swallow up what they have crafted, for what they have crafted is a magician's trick, and the magician will not succeed in whatever he tries
[So it was, and] the magicians, fell down in prostration. They said, "We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses
[Pharaoh] said, "How dare you believe him before I gave you permission? He must be your leader who has taught you magic. So I will surely cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I will crucify you on the trunks of palm trees, and you will surely know which of us is more severe in punishment and more enduring
They said, "Never will we prefer you over the clear proof that has come to us as nor [over] Him who created us. So, decree whatever you will. You can decree only for this worldly life
We have believed in our Lord, so that He may forgive us our sins and the magic that you forced us to perform. God is better and more enduring
Whoever comes to his Lord as an evildoer is destined for Hell where he will neither die nor live
But whoever comes to Him as a believer, having done righteous deeds will be the highest ranks and
Gardens of Eden beneath which rivers flow, where they will dwell eternally. And that is the reward for one who purifies himself
We revealed to Moses, "Travel by night with My worshipers and strike a dry path through the sea for them, and do not fear being overtaken [by Pharaoh] or fear [drowning]
So Pharaoh pursued them with his soldiers, and they were utterly overwhelmed by the sea
Pharaoh led his people astray and did not guide [them]
O Children of Israel, We delivered you from your enemy, and We made a covenant with you on the right side of the mountain, and We repeatedly sent down manna and quail to you
[saying], "Eat from the good things which We have provided you, but do not abuse them or I will be angry with you. And he with whom I am angry will certainly fall
Yet I am most forgiving towards those who repent, believe, do righteous deeds, and stay on the right path
[God] said, "Moses, what made you come in such haste ahead of your people
He said, "They are following closely upon my heels, and I rushed to You, my Lord, so that You might be pleased
[God] said, "But We have tested your people after you [departed], and the Samaritan has led them astray
So Moses returned to his people, angry and grieved. He said, "My people, did not your Lord make you a gracious promise? Did the fulfillment [of the covenant] seem too long to you, or did you want the anger of the Lord to fall on you, so you broke your promise to me
They said, "We did not break our promise to you deliberately, but we were weighed down with the heavy burden of the people's jewelry so we threw them [into the fire], following what the Samaritan did
The Samaritan made them [a statue of] a calf, which had a lowing sound, so they said [to each other) , "This is your god and the god of Moses, but he has forgotten [his past]
Did they not see that it did not respond to them and that it had no power to either harm or benefit them
Aaron had already told them before [the return of Moses], "My people, you are only being tested by it, and your Lord is the Merciful-to-all, so follow me and obey my order
They said, "We will never cease being devoted to the calf until Moses returns to us
[Moses] said, "Aaron, what prevented you, when you saw them going astray
from following me? Have you then disobeyed my order
[Aaron] said, "Son of my mother, do not seize [me] by my beard or by my head. I feared that you would say, You caused division among the Children of Israel, and you did not remember my words
[Moses] said, "And what is the matter with you Samaritan
He said, "I gained insight into what they did not see, so I took a handful [of dust] from the messenger's track and threw it in. This is what my soul tempted me to do
[Moses] said, "Get out of here. All that you can ask for in this life is not to be physically harmed. But you have an appointment [in the Hereafter] you will not fail to keep. Look at your 'god' to which you remained devoted. We will burn it up and we will scatter its dust into the sea
[People] your true god is God; there is no god but Him. His knowledge encompasses all things
In this way We tell you [Prophet] the news of what has happened before, and We have given you a Reminder directly from Us
Whoever turns away from it will bear a heavy burden on the Day of Resurrection
carrying it eternally. What a terrible burden to carry on the Day of Resurrection
On that Day the Horn will be blown and We will gather those who force others to reject Our messages, blinded [with terror]
and they will whisper to each other, "You have spent only ten [days]
We know best what they will say when the most perceptive [among them] will say, "[In fact] you have spent only one day
And [should] they ask you [Prophet] about the mountains, say, "My Lord will blow them away into dust
and He will level them into empty plains
where you will not see a dip or an elevation
On that Day, everyone will follow the Caller from whom there is no escape. Then, all voices will be quieted before the Merciful-to-all and only whispers will be heard
On that Day, no intercession will be of value except from one to whom the Merciful-to-all has given permission and was pleased with his speech
God knows what is before them and what will be after them, but they cannot contain Him with their knowledge
And [on that day all] faces will be humbled before the Ever-Living, the Sustainer of existence. And he who bears injustice will despair
But he who does righteous deeds while he is a believer he will fear neither injustice nor deprivation
And thus We have sent down [this revelation] as a perfect Arabic Qur'an and have given warnings that perhaps they will remain mindful of Us, or that it might give them a new awareness
Know then, that God, the Ultimate Sovereign, the Ultimate Truth is So exalted. [Prophet] do not rush ahead with the Qur'an before its revelation to you is complete, and say, "My Lord, increase me in knowledge
And We had already made a covenant with Adam, but he forgot [it]; and We found him lacking in steadfastness
And [mention] when We said to the angels, "Bow down before Adam," and they bowed, except Iblis; he refused
So We said, "O Adam, this is an enemy to you and to your wife. Do not let him drive you out of the Garden and make you suffer
In the Garden you will never go hungry or go naked
nor will you go thirsty or suffer the heat of the sun
Then Satan whispered to him, saying, "Adam, shall I show you the tree of immortality and a kingdom that will never decay
And they both ate from it, so that their nakedness became apparent to them, and they began to cover themselves with the leaves from the Garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and was led astray
But later, his Lord chose to bring him closer, accepted his repentance, and guided him
[God] said, "Go down from it, all of you, as enemies to one another. But when guidance comes to you from Me, then whoever follows My guidance will neither go astray [in this world] nor suffer [in the Hereafter]
But whoever turns away from remembering Me, he will have a life of great hardship, and We will raise him blind on the Day of Resurrection
He will say, "My Lord, why have you raised me blind whereas I was able to see before
[God] will say, "Just as Our Signs came to you and you forgot them, in the same way, you too will this Day will be forgotten
This is how We repay him who goes too far and does not believe in the signs of his Lord. And the punishment of the Hereafter is more severe and more enduring
Has it not become clear to them how many generations We destroyed before them, in whose ruined dwellings they now walk? There are signs in this for those with understanding
And were it not for a prior word from your Lord, setting an appointed term, [their punishment] would necessarily have come immediately
So [Prophet] be patient with what they say and exalt your Lord's limitless glory and praise Him before the rising of the sun and before its setting; and exalt His limitless glory during periods of the night and the day, so that you may be content
And do not gaze longingly toward what We have given some of them to enjoy, [it is merely] the splendor of worldly life by which We test them, but the provision of your Lord is better and more enduring
Order your people to pray and be steadfast yourself. We are not asking you for provision; We provide for you, and the [best] end [comes through] being mindful of God
And they say, "If he would only bring us a sign from his Lord?" Has not clear evidence come to them in the earlier texts
And if We had destroyed them with a punishment before this, they would have said, "Our Lord, if You had only sent us a messenger, we could have followed Your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced
Say, "Each is expectantly waiting; so wait with your expectations. For you will eventually know who is on the path of equity and who is rightly guided
People's reckoning draws closer, but they turn away without paying any attention
Every time a new message comes to them from their Lord, they listen to it while they play
with their hearts distracted. Those bent on wrongdoing conceal their private conversation, [saying], "Is he not [Muhammad] just a man like you? Do you succumb to magic with your eyes wide open
He said, "My Lord knows whatever is said throughout the heaven and earth, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-knowing
But they continue to quibble, "These [revelations] are only confused dreams," or, "He has just invented it," or, "He is merely a poet." "So [they say] let him bring us a sign like those who were sent previously
We destroyed the communities before them who did not believe, so will they believe
Those We have sent before you were only men whom We inspired. So, tell those who deny the truth: "if you do not know this, ask the people of earlier revelations
And We did not give the prophets bodies that did not eat food, nor were they immortal
Then We fulfilled Our promise to them and We saved those We willed, and destroyed those who exceeded all bounds
We have sent down to you a Book containing all that you ought to bear in mind. Will you not reason, then
And how many communities of unjust people have We destroyed, raising up other people in their place
When they felt the might of Our punishment, they fled at once
Do not flee, but return to the life of luxury you enjoyed and to your homes, so that you may be questioned
They said, "Woe to us! we were truly wrongdoers
And that cry of theirs did not cease until We made them like stubble, silent and still
We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play
had We wished for amusement, We could have found it within Ourselves- had We so willed
Instead, We hurl the Truth after falsehood, and the Truth destroys it, and it withers away. But woe to you for all your [attempts to] define [God]
To Him belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. And those near Him are never too proud to worship Him, nor do they tire [of doing so]
They exalt His limitless glory day and night, [and] do not grow weary
Or have they taken for themselves earthly gods who resurrect the dead
Had there been in heaven or on earth any deities other than God, they would both be ruined. But exalted be God in His limitless glory, Lord of the Throne, Who is far above anything they describe
He will not be questioned about what He does, but they will be questioned
Or have they taken gods besides Him? Say, "Produce your proof. This is the message for those with me and the message of those before me." But most of them do not know the Truth, so they turn away
We never sent any messenger before you [Prophet] without revealing to him that "There is no god except Me, so worship Me
And yet, some say, "The Merciful-to-all has taken a son!" May He be exalted in His glory! " No! They are only His honored worshipers
They do not speak before He does, and they act only on His command
He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and they cannot intercede [for anyone] except with His approval, as they are in reverent awe of Him
Where any of them say, "I am a god besides Him"- that one We would repay with Hell. This is how We repay the transgressors
Are the unbelievers not aware that the heavens and the earth were one mass before We separated them and made every living thing from water? Will they not believe, then
And We placed within the earth firmly set mountains, lest it should shake with them, and We made valleys, as roadways as roadways that they might be guided [through them]
and We made the sky a protected roof, yet still, they turn away from its signs
And It is He who created the night and the day and the sun and the moon; each floating in its orbit
[Prophet] We did not grant immortality to any human being before you; so if you die, would they live forever
Every soul is bound to taste death. We test you with evil and with good as a trial and to Us you will all return
And when the unbelievers see you, they laugh at you, [saying], "Is this the one who keeps talking about your gods?" Yet when the Merciful-to-all is mentioned, they reject Him
The human being is a creature of haste. I will show you My signs soon, so do not ask Me to show them sooner
And they say, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are telling the truth
If the unbelievers only knew the time when they will not be able to divert the Fire from their faces or from their backs, and they will find no help
Rather, it will come to them unexpectedly and bewilder them, and they will not be able to repel it, nor will they be reprieved
Messengers before you were also mocked, but those who mocked them were overwhelmed by the very thing they mocked
Say, "Who can protect you by night or day from the Merciful-to-all?" Yet they turn away when their Lord is mentioned
Or, do they have gods to defend them from Us? They are unable [even] to help themselves, nor can they be protected from Us
We have allowed these people and their fathers to enjoy life for a long time, until life seemed long and good to them. Do they not see how We come upon the land, eroding it from its extremities? Will they prevail then
Say: "I can only warn you through Revelation," but the deaf cannot hear the call when they are warned
Yet, if but a whiff of your Lord's punishment should touch them, they would surely say, "Woe to us! We have been unjust
And We place the scales of justice for the Day of Resurrection, so that no soul will be wronged in the least for though there be [only] the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it forth. It suffices that We will do the reckoning
And We gave Moses and Aaron the Furqan [a standard by which to judge right from wrong] a light and a reminder for those who are ever mindful of God
those who stand in awe of their Lord, though He is unseen, and who fear the Hour
And this [Qur'an] too is a blessed message that We have sent down. Will you then ignore it
Before [Moses] We gave Abraham sound judgment and We knew him well
when he said to his father and his people, "What are these statues to which you are devoted
They said, "We found our fathers worshipping them
He said, "You and your fathers have obviously gone astray
They said, "Have you come to us with the Truth, or are you playing games
He said, "[No], rather, your Lord, who created them, is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and I am a witness to that
And, by God, I will surely plot against your idols after You have turned your backs and gone away
So he broke them into pieces, except for the largest one among them, so that they might return to it [and question]
They said, "Who has done this to our gods? He is unjust
Some said, "We heard a young man mention them; they call him Abraham
They said, "Then bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may be witnesses
They said, "Have you done this to our gods, Abraham
He said, "Rather, this one, the largest of them, did it, so ask them, if they are able to speak
So they turned on one another, saying, "It is you who are the unjust
Then, they reversed themselves, [saying], "You [Abraham] knew that these [idols] do not speak
He said, "Then do you worship what does not help or harm you at all instead of God
Shame on you, and shame on what you worship instead of God. Will you not use reason then
They said, "Burn him and support your gods-if you are to act
But We said, "Fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham
And they intended to harm him, but We made them the greatest losers
And We delivered him and Lot to the land which We had blessed for all people
And We gave him Isaac and Jacob as an additional gift, and all [of them] We made righteous
We made them leaders guiding others by Our command. And We inspired them to do good deeds, to establish prayer, and to give the purifying alms; they were our true worshippers
And to Lot We gave sound judgment and knowledge, and We saved him from the town that was committing wicked deeds. They were evil, perverse people
And We admitted him into Our mercy. He was of the righteous
Long before that, We answered Noah when he called to Us, so We responded to him, and saved him and his family from the great calamity
And We helped him against the people who denied Our signs. They were an evil people, so We drowned them, all together
And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment concerning the field into which some people's sheep had strayed [at night]. We were witness to their judgment
and We gave understanding of the case to Solomon, and to each [of them] We gave sound judgment and knowledge. And We caused the mountains and the birds to join David in extolling Our limitless glory, for We are able to do [all things]
And We taught him to fashion coats of armor to protect you from your [enemy in] battle. But are you grateful
And to Solomon We subjected the wind, which aped at his command toward the land that We had blessed. It is We who have knowledge of everything
And among the [devils] rebellious creatures, who dove into the sea for him and did other work, but it was We who kept watch over them
And [mention] Job, when he cried to his Lord, "Great harm has afflicted me, and you are the Most Merciful of the Merciful
So We responded to him and removed the harm that afflicted him. And We restored his family and their like with them, as a mercy from Us and a reminder for God's worshippers
And [mention] Ishmael and Idris and Dhul-Kifl; all were all steadfast
And We admitted them into Our mercy for they were truly righteous
And [Jonah] Zun-nun, when he went off in anger and thought that We would not punish him. Then he called out from the deep darkness, "There is no God except You; May You be exalted in Your glory. I have been among the unjust
We responded to him and saved him from his grief. This is how We save the believers
And Zechariah, when he called to his Lord, "My Lord, do not leave me childless, for you are the best of heirs
We responded to him, gave him John, and healed his wife for him. They were always eager to do good deeds, calling out to Us in hope and fear, and they humbled themselves before Us
And [mention Mary] the one who guarded her chastity. We breathed into her from Our Spirit, and made her and her son a sign for all people
This is your community, a single community [of believers], and I am your Lord, so worship Me
And [yet], they later disagreed and became divided, [but] they are all destined to return to Us
So whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer -his effort will not be ignored, and We shall record it in his favor
No community that We have destroyed can possibly return
until Gog and Magog are let loose and they rush down from the heights
Then, the true promise will approach and the eyes of the unbelievers will stare [in horror, while they say], "Woe to us; we were oblivious to this; rather, we were unjust
You and what you worship other than God are the firewood of Hell. You will be coming to it
Had these [false deities] been [actual] gods, they would not have come to it, but each one of them will stay there [in Hell] forever
In it they will be wailing and they will not be able to hear
As for those for whom We have decreed the best [reward]-they will be kept far removed from Hell
They will not hear its sound, while they abide eternally in whatever their souls desire
They will not be grieved by the greatest horror and the angels will greet them, [saying], "This is your Day which you have been promised
the Day when We will roll up the heavens as one rolls up a written scroll. Just as We produced the first creation, [so] We will repeat it. This is a binding promise on Us. We will do it
We have written in the Zabour [Psalms] as We did in previous Scriptures, that My righteous worshipers shall inherit the earth
Truly there is a message in this for people who worship
We have only sent you [Prophet] as a mercy to humanity
Say, "It is revealed to me that your god is but one God-so, will you be submissive to Him
But, if they turn away, then say, "I have proclaimed the message equally to [all of] you. And I do not know if what you have been promised is near or far
He knows what is revealed when you speak, and He knows what you conceal
For all I know [this delay in God's judgment] may be a trial for you and you will have enjoyment for a while
Say [Prophet] "My Lord, judge [between us] in Truth. Our Lord is the Merciful-to-all, the one whose help is ever sought against that which you unbelievers speak
[The Pilgrimage]O Humankind, be ever mindful of your Lord. The tremor of the [final] Hour is a mighty thing
On the Day you see it every nursing mother will be distracted from the child she is nursing, and every pregnant woman will abort her pregnancy, and you will think that people are drunk while they are not-but God's punishment is severe
Yet some people still argue about God without knowledge, following every rebellious devil
who is destined to lead astray those who ally themselves with him, and guide them toward the suffering of the blazing flame
People-If you should be in doubt about the Resurrection, then [consider that] We created you from dust, then from a fertilized ovum, then a leach like, and then a chewed morsel, differentiated and undifferentiated so We may show you [our power]. And We settle in the womb what We wish for a specified term, then We bring you forth as an infant, and then you may grow to reach maturity. And among you some will die, and some will reach the most decrepit age in which he no longer knows what he once knew. You see the earth barren, yet when We send down rain, it shakes and swells and produces every kind of beautiful plant
That is because God is the Ultimate Truth and because He alone brings the dead to life and because He is competent over all things
And [that they may know] that the Hour is coming; no doubt about it, and that God will resurrect all those in the graves
Yet among men there is he who argues about God without knowledge or guidance or an enlightening Book
turning away [from the truth] in his arrogance to lead [people] astray from the path of God. For him there is only disgrace in the world, and We will make him taste the punishment of the burning fire on the Day of Resurrection
[He will be told] "This is for what you have done. God is never unfair to His servants
And among people you would find one who worships God with shaky faith. If good befalls him, he is reassured by it; but if he is tested, he reverts to his old ways, [thereby] losing both [this] world and the next. That is a manifest loss
Instead of God, he calls upon what can neither harm him nor benefit him. That is the ultimate misguidance
He calls on one who is more likely to harm than to benefit [him]. How miserable are both the protector and the companion
But God will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds to Gardens with rivers flowing through them. God does what He wills
Anyone who thinks that God will not help him [the Prophet] in this world and in the Hereafter, let him find a way to reach out to heaven, then try to make headway, and see if his scheme will eliminate what enrages him
And thus have We sent the Qur'an down as verses of clear evidence for God guides those who want to be guided
As for those who believed, the Jews, the Sabeans, the Christians, the Magians and those ascribing divinity to other than God-God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection. God witnesses all thing
Do you not see that everyone in the heavens and everyone on earth and the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the moving creatures and many human beings bow down before God? But for many others their punishment is justified and he who is disgraced by God cannot have his honor restored by anyone. God does whatever He wills
These are two adversaries who have disputed over their Lord. But the unbelievers will have cut out garments of fire cut out for them, and boiling water will be poured over their heads
which will melt the contents of their bellies as well as their skin
and they shall be held by iron grips
Every time they try to escape [the fire) of it in their anguish, they will be returned to it, and [it will be said], "Taste the punishment of the Burning Fire
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, God will admit them to Gardens with rivers flowing through them. They will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be silk
for they were [willing to be] guided [in this life] to speak the best words, and so they were guided to the path that leads to Him Who is Worthy of [all] Praise
As for the unbelievers who divert [others] from the path of God and [from] the Sacred House, which We made for all People equally-[both] those who dwell there, and those who come from abroad - We will let those who desire to profane it with wrongdoing taste a painful punishment
For when We showed Abraham the site of the House, [We told him], "Do not associate anything with Me and purify My House for those who will circle around it, and those who stand to pray and those who bow down and prostrate themselves
And proclaim the Pilgrimage to all people: they will come to you on foot and on every kind of swift and lean mount, through distant passes
so that they may receive benefits for themselves and to celebrate God's name on appointed days. He has provided [sacrificial] animals for their purposes. So eat of them and feed the miserable and poor
So let the pilgrims perform their acts of purification and fulfill their vows. And then circle around the Ancient House
All of that [has been commanded]. As for anyone who honors the sacred ordinances of God, it is good for him in the sight of his Lord. Livestock have been permitted to you, except what has been explicitly forbidden. So turn away from the filth of idols, and turn away from telling lies
inclining [only] to God, not associating [anything] with Him. And he who associates others with God- it is as though he had fallen from the sky and was snatched by the birds or the wind carried him down into a remote place
Thus it is; and whoever venerates the sacred rites of God-[their acts] proceed from a pious heart
You have benefits in these animals marked for sacrifice for a specified time; then, their place of sacrifice is at the Ancient House
We have appointed a rite [of sacrifice] for every nation, so that they may mention the name of God over whatever [sacrificial] animals He has provided them. Your god is one God, so submit to Him. And, give good news to the humble of heart
those whose hearts tremble when God is mentioned, and those who patiently persevere over what has afflicted them, and those who perform prayer and those who spend from what We have provided them
We have appointed sacrificial animals for you among the rituals of God. There is much good for you in them, so mention God's name over them when they lined up [for sacrifice], and, when they are [lifeless] on their sides, then eat from them and feed the needy and the beggar. Thus We have subjected them to you so that hopefully you may be grateful
It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches Good: what reaches Him is your piety. Thus He has made them subject to you, so that you may glorify God for having guided you. And give good news to those who do their best at whatever they do
God will defend the believers. God does not like the treacherous and ungrateful
Permission [to fight] has been given to those against whom war is being waged wrongfully, because they were wronged. And God is surely capable of giving them victory
[They are] those who have been driven from their homes unjustly, for saying only that "Our Lord is God." And, if God did not intervene by using some people to drive out others, many monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, where God's name is much remembered, would have been destroyed. God is sure to help those who help His cause, for truly God is strong and mighty
[And they are] those who, if We give them authority in the land, establish prayer, and give the purifying alms, and order what is obviously right, and forbid what is obviously wrong. And to God belongs the outcome of [all] matters
And if they deny you [Prophet], so, did the people of Noah and Aad and Thamud deny [their prophets]
as did the people of Abraham and the people of Lot
and the inhabitants of Midian. And Moses was called a liar. So, I indulged the unbelievers for a time, and then I seized them, and how [terrible] was My reproach
And how many a town did We destroy while it was committing wrong, so It is [now] fallen into ruin, and [how many] an abandoned well, and [how many] a lofty palace
Have they not traveled through the land, so that their hearts gain wisdom and their ears learn to listen? For it is not the eyes that are blind, but the hearts within the breasts
They challenge you [Prophet] to bring on their punishment [if you can]. But God will never fail to deliver His promise. A day with your Lord is like a thousand years as you count them
And how many a community did I indulge while it was unjust? Then I seized it, and their [final] destination is up to Me
Say [Prophet) , "O People, I am sent only to deliver a clear warning to you
And those who have believed and done righteous deeds - for them is forgiveness and generous rewards
But those who oppose Our message, [seeking] in vain to cause it to fail-those are the companions of Hell
Yet, whenever We sent a messenger or a prophet ahead of you, and he was hoping [that his warning will be headed], Satan would cast [doubt] on his hopes. But God destroys that what Satan insinuates, and God confirms His messages, for God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
He makes what Satan spews forth a temptation only to those whose hearts are sick or hardened-surely the unjust are profoundly opposed to the Truth
So that those who have been given knowledge may understand that it is the Truth from your Lord and believe in Him, while their hearts humbly submit to Him. God will guide the believers to a straight path
but the unbelievers will continue to be in doubt about it until the Hour comes suddenly on them, or punishment strikes them on the Day of desolation
[All] sovereignty on that Day will belong to God; He will judge between them. So, those who believed and did righteous deeds will be in the Gardens of Delight
While the unbelievers and those who reject Our signs will receive a humiliating punishment
And those who emigrated for the cause of God and then were killed or died-God will surely provide for them handsomely, for God is surely the best of providers
He will surely admit them into a place that well pleases them, for God is All-Knowing and Forbearing
That [is so]; and whoever responds [to an act of aggression] only with an equivalent force and is then wronged again, God will surely help him. God is pardoning and forgiving
Thus it is, because God merges the night into day and merges the day into night, and because God is All-Hearing and All-Seeing
Thus it is, because God is the Ultimate Truth, and anything they call upon other than Him is falsehood, because God is the Most High, the Most Great
Do you not see that God has sent down rain from the sky, and then the earth becomes green? God is Most-Subtle, All-Aware
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, God is the Rich Beyond Need; the Praiseworthy
Do you not see that God has made everything on the earth of service to you-including the ships that run through the sea by His command- and that He prevents heaven from falling on the earth without His permission? God is most compassionate and most Merciful-to-all people
He is the One Who gave you life, and then will causes you to die, and then will bring you back to life. Human being however is ungrateful
We have appointed acts of worship for every nation, which they [are to] observe. So, let the unbelievers not contend with you over the matter, but invite them to your Lord. You are on the straight path
and if they argue with you, then say, "God knows best what you are doing
On the Day of Resurrection, God will judge between you regarding your differences
Do you not know that God knows what is in the heaven and earth? All this is written in a Record. This is easy for God
Nevertheless, they worship others besides God, something for which He has granted no authority, and about which they have no knowledge. There will not be any helper for the unjust
And when Our verses are recited to them as clear evidence, you will detect disapproval in the faces of the unbelievers. They all but assault those who recite Our verses. Say, "Shall I inform you of [what is] worse than that? [It is] the Fire that God has promised the unbelievers. How miserable is their destination
People, an example is presented, so listen to it. Those you call on besides God will never be able to create [as much as] a fly, even if they all gathered together for that purpose. And if the fly robs them of anything, they will not be able to retrieve it. How feeble are the petitioners and those they petition
They do not give God His due esteem. God is omnipotent, almighty
God chooses messengers from among the angels and people. God is All-Hearing and All- Seeing
He knows what lies before them and what is behind them, for all matters will go back to God
Believers: bow, and prostrate, and worship your Lord and do good, so that you may succeed
And strive for God as He deserves. He has chosen you and has not imposed hardships on you in religion- the faith of your father, Abraham. He named you "Muslims" [submitters] before [in former Books] and in this [revelation], so that the Messenger may be a witness over you, and you may be witnesses over other human beings. So, perform prayer, and give the purifying alms and hold fast to God. He is your protector, and how excellent is this protector, how excellent this helper
The believers have prospered
They are those who humble themselves in prayer
who turn away from meaningless talk
pay the purifying alms
and who protect their chastity
except with their wives or with those whom their right hands held in trust, for which they will not be blamed
Those who desire anything beyond that are transgressors
whereas those who honor their trusts and their promises
and who keep up their prayers
those are the inheritors
who will inherit the Paradise of Ferdous, where they will dwell for eternity
And We did certainly create man from an extract of clay
and then We placed him as a fertilized ovum in a safe place
and then We transformed the fertilized ovum into a clinging leach, and the leach into a chewed morsel, and [from] the chewed morsel, We created bones, and We covered the bones with flesh, and then we structured him into yet another creation. Blessed is God, the best of creators
Then, after that, you will surely die
Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be resurrected
And We have created above you seven heavenly dimensions, and We have never abandoned [Our] creation
And We have sent down rain from the sky in a measured amount and we settle it into the earth, [although] We have the power to withdraw it
With [water] We bring forth gardens of palm trees, and vines with abundant fruit for you, from which you may eat
and a tree growing out of Mount Sinai that produces oil and relish for those who eat
And there is a lesson for you in livestock, we give you milk to drink from their bellies, [you derive] numerous other benefits from them: you eat [their meat]
We sent Noah to his people, and he said, "My people, worship God; you have no gods before Him. Will you not be aware of Him
and ride upon them as you do on ships
But their leaders, who were among the unbelievers from his people said, "He is but a human being like you, trying to gain dominance over you; if God had so willed, He would have sent down angels. We have never heard of anything like this from our forefathers
He is only a man possessed, so put up with him for a while, and let's see what happens to him
[Noah] said, "My Lord, help me, because they have accused me of lying
So We instructed him, "Build the Ark under Our watchful eyes and [according to] Our revelation. When Our command comes and the valley overflows, take on board pairs of every species and your family, except for those among them against whom judgment has been proclaimed. And do not plead with Me on behalf of the unjust; they will all be drowned
When you and those with you are settled on the Ark, then say, 'All praise is due to God, who has delivered us from the oppressive people
And say, 'My Lord, let me land at a blessed landing place, as You are the best to provide
There are signs in all this, and We are always putting people to the test
Then, after those people, We raised up a new generation
And We sent them a messenger from among them, [saying], "Worship God for you have no god before Him. Will you not, then, be aware of Him
But the leaders among his people, who denied the truth and denied the encounter with the Hereafter, and to whom We had given ease and plenty in this worldly, life said, "This is only a man like you, who eats what you eat and drinks what you drink
and, if you should obey a human being like yourselves, you would then fail
Does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones that you will be brought forth [to a new life]
What You have been promised is sheer nonsense
Life is only our worldly life: we live and die, but we will not be resurrected
He is just a man who has invented a lie about God, and We will never believe him
He said, "My Lord, help me because they call me a liar
[God] said, "After a little while, they will surely regret [what they have said]
So the blast justly struck them, and We swept them away like scum. Away then with the oppressive people
After them, We gave rise to new generations
No community can speed up or hold back its appointed destiny
Then We sent Our Messengers in succession. Whenever a messenger came to a community he was invariably rejected, so We destroyed them one after the other, until they became mere tales. Away, then, with the people who do not believe
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a clear authority
to Pharaoh and his inner circle, but they were an arrogant, haughty people
They said, "Should we believe two human beings like us while their people are serving us
So they called them both liars, and were consequently destroyed
And We gave Moses the Book so that they might be guided
And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and sheltered them within a hill where there was a meadow and a flowing spring
[God said], "O Messengers, eat good things and do good. I know all that you do
This community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord, so be ever conscious of Me
Yet [your followers] tore their unity piece by piece, each faction rejoicing in what it has
So, leave them in their confusion for a while
Do they think that We provide them wealth and children
because We rush to give them good things? No, but they are oblivious [to what is going on]
Those who stand in awe of their Lord
who believe in the messages of their Lord
who do not associate anything with their Lord
and who give whatever they can while their hearts tremble at the thought that they will be returning to their Lord
these are the ones who vie to do good deeds, and they will be the first to attain them
We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear. There is a record with Us which speaks the Truth and they will not be treated unjustly
However, the [unbelievers'] hearts are in confusion about this [message], and they do even do worse deeds
until We bring those corrupted with opulence for punishment. Only then will they suddenly start crying [to God] for help
Do not cry out today. You will not get any help from Us
For [every time] My verses were recited to you, you turned away from them
in arrogance, amusing yourself by talking nonsense about them far into the night
Have they not thought about what We tell them, or has something come to them that did not come to their forefathers
Or do they not recognize their messenger? Is that why they do not acknowledge him
Or do they say, "He is crazy?" when in fact he brought them the Truth. But most of them hate the Truth
If the Truth conformed to their desires, truly, the heavens, and the earth, and whoever is in them would have been corrupted. Instead, We have given them their Reminder, but they turn away from it
Or [do they think that] you are asking them for compensation, when your Lord's compensation is best? He is the Best of Providers
You call them to a straight path
but those who do not believe in the Hereafter deviate from that path
Even if We were to show them mercy and relieve them of the harm afflicting them, they would persist in their blind transgression
Even when We afflicted them with suffering [as a warning], they did not humble themselves to their Lord, nor were they submissive
but when We open a gate of severe punishment to them, they will immediately be crushed with despair
And it is He who created your hearing and vision and hearts; how seldom are you grateful
And it is He who spread you over the earth, and to Him you will be gathered
And It is He Who gives life and causes death, and to Him is due the alternation of night and day. Will you not then use your reason
However, they are content to say what their ancestors said
They said, "When we die and become dust and bones, are we to be resurrected
We have been promised this before, and so were our forefathers. These are just ancient legends
Say, "To whom belongs the earth and all that is in it, if you know
They will say, "To God." Say, "Then will you not take heed
Say, "Who is Lord of the seven heavens and Lord of the Mighty Throne
They will say, "[They belong] to God." Say, "Then will you not be mindful
Say, "In whose hand is the dominion over all things. Who protects, while none can protect against Him, if you happen to know
They will say, "[All belongs] to God." Say, "Then how can you be so mislead
In fact, We have sent them the Truth, but they lie
God has not taken any son, nor has there ever been any other god but Him. [Had there been], then each god would have taken aside what it created, and sought to overcome the others. May God be exalted in His glory, far above what they ascribed to Him
The Knower of all that is beyond human's perception, as well as all that can be witnessed by humans. May He be exalted above all whom they associate with Him
Say, "My Lord, if You are going to show me what you have promised them
then, My Lord, do not place me among such unjust people
We are surely able to show you what We have promised them
Overcome evil with good- We are well aware of what they are saying
And say, "My Lord, I seek refuge in You from the incitements of the devils
and I seek refuge in You, my Lord, so they may not come near me
When death comes to one of them, he says, "My Lord, send me back
so that I may make amends for what I left undone." Never! This is but a word he is saying; for behind them there is a [dimensional) barrier until the Day when all will be resurrected
So when the Horn is blown, no ties of kinship will bind them on that Day, nor will they ask about one another
And those whose balance [of good deeds) is heavy, it is they who will be successful
but those whose balance is light, those are the ones who have lost their souls and will remain in Hell forever
The Fire will sear their faces, distorting them horribly and painfully
Were not My verses recited to you and did you not reject them
They will say, "Our Lord, our defiance overcame us, and we were led astray
Our Lord, get us out of here, and, if we go back to our evil ways, we would be unjust
He will say, "Remain despised where you are and do not speak to Me
Among My worshipers there were those who used to say, 'Our Lord, We have believed, so forgive us and have mercy on us, for You are the most Merciful
But you were so preoccupied with mocking them that you forgot about Me, while you were laughing at them
I have rewarded them this Day for their patient endurance - they are the successful
He said: "How many years were you on earth
They will say, "We were there a day or part of a day; ask those who keep track of it
He will say, "You stayed but a little, if only you had known
Did you think, then, that We created you in vain, or that you would not be returned to Us
How sublimely exalted is God, the Ultimate Sovereign, the Ultimate Truth; there is no deity except Him, Lord of the Noble Throne of His majesty
Whoever calls another deity besides God with no evidence for its existence, then his reckoning will be with his Lord. the unbelievers will never triumph
And, say, "My Lord, forgive and have mercy; and You are the most Merciful-to-all
[This is] a chapter which We have sent down and made it obligatory, revealing clear messages so that you might take heed
The [unmarried] woman or man found guilty of adultery, lash each one of them with a hundred lashes, and do not let compassion for them prevent you from obeying God's law, if you believe in God and the Last Day. And let a group of the believers witness their punishment
The adulterer shouldn't marry except an adulteress or idolatress, and let none marry her except an adulterer or an idolater. Such behavior is forbidden to believers
And as for those who accuse a chaste women and then do not produce four witnesses, lash each with eighty lashes, and do not accept their testimony again, for they are deviators from the truth
except for those who repent later and reform, for God is most forgiving and Merciful-to-all
As for those who accuse their own wives [of adultery] and have no witnesses except themselves, let each call on God four times to witness that he is telling the truth
and the fifth [testimony will be] that the curse of God be upon him should he be lying
But she will not be punished if she gives four testimonies with God as her witness that he is lying
and the fifth [testimony will be] that the wrath of God be upon her should he be truthful
Were it not for God's favor to you and His mercy...and because God is accepting of repentance and Wise
There is a group among you who spread slander. Do not think it bad for you; rather It is a good thing. Every one of them shall bear the sin that he has earned, and he who took the greatest part in it will have a painful punishment
When you heard about it, why did the believers-men and women-not think well of one another and say "This is an obvious lie
And why did they not produce four witnesses to it? When accusers do not produce four witnesses, then in God's sight it is they who are the liars
And had it not been for God's favor upon you and His mercy in this world and the Hereafter, you would have already been afflicted by terrible suffering for indulging in such talk
When you received it on your tongues and your mouths uttered things about which you had no knowledge, you thought it a trivial matter, while in God's sight it was most serious
And why, when you heard it, did you not say, "It does not behoove us to speak about this. May you [O God] be exalted in Your glory; this is a great slander
God warns you never to repeat this [conduct], if you are true believers
God makes His messages clear to you, for God is All-knowing and All-Wise
Those who enjoy hearing that immorality has spread among the believers will have a painful punishment both in this world and the Hereafter. God knows and you do not
Were it not for God's favor to you and His mercy, and because God is compassionate and Merciful-to-all
Believers, do not follow Satan's footsteps, for he who follows Satan's footsteps joins immorality and wrongdoing. Were it not for God's favor to you and His mercy, not one of you would have been purified, ever, but God purifies whom He wills, for God is All-Hearing and All-Knowing
Let not those among you who possess affluence and wealth swear against giving to their relatives, the needy, and the emigrants for God's sake, but let them pardon and forgive. Would you not like for God to forgive you? God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Those who [falsely] accuse chaste women [who are] incautious but believing are cursed in this world and the Hereafter; they will have a great punishment
on the Day when their tongues, their hands and their feet will bear witness against them regarding what they used to do
On that Day, God will pay them in full their just due, and they will know that God is the Manifest Truth
Wicked women are for wicked men, and wicked men are for wicked women. Good women are for good men, and good men are for good women. The good [men and women] are innocent of what has been said against them; they will have forgiveness and a generous provision
Believers do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission to do so and greeted their residents. That is best for you, so that you will be reminded [of each other's rights]
And if you do not find anyone in, do not enter until permission has been granted, and, if It is said to you, "Go away," then go away. This is purer for you, for God knows well what you do
[However] there is no blame on you for entering houses not inhabited but serve a purpose useful to you. God knows what you reveal and what you conceal
Tell believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts. That is purer for them. God is acquainted with what they do
And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their private parts and not expose their charms, beyond what may be [acceptable to] display. Let them drape [a portion of] their head coverings over their breasts, and not reveal their charms except to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands' fathers, their sons, their husbands' sons, their brothers, their brothers' sons, their sisters' sons, their womenfolk, their slaves, or those male attendants having no sexual desire, or children who are not yet aware of women's private parts. And let them not stamp their feet to make known what they conceal of their charms. And believers-all of you-turn to God in repentance, that you may succeed
Marry off those among you who are unmarried and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves. If they should be poor, God will enrich them from His favor; God is All- Encompassing and All-Knowing
Those who are unable to marry should keep chaste until God gives them sufficiently from His favor. If any of those whom your right hands held in trust seek a contract then, draw one with them if you know there is goodness within them, and share with them the wealth that God has given you. Do not compel your girls against their will to prostitution, out of your desire for the short-term gains of this world, if they want to be married. If they however are compelled, God will be forgiving and merciful to them
We have sent down to you clarifying messages and examples from those who passed on before you, and an admonition for those who are ever mindful of God
God is the illuminator of the heavens and the earth. His light may be likened to [the light emanating from] a niche containing a lamp that is enclosed in glass, the glass [is shining] like a brilliant star fueled from a blessed tree, an olive tree that is neither of the east nor of the west-its oil is nearly luminous even if untouched by fire. Light upon light. God guides to His enlightenment whoever wills [to be guided]. God presents such examples to people, since God [alone] has full knowledge of all things
In houses of worship that God has allowed to be raised, where His Name will be remembered and where His limitless glory is celebrated morning and evenings
[by] men whom neither commerce nor business can distract from the remembrance of God, performance of prayer, and the payment of the purifying alms. They fear a Day when hearts and eyes will be convulsed
hoping that God may reward them according to the best of what they did, and give them more from His favor. God provides limitlessly for anyone He will
But the unbelievers, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert that the thirsty mistake for water until, when he comes to it, he finds it is nothing. Instead, he finds only God there, and God will pay him his full due, for God is quick to take account
Or [their deeds are] like darkness over a stormy sea covered by waves, over waves, over which are dark clouds, layer upon layer of darkness. If one holds out his hand, he can hardly see it. For him to whom God gives no enlightenment, there is no enlightenment
Do you not see that God's limitless glory is exalted by all in the heavens and the earth, even by the birds with wings outspread [in flight]? Each [of them] knows how to pray to and glorify [Him], and God well knows that they do
To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and to God [all things] ultimately return
Do not you see that God drives the clouds, then brings them together, and then piles them into heaps until you see rain come pouring from them? He sends down from the sky mountains [of clouds] filled with hail, striking with it whom He wills and averting it from whom He wills. The flash of its lightening almost blinds the eyes
God revolves night and day. In [all] this is a lesson for those who are insightful
God has created every living creature from water. Some of them creep on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. God creates what He wills for God is surely able to do all things
We have indeed sent down messages clarifying everything. God guides to a straight path whoever wills [to be guided]
Some declare, "We believed in God and the Messenger, and we obey," but then, a group of them turn away. Such people are not true believers
When they are called to God and His Messenger to judge between them, some of them turn away
but if they think that the right is on their side, they then come to him [the Prophet] in prompt obedience
Is there a sickness in their hearts? Or are they in doubt? Or do they fear that God and His Messenger will be unjust to them? Rather, it is they who are the unjust
When the believers are called to God and His Messenger to judge between them, they respond "We hear and we obey." Those are the achievers
for whoever obeys God and His Messenger, and is in awe of God and is ever mindful of Him, it is they who are the successful
[Others] solemnly swear by God that if you [Prophet] ordered them, they would go forth [in God's cause]. Say, "Do not swear. [Such] obedience is [expected]. God is well aware of all you do
Say, "Obey God and obey the Messenger; but if you turn away, he is responsible only for what he has been given to do, and you are responsible for what you have been given. If you obey him, you will be [rightly] guided, but the Messenger's duty is only to deliver the Message clearly
God has promised those among you who have believed and done righteous deeds that He will make them successors upon the earth just as He did those before them, and that He will establish for them the faith that He has chosen for them. He will exchange the fear they have experienced with security, [for] they worship Me [alone], not associating anything with Me. But whoever denies the truth after [having understood] this, then those are the defiantly disobedient
Establish prayer, and give the purifying alms, and obey the Messenger, so that you may receive mercy
Do not even think that the unbelievers can ever escape God on earth. Their refuge will be the Fire. What an evil destination
Believers, let your slaves and those who have not [yet] reached puberty among you ask permission of you [before entering your presence] at three times of the day: before the dawn prayer, and when you take off your clothing [for rest] at noon, and after the evening prayer. [These are] three times of privacy for you. At other times, there is no blame on you or them if you move about freely, tending to each other's needs. In this way does God make the message clear to you, for God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
And when your children reach puberty, let them ask your permission to enter, just as those before them have done. In this way God makes His messages clear to you, for God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
As for elderly women who have no desire to marry-there is no blame upon them if they remove their outer garments without displaying their charms, but, to modestly refrain [from that] is better for them, for God is All-Hearing and All-Knowing
There is not any restriction on the blind, the lame, the ill or yourselves when you eat from your [own] houses or the houses of your fathers, your mothers, your brothers, your sisters, your father's brothers, your father's sisters, your mother's brothers, your mother's sisters or [from houses] whose keys you possess, or from any of your friends' houses. There is nothing wrong with your eating [either] together or separately, but, when you enter any house, give greetings of peace upon each other, a greeting from God, blessed and good. In this way God makes His messages clear to you so that you may understand
The Believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger, and who, when they meet with him about some matter of common concern, do not depart until they have asked his permission. [Prophet], those who ask your permission are the ones who [truly] believe in God and His Messenger. So, when they ask your permission to attend to their affairs, then give permission to any among them you will, and ask God to forgive them. God is Ever-Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
[Believers], do not call the Messenger as you call one another. God knows those of you who slip away, [from meetings with the Prophet] stealthily, so let those who dissent from the Prophet's order beware, lest some trial befall them [in this life] or a painful punishment [in the next]
To God belongs everything is in the heavens and earth. He knows what you stand for, and one Day, when all return to Him, He will inform them what they have done, for God knows all things
Blessed is He who sent down to His Servant the Furqan [the Standard by which we judge right from wrong), so that he may be a warner to all people
It is He to whom belongs the dominion over the heavens and the earth, and who has not taken a son and has no associate in His dominion, for He has created all things according to precise measures
Yet some have chosen to worship gods other than Him, gods who cannot create but are themselves created, who have no power to protect themselves from harm or benefit themselves, and who have no power over death, or life, or resurrection
And the unbelievers say, "This is but a lie he has devised, made possible with the help of other people." In truth, they have committed injustice and falsehood
They [also] say, "These are just legends of the ancients that he [directed to be] written down and dictated to him morning and evening
Say, "It has been sent down by Him who knows [every] secret within the heavens and the earth. He is ever-forgiving and Merciful-to-all
And they also say, "What sort of messenger eats food and walks in the markets? Should not at least an angel have been sent down to him, to help him with his warning
Or, "Why hasn't he been given a treasure?" Or, "Why he does not have a garden from which he eats?" And the unjust say, "The man you follow is simply bewitched
Look at the examples they are using to describe you, [Prophet] but they have strayed and now cannot find their way
Blessed is He Who, if He wishes, can give you [Prophet] better than these; Gardens with rivers flowing through them and can grant you palaces
Denying that there is an Hour [of resurrection] is actually their main issue. [Hence], We have prepared a blazing fire for those who deny the Hour
When [Hell] sees them from a distance, they will hear its fury and roaring
and when they are thrown, shackled together, into a narrow place therein, they will pray for death
[They will be told] "Do not pray today for one death, but pray for many deaths
Say, "Is that [fate] better for you, or is the Garden of Eternity, which is promised to those that were ever mindful of God, better? For them, It will be a reward and a destination
Where they can have whatever they wish forever. This is a binding promise from your Lord
And on the Day He will gather them [the unjust] along with those they worship beside God, and [He] will say, "Was it you who misled My servants, or did they stray from the path by themselves
They will say, "May You be exalted in Your glory! It was not for us to take any protectors beside You. But You provided comforts for them and their fathers until they forgot your message and became a worthless people
[God will say] "They [whom you claimed as divine], are refuting you and what you claim. Hence, you cannot avoid [punishment] or [find] help. And whoever commits injustice among you, We will make him suffer great punishment
[Prophet] Every messenger we ever sent before you ate food and walked in the markets. But We have made some of you a test for others to see if you will be steadfast? For your Lord is ever insightful
Those who do not expect that they are destined to meet Us say, "Why were not angels sent down to us, or [why] do we [not] see our Lord?" They have certainly become too proud of themselves and excessively insolent
On the day they see the angels, there won't be any good news for those who denied God, and [the angels guarding the gate to paradise] will say, "Stop, stay out
We will examine their deeds and scatter them like dust
Meanwhile those who are destined for paradise will, on that Day, be securely settled in the best resting place
The Day when heaven will split open with clouds [emerging], and the angels are sent down successively in streams
True sovereignty, on that Day, will belong to the Merciful-to-all. For unbelievers, it will be a day of distress
on that Day the one who was unjust to himself will bite his hands [in regret] and will say, "How I wish I had followed the way of the Messenger
Woe to me! I wish I had not taken so and so as a friend
He led me away from the remembrance [of God] after it had come to me. Satan, has always let man down
The Messenger will say, "My Lord, This Qur'an was abandoned by my people
and thus have We assigned to every prophet an enemy; those, who force others to reject Our messages. But your Lord is sufficient as a guide and a helper
And the unbelievers say, "Why was the Qur'an not sent to him in one single revelation?" [It was revealed in stages] so that We may strengthen your heart. And We revealed it in well-organized portions
And every time they come to you with an argument, We will give you the [full] Truth and the best explanation
As for those who are dragged facedown to Hell, they will be in the worst place as they are the most misguided from the path
And We gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron to help him
We said, "Go together to the people who have rejected Our signs." Then We destroyed them completely
And the people of Noah-when they denied the messengers, We drowned them, and We made them a sign for people to come. And We have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust
[And the people of] Aad and Thamud, the people of the Al Rass and many generations in between
in each case, We, [warn them with] examples, and each We utterly destroyed
They must surely have come upon the town that was showered with a horrible rain; have they not seen it? But they do not expect resurrection
And whenever they see you [Prophet] they ridicule you, [saying], "Is this the one God sent as a messenger
He would almost have misled us from our gods had we not stood firmly by them." But soon, when they see the punishment, they will know who is the most misguided
Have you seen the one who has taken his own whims as his god? Are you responsible for him
And do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are just like cattle; indeed, they are [even] more lost
Have you not considered how your Lord lengthens the shadow [when], had He so willed, He could have made it stationary? [Instead], We have made the sun its guide
and We draw it back toward us gradually
It is He who made the night a veil for you and sleep for rest, and the day a time for rising
And it is He who sends forth the winds, bringing good news of His mercy. And We send down from the sky pure water
so that We may bring dead land to life and provide drink for the multitude of beings, animals and people, We have created
Indeed, We have distributed it among them so that they might take heed, but most people continue in their denial of the truth
And if We had willed, We could have sent a warner to every town
so do not go along with the unbelievers, but strove hard against them with this [Qur'an]
He is the one who has merged the two seas, one fresh and sweet, the other salty and bitter, and He placed between them an insurmountable barrier
He created human beings from water and made them kin by blood and marriage. Your Lord is able to do all things
Yet, instead of God, they worship what can neither benefit nor harm them. The unbeliever is always biased, against his Lord
We have sent you [Prophet] only to bring good news and deliver a warning
Say, "I ask you no payment for doing this- only that whoever wills may take a path to his Lord
Put your trust in the Everlasting who does not die, glorify Him and celebrate His praise. For it is sufficient that none knows His worshipers' sins as fully as does He
Who created the heavens and the earth and everything in between them in six days, and then established Himself above the Throne of His majesty- the Merciful-to-all! Ask about Him, then, the well informed
Yet, when they are told, "Prostrate yourselves before the Merciful-to-all," they say, "And who is the 'Merciful-to-all'? Should we prostrate ourselves before whatever you order us [to worship]?" And they turn farther away
Blessed is He who has placed constellations in the sky, a radiant light and glowing moon
And It is He who has made night and day succeed each other, [revealing Himself to] for anyone who wishes to be mindful or show gratitude
The worshipers of the Merciful-to-all are those who walk upon the earth with humility, and when the ignorant address them, reply with "peace
those who spend the night prostrating themselves and standing before their Lord
and those who say "Our Lord, spare us the punishment of Hell. Its punishment is dreadful
It is an evil abode and resting-place
They are those who, when they spend, are neither wasteful nor tightfisted, but maintain balanced spending habits
[as well as] those who never invoke another god alongside God nor kill the soul that God has forbidden [to be killed], except in the pursuit of justice, nor commit unlawful sexual intercourse. Whoever does these things will face a penalty
that will be multiplied for him on the Day of Resurrection, and he will remain in humiliation forever
except those who repent, believe and do righteous work, [in that case] God will replace their evil deeds with good ones for God is ever-forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Whoever repents and acts righteously has truly returned to God in repentance
Those who do not testify to falsehood, and, when they pass near ill speech, pass by with dignity
and those who, when reminded of their Lord's revelations, do not turn a deaf ear or a blind eye
and those who say, "Our Lord, give us joy in our spouses and offspring, and make us a good example for those who are ever mindful of You
All of them will be awarded the highest paradise for what they patiently endured and they will be received with greetings of peace
and will live there for eternity. What an excellent home and place of rest
Say [to unbelievers], "What would my Lord care for you if not for your prayers to Him?" But since you have denied the truth as lies, [punishment] will inevitably befall you
Ta Seen Meem
these are the verses of the Book that makes everything clear
Perhaps, [Prophet] you punish yourself with grief because they will not believe
If We so will, We can send down from heaven a miracle that will force their necks to remain bowed in humility
Whenever a new revelation comes to them from the Merciful-to-all, they turn away
They have already denied the truth, but the news of what they used to ridicule will come back to [hunt] them
Do not they see the earth, and how many kinds of noble pairs of plants, We have caused to grow in it
There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
When your Lord called on Moses, [saying], "Go to the unjust people
the people of Pharaoh. Will they not be mindful of Me
He said, "My Lord, I fear that they will call me a liar
and that my breast will tighten, and my tongue will be tied, so send for Aaron
Besides, they have a charge against me, so I fear that they will kill me
[God] said, "No. Go both of you with Our signs; We are with you, listening
Go to Pharaoh and say, "We are messengers from the Lord of the worlds
let the Children of Israel go with us
[Pharaoh] said, "Did we not raise you among us as a child, and did you not live among us for many years
[Then] you committed that crime of yours, you were so ungrateful
[Moses] said, "At the time I did it, I was of the misguided
So I fled from you because I feared you. Then my Lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the Messengers
As for that favor of which you remind me, was it not because you enslaved the Children of Israel
Pharaoh said, "But what is the Lord of the worlds
He said, "The Lord of the heavens and earth and all that is between them, if you only knew
[Pharaoh] said to those around him, "Do you hear [what he said]
[Moses went on], "Your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
[Pharaoh] said, "This messenger who has been sent to you is really mad
[Moses] said, "Lord of the east and the west and that between them, if you [would just use your] reason
[Pharaoh] said, "If you take a god other than me, I will surely imprison you
[Moses] said, "Even if I show you undeniable proof
[Pharaoh] said, "Bring it, then, if you are telling the truth
So [Moses] threw down his staff; and behold, it was an undeniable snake
Then he drew out his hand, and-behold- it was [shining] white for all to see
[Pharaoh] said to the notables around him, "This is a skilled magician
He wants to drive you out of your land with his magic, so what do you recommend
They said, "Let him and his brother wait for a while, and [meanwhile] send marshals to all the cities
to bring every skilled magician
So the magicians were assembled at the appointed time on the appointed day
It was said to the People, "Have you assembled
so that we might follow the magicians if they win
When the magicians arrived, they said to Pharaoh, "Is there a reward for us if we win
He said, "Yes. You will be in my inner circle
Moses said to them, "Throw whatever you will throw
So they threw their ropes and their staffs, and said, "By the might of Pharaoh, We will surely win
Then Moses threw down his staff, and it devoured their deceptions
And down fell the magicians in prostration [to God]
saying, "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
the Lord of Moses and Aaron
[Pharaoh] said, "How dare you believe in Him before I have given you permission? He [Moses] must be your leader who has taught you magic. But soon you will know. I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will crucify all of you
They said, "We do not care! We will be returning to our Lord
We hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, because we were the first believers
We later revealed to Moses, "Travel by night with My worshipers, for you will be pursued
Then Pharaoh sent his marshals to the cities
[saying], "[The Children of Israel] are a small band
but they are offending us
and we are a vigilant society
So We expelled them from [their] gardens and springs
treasures and honored estates
Thus it was. [In time], We caused the Children of Israel to inherit all of this
So, they [the Egyptians] pursued them at sunrise
and when the two sides sighted one another, Moses' companions' said, "We will be overtaken
[Moses] said, "No! my Lord is with me; He will guide me
Then, We revealed to Moses, "Strike with your staff the sea." It parted, and each part looked like a mountain
We brought the pursuers right into it
and We saved Moses and all who were with him
and We drowned the others
There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
Tell them the story of Abraham
when he asked his father and his people, "What do you worship
They said, "We worship idols, and we always attend to them
He asked, "Do they hear you when you call on them
Or do they benefit you, or harm you
They said, "But this is what we found our fathers doing
He said, "Have you really thought about what You have been worshipping
you and your forefathers
They are enemies to me. [I worship none] except the Lord of the worlds
Who created me. It is He Who guides me
and He who feeds me and gives me drink
and He who heals me when I am ill
and He who will cause me to die and then bring me back to life
and who, I hope, will forgive my sins on the Day of Judgment
[Abraham then said], "My Lord, grant me wisdom and allow me to join with the righteous
and grant me a lasting mention as one who told the truth among later generations
And make me among those who will inherit the Garden of Bliss
Forgive my father, for he has been of those who were misguided
and do not disgrace me on the Day they are [all] resurrected
the Day when neither wealth nor children will benefit [anyone]
except the one who comes to God with a flawless heart
[On that day], Paradise will be brought near to those who were mindful of God
and Hell will be brought forth for those who were misled
It will be said to them, "Where are those you used to worship
other than God? Can they help you or help themselves
So They will be hurled into Hell with those who misled them
with Iblis' helpers, all together
While bickering with each other they will say
By God, we were obviously misguided
when we equated you with the Lord of the worlds
No one misguided us except those who forced us to reject God's messages
So now we have no intercessors
nor a devoted friend
If we can only go back [to the world) , we will be believers
There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
The people of Noah denied the Messengers
when their brother Noah said to them, "Will you not be mindful of God
I am a trustworthy messenger to you
So be mindful of God and obey me
I ask no reward from you for doing this; my reward comes only from the Lord of the worlds
So be mindful of God, and obey me
They said, "How can we believe you when you are followed mostly by the lowest [class of People]
He said, "What do I know about what they have been doing
It is for my Lord alone to bring them to account, if you [could] only understand
I am not one to drive away the believers
I am only a clear warner
They said, "If you do not desist, Noah, you will surely be stoned
He said, "My Lord, my people have denied me
Judge between us decisively, and save me and those believers with me
So We saved him and those with him in the laden ark
and then We drowned the rest
There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
[The people of] Aad denied the Messengers
when their brother Hud said to them, "Will you not be mindful of God
I am a trustworthy messenger to you
so be mindful of God, and obey me
I ask no reward from you for doing this; my reward is only from the Lord of the worlds
Do you build a tower on every hill just to amuse yourselves
and construct for yourselves mighty castles hoping to live there eternally
And when you attack, why do you attack like tyrants
So be mindful of God, and obey me
and be mindful of Him Who provided you with everything you know
grazing livestock and children
gardens and springs
I fear for you the punishment of a terrible day
They said, "It is all the same to us whether you preach or not
this is only what our forefathers used to do
We will not be punished
They denied him, so We destroyed them. There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
[The people of] Thamud denied the Messengers
when their brother Salih said to them, "Will you not be mindful of God
I am a trustworthy messenger to you
so be mindful of God, and obey me
I ask no reward from you for doing this; my reward [comes) only from the Lord of the worlds
Do you think that you will be left secure in what you have here
[your] gardens and springs
fields of crops and palm trees with softened fruit
And your fine homes that you skillfully carve out of the mountains
Be mindful of God and obey me
and do not obey those given to excess
who spread corruption on earth and do not set things right
They said, "You are bewitched
You are only a man like us, so bring a sign, if you are telling the truth
He said, "This is a camel. She will have a time to drink, and you will have a time, [each) on an appointed day
Do not harm her, unless you want to be seized by the punishment of a terrible day
But they hamstrung her and woke up fully regretful
and the punishment seized them. There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
The People of Lot denied the Messengers
When their brother Lot said to them, "Will you not be mindful of God
I am a trustworthy messenger to you
So be mindful of God, and obey me
I ask no reward from you for doing this; my reward comes only from the Lord of the worlds
Why do you get intimate with men
and leave the mates your Lord has created for you? You people have transgressed all bounds
They said, "If you do not stop this, Lot, you will surely be kicked out
He said, "I despise your actions
My Lord, save me and my family from (the consequence of] what they do
So We saved him and his family, all of them
except for an old woman who stayed behind
Then, We destroyed the others
We poured upon them a rain of destruction. How terrible is such rain on those who had been forewarned
There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly, your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
The woods-dwellers denied the Messengers
When Shu'ayb said to them, "Will you not be mindful of God
I am a trustworthy messenger to you
so be mindful of God, and obey me
I ask no reward from you for doing this; my reward comes only from the Lord of the worlds
Give full measure, and do not cheat
Weigh with an even scale
and do not mislead people into thinking that their goods are worth less than their real value, and do not spread corruption on earth
Fear Him who created you and the former generations
They said, "You are surely bewitched
You are a man like us, and we think you are a liar
Make a fragment of the sky fall on us, if you are telling the truth
He said, "My Lord knows best what you are doing
But they did not believe him, and the punishment of the day of shadow seized them truly, the punishment of a terrible day
There is a sign in this, but most of them will not believe
Truly your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
This [Qur'an] is the revelation sent as you received it from the Lord of the worlds
and brought down by The Trustworthy Spirit
to your heart, that you may (Prophet] be of the warners
in a clear perfected [Arabic] tongue
It is mentioned in the scriptures of the ancients
Is it not a sign that the scholars of the Children of Israel knew it
Yet even if We had revealed it to a non-Arab
and he had recited it to them, they would still not believe in it
This is how We make it go unheeded through the hearts of those who force others to reject Our messages
they will not believe until they see the painful punishment
that will come upon them suddenly, when they do not expect it
They will say, "May we have more time
Why do they ask that we hasten Our punishment
Do you see that, if We gave them years of enjoyment
then inflicted the punishment as promised
what good would the years of enjoyment be to them
We have never destroyed a town without sending messengers to warn
and remind it, for We have never been unjust
The devils did not bring it [this Qur'an] down
They are not able, nor are they capable
As they are indeed barred from hearing [what goes on around the throne of His majesty]
So do not invoke another deity beside God, or you will incur punishment
Warn your closest relatives
and be humble and kind to the believers who follow you
but, if they disobey you, then say, "I am not responsible for what you are doing
And rely upon the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
Who sees you when you arise
and when you move among those who prostrate themselves
He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing
Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend
They descend upon every sinful liar
who readily lends an ear, but most of them are liars
As for the poets, [only] the perverse follow them
Do you not see that they wander aimlessly in every valley
and say what they do not do
But except those [poets) who believe, do righteous deeds, remember God often, and defend themselves after they were wronged. Those who do wrong will soon know the kind of reversal they will receive
Ta, Seen. These are the verses of the Qur'an, a book that makes everything clear
a guidance and good news for the believers
who perform prayer and give the purifying alms, and are certain of the Hereafter
As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have made their deeds seem right in their own eyes, so they will wander blindly
It is they who will receive the worst punishment, and, in the Hereafter, they are the most failing
You have received the Qur'an from the Grace of the All-Wise and All-Knowing
[Mention] when Moses said to his family, "I think I see a fire. I will bring you information or will bring you a burning torch that you may warm yourselves
But when he reached it, a voice called to him: "Blessed is He who is in the fire and whoever is around it. And may God be exalted in His Glory, the Lord of the Worlds
Moses, It is I-God, the Almighty, the Wise
Throw down your staff." But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he ran away and did not turn. [God said], "Moses, do not be afraid. In My presence the Messengers do not have anything to fear
I am Forgiving and Merciful to him who does wrong but [who then] replaces his bad deeds with good ones
And put your hand in your garment; it will come out white yet unharmed-one of nine signs [you will take] to Pharaoh and his people. They have been disobedient people
But when Our enlightening signs came to them, they said, "This is clearly magic
Even though they were convinced, they rejected them out of spite and pride. So consider what happen to those who spread corruption
We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they said, "Praise God, who has favored us over many of His believing servants
And Solomon was David's heir. He said, "People, we have been taught the language of birds, and we have been given a share of everything. This is clearly a blessing
Then one day, Solomon's troops of jinn and men and birds were assembled before him, and they were [marching] in rows
When they came upon the valley of the ants, one of the ants said, "Ants enter your dwellings so that you will not be crushed by Solomon and his soldiers without their knowing it
Solomon smiled, amused at what she said, and said, "My Lord, enable me to be grateful for the blessings You have given me and my parents, and that I may do righteous deeds accepted by You. And admit me by Your mercy into [the ranks of] Your righteous worshipers
[One day] he inspected the birds and said, "Why do I not see the hoopoe, or is he absent without permission
I will surely punish him severely or kill him unless he brings me a convincing excuse
But the hoopoe did not stay away for long. It said, "I learned something that you do not know, and I have brought you news from Sheba
I found a woman ruling them. She has been given [an abundance] of all things, and she has a magnificent throne
I found that she and her people bow to the sun instead of God. Satan has made their deeds seem right to them and has turned them away from the right path, so they cannot find their way
Should they not bow to God, who brings forth what is hidden within the heavens and the earth, and who knows what you conceal and what you declare
He is God-there is no god except Him, Lord of the awesome Throne
[Solomon] said, "We will see whether you told the truth or were a liar
Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them. Then withdraw but see what response they will have
The Queen said, "Counselors, a gracious letter has been delivered to me
It is from Solomon, and it is, 'In the name of God, the Merciful-to-all, the Mercy Giver
Do not allow yourself to think that you are above me, come to me in submission
She said, "Council, advise me on the matter before me. I will not decide on a matter unless I hear from you
They said, "We are powerful and have great military might, but the decision is yours, and we stand ready to follow your orders
She said, "When kings enter a town, they ruin it and humiliate its proudest inhabitants. This is what they do
I am sending them a gift, and I will see what the messengers bring back
So when her messengers gained an audience with Solomon [and presented the gift], Solomon said, "Do you bring me wealth, when what God has given me is better than what He has given you? It is people like you who will rejoice in a gift like this
Go back [and tell] them, that we will come to them with soldiers whom they will be unable to face, and We will expel them from their land in humiliation, and disgrace
Then he said, "Council, which of you will bring me her magnificent throne before they come to me in submission
A daring one from among the jinn said, "I will bring it to you before you rise from your council. I am strong enough to do it and can be trusted
But one who had knowledge from the Book said, "I will bring it to you before your glance returns to you." And when [Solomon] saw it placed before him, he said, "This is a favor of my Lord to test me whether I will be grateful or not. And whoever is grateful, it is for his own good. As for the ungrateful, then my Lord is rich beyond need and generous
Then he said, "Disguise her throne; We will see whether she will allow herself to be guided [to truth] or will be among those who reject guidance
So when she arrived, she was asked, "Is your throne like this?" She said, "It is as if it were the same." [Solomon thought], "We were given knowledge before her, and we have been submissive to God
While what she worshiped beside God prevented her from believing, as she is from a people who deny the truth
She was told, "Enter the courtyard." But when she saw it, she thought it was a pool and uncovered her legs. He said, "It is a courtyard paved with smooth glass." She said, "My Lord, I have been wrong [because of my limited knowledge], and I submit with Solomon to God, Lord of the Worlds
And We sent to Thamud their brother Salih, [saying], "Worship God," but they were split into rival factions
He said, "My people, why are you so anxious to rush towards evil instead of to good? Why you do not ask God for forgiveness, so that maybe you will receive mercy
They said, "We consider you to be a bad omen, you and those with you." He said, "Your omen is with God. Rather, it is you who are being tested
And in the town there were heads of nine clans who spread mischief in the land and did no good
They said to each other, "Let's take an oath by God that we will kill him and his family tonight. Then we will say to his protector, 'we did not witness the destruction of his family, and we are truthful
So they devised their plan, and We too had a plan, but they were not aware of what We were planning
Look, then, at the outcome of their plan: We destroyed them and all their people
Here are their houses, desolate because they were unjust. There is a sign in that for people who know
And We saved those who believed and were mindful of God
And Lot, when he said to his people, "How can you commit this indecent act with your eyes wide open
You lust after men instead of women? You are ignorant people
But his people's answer was "Expel Lot and his family from your town. They are people who keep themselves pure
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife; We determined she would be with those who stayed behind
And We rained upon them a rain. Horrible was the rain for those who were forewarned
Say, "Praise be to God, and peace be on His worshipers whom He has chosen. Is not God better than those they associate with Him
Is He [not best] who created the heavens and the earth? Who sent down rain from the sky for you, causing gardens full of beauty to grow; you could not have grown the trees on your own. Is there another god alongside God? [No], but there are people who take others to be equal to Him
Is He [not best] who made the earth a stable ground, and placed rivers within it, and set mountains firmly on it, and placed a barrier between the two seas? Is there a god with God? [No], but most of them do not know
Is He [not best] Who responds to the desperate when he calls upon Him, and Who removes his distress and makes you successors on earth? Is there a god with God? Little do you remember
Is He [not best] Who guides you through the darkness of land and sea and who sends the winds, bringing advance news of His mercy? Is there a god with God? Exalted is God above whatever they associate with Him
Is He [not best] Who begins creation and then repeats it, and Who provides for you from the heaven and the earth? Is there a god with God? Say, "Show me your evidence, if you are truthful
Say, "None in the heavens and earth knows what lies beyond our senses except God, and they do not know when they will be resurrected
Rather, their knowledge cannot comprehend the Hereafter. They are in doubt about it; they are in fact blind to it
So the unbelievers say, "When we and our fathers become dust, will we then be brought out of the graves
We and our forefathers have been promised this before. This is only a legend of an ancient people
Say, "Travel around the earth and observe the fate of those who are guilty of forcing others to reject God's messages
[Prophet,] do not grieve over them or be distressed by what they conspire
They say, "When is [the fulfillment of] this promise, if you are truthful
Say, "Perhaps some of what you seem eager for is closer than you think
Verily your Lord is bountiful to people, but most of them do not show gratitude
Certainly your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare
for there is nothing [so] hidden in heaven and earth that it is not in a clear record
This Revelation [The Qur'an] explains to the Children of Israel most of what they differ about
And It is guidance and mercy for the Believers
Your Lord will judge between them by His [wise] judgment, for He is the Almighty, the All-Knowing
So put your trust in God; you are on the path of clear Truth
You will not make the dead hear, nor will you make the deaf listen to the call when they have turned their backs and gone away
and you cannot guide the blind away from their error. You cannot make anyone hear you except those who believe in Our signs and submit to [Us]
And when the judgment comes against them, We will bring forth a beast from the earth to tell them that, truly people had no true faith in Our signs
And [warn of] the Day when We will gather from every nation a crowd of those who deny Our messages, and they will be formed into groups
until, when they arrive [at the place of Judgment], He will say, "Did you deny My messages without even trying to understand them? What were you doing
The verdict will be handed down for their wrongdoing, and they will not speak
Do they not see that We made the night for them to rest and the day to see? There are signs in that for people who believe
And [warn of] the Day on which the Horn will be blown, and everyone in the heavens and on earth will be terrified except whom God wills, and all will come to Him completely humbled
And you will see the mountains, thinking they are solid, going by like clouds. [It is] the work of God, who perfected all things; He is well aware of all you do
Whoever comes [at Judgment] with a good deed will be rewarded with something better, and they will be safe from the terror of that Day
And whoever comes with an evil deed, they will be cast face down into the Fire, [and will be asked] "Are you being repaid for anything except what you have done
[Say], "I have simply been ordered to worship the Lord of this town, Who made it sacred and to Whom all things belong. And I have been ordered to be one of those who submit to God
and recite the Qur'an." Whoever is guided is guided only for his own good, and to whoever strays, say, "I am only one who gives warning
And say, "All praise is due to God. [In time] He will show you His signs, and you will recognize them. Your Lord is never unaware of what you do
Ta Seen Meem
these are the verses of the Book that make everything clear
We recite to you from the story of Moses and Pharaoh setting out the Truth for people who believe
Pharaoh exalted himself and divided the people into factions: oppressing a segment of them, slaughtering their sons while sparing the women. He was one of those who spread corruption
But, We wanted to favor those who were oppressed in the land, and make them leaders and make them inheritors of the land
and to empower them and show Pharaoh, Haman and their soldiers through them the very thing that they feared
So, We inspired Moses' mother, "Nurse him for now; but when you fear for his safety, put him into the river; do not be afraid and do not grieve. We will return him to you and will make him a messenger
And Pharaoh's people picked him up, to become later an enemy to them and a source of grief, [since] Pharaoh and Haman and their soldiers were sinners
Pharaoh's wife said, "He will be a delight for my eyes and yours. Do not kill him; He may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." They did not realize [the consequences of] what was going on
[Later] Moses' mother felt her heart totally empty. She was about to disclose the matter had We not strengthened her heart that she would be counted among the believers
And she said to his sister, "Follow him," so she watched him from a distance without being noticed
And We made him reject all wet nurses, so she said, "Shall I tell you about a household that will feed him for you and be good to him
And We returned him to his mother so that she might delight her eyes with him, not grieve and know that God's promise is true. But most people do not know
And when he attained his full strength and maturity, We gave him judgment and knowledge. And thus We reward those who do of good
[One day] he entered the town unnoticed and found two men fighting, one from his own people and the other from his enemy. The one from his own people cried out to him for help against the enemy, so Moses struck him and killed him. [Moses] said, "This must be from Satan's doing. He is clearly an enemy who clearly leads [people] astray
He said, "My Lord, I have done wrong. Please forgive me," and He forgave him. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful-to-all
[Moses] said, "My Lord, with all of Your blessings to me, I will never support those who do evil
Next morning, he entered the town, fearful and anxious, when suddenly the man who sought his help the previous day cried out to him again for help. Moses said to him, "You are clearly a troublemaker
As [Moses] was about to strike the one who was an enemy to both of them, [the man] said, "Moses, do you want to kill me as you killed that man yesterday? You want only to be an oppressor in the land and do not want to put things right
And a man came from the far end of the town, running. He said, "Moses, they are talking about killing you, so leave; I am giving you a good advice
So [Moses] left the town, fearful and on his guard. He said, "My Lord, save me from these oppressive people
And as he made his way toward Midian, he was saying, "Perhaps my Lord will guide me in the right way
When he came to the well of Midian, he found there a crowd of people watering [their flocks], and beside them he found two women holding back their flocks. He said, "What is going on?" They said, "We cannot water until the shepherds take their flocks away, and our father is an old man
So he watered their flocks for them. Then he went back to the shade and said, "My Lord, I am very much in need for whatever good You might send down to me
Then, one of the two women came walking toward him shyly and said, "My father would like to pay you for having watered [our flock] for us." So when Moses came to him and told him his story, he said, "Don't be afraid. You have escaped from those oppressive people
One of the women said, "Father, hire him. A strong and the trustworthy man is the best that you can hire
He said, "I want to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you, on [condition] that you work for me for eight full years; but if you complete ten, it will be seen [as a favor] from you. I do not wish to make things difficult for you. You will find me to be, God willing, a fair man
[Moses] said, "That is a deal between us. Whichever of the two terms I complete, there should be no bad feelings toward me. May God be Witness over what we say
When Moses completed the term and was traveling with his family, he noticed a fire from the direction of the mountain. He said to his family, "Stay here, I have seen a fire. Perhaps I will bring you from there [some] information or burning wood from the fire that you may warm yourselves
But when he came to the fire, a voice called from the right side of the valley from the tree on the blessed spot, "Moses, I am God, Lord of the worlds
Throw down your staff." But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he fled in fear and would not return. "Moses [he was called again], comeback and do not be afraid. You are one of those who are safe
Insert your hand in your garment; it will come out white, but unharmed. And hug your arms to your sides to still your fear, for those are two proofs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his inner circle. They have been defiant and disobedient people
He said, "My Lord, I killed one of them, and I fear they will kill me
My brother Aaron can speak better than I, so send him with me to support me and confirm my words. I fear they will call me a liar
[God] said, "We will strengthen you through your brother and We shall give you both power so that they cannot touch you. With our signs, you and those who follow you will be victorious
But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said, "This is only false magic. We have not heard of this from our forefathers
Moses said, "My Lord knows best who has come with guidance from Him and whose end will be best in the Hereafter. Those who are unjust do not succeed
Pharaoh said, "Counselors, I have not known you to have a god other than Me. Haman, light me a fire to bake clay, and then build me a tower that I may climb up to Moses' God. I think he's a liar
He and his soldiers behaved arrogantly in the land, as they did not know the Truth, and they thought that they would not return to Us
So, We took him and his soldiers and threw them into the sea. See what became of the unjust
We made them leaders calling [others] to the Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection they will receive no help
And We pursued them with a curse in this world, and, on the Day of Resurrection, they will be among the despised
After We had destroyed the earlier generations, We gave Moses the Book as enlightenment to the people, and as guidance and mercy so that they might be reminded
You [Prophet], were not on the western side [of the mount] when We gave Our command to Moses, and you were not a witness
But We produced [many] generations [after Moses], and life dragged on for them. You were not dwelling among the people of Midian, reciting Our verses to them, but We have always sent messages to people
Nor were you on the side of the mount when We called [Moses], but [you were sent] as a mercy from your Lord to warn a people to whom no messenger had come before, so that they might be reminded
that if a disaster should strike them for what they have done, they would not be able to say, "Our Lord, if You had only sent a messenger to us so we could have followed Your instructions and became believers
But even when the Truth came to them from Us, they said, "Why Was [the Prophet] not given signs like those given to Moses?" Did they not previously deny what Moses was given? They said, "[These are just] two magicians supporting each other, and we are denying each of them
Say, "If you are truthful, then bring a Book from God that gives better guidance than either of them that I may follow it
But if they do not respond to you, then know that they are only following their whims and desires. And who is more lost than one who follows his own whims and desires without guidance from God? God does not guide unjust people
We have continuously conveyed the Word to them that they might take heed
Those to whom We gave the Book before [are bound to] believe it
When it is recited to them, they say, "We believe in it. It is the Truth from our Lord. We had devoted ourselves to God even before this came to us
They will be given their reward twice for what they patiently endured, and [because] they ward off evil with good, and give from what we have provided for them
When they hear worthless talk, they turn away from it and say, "We have our deeds, and you have your deeds. Peace be with you; we do not seek the company of the ignorant
You [Prophet] cannot guide [to the Truth] whom you love, but God guides him who wants to be guided. And He knows best those who are guided
They say, "If we were to follow the guidance with you, we would be torn from our land." Have we not established for them a safe sanctuary, to which are brought all kind of fruits, as provisions from Us? But most of them do not understand
How many towns have We destroyed which lived in ease and plenty but were ungrateful? Here are their dwellings, virtually uninhabited since their time. We have inherited them
Your Lord never destroys cities unless He [first] sends a messenger in their midst reciting Our verses, nor would We destroy cities unless their inhabitants were evil
[People] whatever you are given is only for the [passing] enjoyment and vanity of this life, but what is with God is better and more lasting. Will you not, then, use reason
Is the one who sees the fulfillment of the good promise We gave him [about the Hereafter] like the one We provided with worldly enjoyment [but] who, on the Day of Resurrection, is summoned [for punishment]
On that Day, He will call them and say, "Where are My partners whom you used to claim
Those against whom the charge will be proved will say, "Our Lord, these are the people we led astray, just as we, too, were led astray. We declare our innocence to You; it was not us they were worshipping
It will be said to them, "Call those 'partners.' " They will call them, but they will not respond to them, and they will see the punishment [that awaits]. If only they had followed Our guidance
On that day He will call them and say, "How did you respond to My Messengers
All their usual arguments will be of no use to them that Day, and they will not [be able to] ask one another
As for the one who has repented, believed, and done righteous deeds, he can hope that to be counted among the successful
Your Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses; The choice is never theirs. May God be exalted in His Glory and far above all they associate with Him
Your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they declare
He is God; there is no god except Him. [All] praise belongs to Him in this world and the next. The judgment is His, and to Him you will be returned
Say, "Just think, if God were to make the night continuous for you until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than God could bring you light? Will you not listen
Say, "Just think, what if God should make daylight continuous for you until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than God could bring you the night in which to rest? Will you not see
But, out of His mercy, He made the night and the day for you so that you may rest, and seek from His favor, and perhaps give thanks
On the Day He will call them and say, "Where are those you used to claim as My partners
We will pull out a witness from every nation and say, "Produce your evidence." They will then know that the Truth belongs to God alone, and [the gods] they have invented have forsaken them
Korah was one of Moses' people, but he exploited them. We allowed him to have treasures, the keys to which would burden even a band of strong men. When his people told him, "Don't gloat . God does not like it, when people gloat
seek the Hereafter with what God has given you, but do not neglect your share of this world. Do good as God has done good to you. Do not seek to cause corruption in the land, for God does not like those who spread corruption
His answer was, "I was able to obtain this [wealth] because of knowledge I have." Did he not know that God had destroyed many generations before him, who had greater power than he, and greater wealth? But the criminals will not even be asked about their sins
So he came out, in his splendor, before his people. Those who desired this worldly life said, "How we wish to have been given like what Korah had been given; he is truly a most fortunate man
But those who had been given knowledge said, "You are wrong! God's reward is better for him who believes and does good deeds; only those with great patience will obtain this
And We caused the earth to swallow him and his house. There was no one to help him against God, nor could he help himself
And those who had wished in the previous day to be in his place said, "As if God gives abundantly or sparingly, to whomever He wishes of His servants. Oh! If God had not been gracious to us, He would have caused the earth to swallow us too. Alas, those who deny the truth will never succeed
We grant a home in the Hereafter to those who do not desire superiority on earth or to spread corruption, for the [best] outcome is for those who are mindful of God
Whoever comes [on the Day of Judgment] with a good deed will have a better reward, and whoever comes with an evil deed will be punished only for what they have done
He who ordained the Qur'an for you [Prophet] will see you back to your destination. Say, "My Lord best knows he who brought true guidance, and he who is clearly lost
You [Prophet] could not have expected that the Book would be conveyed to you, but [It is] a mercy from your Lord. So do not back up the unbelievers
and never let them turn you away from God's revelations after they have been revealed to you. [Instead], invite people to your Lord. Never be one of those who associate others with God
and do not invoke another god besides God; there is no god except Him. All things will perish except His Face. Judgment belongs to Him, and to Him you will be returned
Alif Lam Meem
do people think that they will be left to say, "We believe," without being tested
We have tested those who lived before them, so God will note those who prove to be truthful, and will note the liars
Or do those who do bad deeds think they can escape Us? [That is] bad judgment on their part
As for those who look forward to meeting God, God's appointed time is coming. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing
And whoever strives, strives only to benefit himself, for God is rich beyond any needs of the worlds
As for those who believe and do good deeds, We will remove their bad deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they have done
We have commanded people to honor their parents; But do not obey them if they try to make you serve anything besides Me of which you have no knowledge, for you will all return to me, and I will tell you about everything you have done
Those who believe and do good deeds, We will admit them with the righteous [into Paradise]
Some people say, "We believe in God," but when one [of them] is harmed for God's sake, they consider human persecution to be as severe as God's punishment. But if victory comes from your Lord, they say, "We were always with you." Does God not know what is in everyone's heart
God will surely note the believers, and will note the hypocrites
The unbelievers said to the believers, "Follow our way, and We will bear your sins." But they will not bear any of their sins. They are liars
They will surely carry their own burdens, and other burdens along with their burdens, and they will be questioned on the Day of Resurrection about their false assertions
We sent Noah to [call] his people [to God]. He remained among them a thousand years minus fifty, and the flood seized them while they were unjust
But We saved him and the ark's occupants, and We made it a sign for the worlds
And [We sent] Abraham, who called on his people, "Worship God and be always mindful of Him. That is best for you if you should know
You worship mere idols instead of God; they are man-made lies. Those you worship instead of God do not have the ability to provide for you. So seek provision from God and worship Him and be grateful to Him. You will all be returned to Him
If you deny [Our message], there are nations before you who have denied it. The Messenger is only responsible for clear transmission
Have they not considered how God begins creation and then repeats it? That, for God, is easy
Say, "Travel throughout the earth and observe how He brings life into being. Then God will bring the next life into being, for God has power over all things
He punishes whom He wills and has mercy on whom He wills, and you will all be returned to Him
You will never be beyond His reach on earth or in the heaven, and you have none other than God to protect you or help you
Those who deny God's signs and their preordained meeting with Him-they have lost hope of My mercy, and they will have a painful punishment
The only answer of [Abraham's] people was "Kill him or burn him," but God saved him from the fire. In that there are signs for people who believe
[Abraham] said, "You have chosen [to worship] idols other than God, but your bond of affection with them will be only in this worldly life. On the Day of Resurrection, you will deny and curse one another, and your refuge will be the Fire, [where] you will have no helpers
Lot believed him. He said, "I will flee to my Lord, He is the Almighty, the Wise
And We gave Isaac and Jacob to Abraham, and placed prophets and the Book among his descendants. We gave him his reward in this world, and he is in the Hereafter among the righteous
And Lot, when he said to his people, "You commit such outrageous immoral acts that no one else in the world ever committed before you
You lust after men, obstruct nature's way, and commit [every] shameful act in your gatherings." His people's answer was: "Bring us God's punishment if what you say is true
He said, "My Lord, support me against these wicked people
And when Our Messengers came to Abraham with the good news, [of Isaac's birth] they also said, "We will destroy the people of that town. Its people have been wicked
[Abraham] said, "But Lot is there." They said, "We know who is there better than you do. We will save him and his family, except for his wife. She is to be among those who remain behind
And when Our Messengers came to Lot, they were mistreated, and he was troubled and distressed on their account, because he felt powerless to protect them. They said, "Fear not, nor grieve. We will save you and your family, except your wife; she's among those who will remain behind
We will bring down punishment from the sky on the people of this town because they have deviated [from God's orders]
We have a remnant of that town as clear evidence for people who use their reason
And to Midian [We sent] their brother Shu'ayb, who told them, "My people, worship God, and look forward to the Last Day, and do not spread wickedness on the earth
But they rejected him, so an earthquake seized them, and next morning they lay dead in their homes
And Aad and Thamud-what happen to them is obvious to you from their [ruined] dwellings. Satan made their deeds pleasing to them and diverted them from the path [of God] even though they had been able to see the truth
[The same fate befell] Korah, Pharaoh and Haman. Moses came to all of them with clear evidence, but they chose to be arrogant on earth, and they couldn't escape Our punishment
So We seized each of them for their wrong doing: upon some We sent a storm of stones, and some were seized by a blast [from the sky], and some We caused the earth to swallow, and some We drowned. It was not God who did them an injustice, they did themselves an injustice
The example of those who take protectors other than God is like that of the spider that made itself a home, for the weakest of homes is the spider's home. If they only knew
God knows whatever they call upon other than Him, for He is the Almighty, the Wise
Such examples We offer to people, but only those with knowledge will grasp their meaning
God created the heavens and the earth in Truth. There is in that a sign for the believers
Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book, and pray. Prayer restrains indecency and wrongdoing, and enhances the remembrance of God. God knows all that you do
If you argue with the People of the Book, then argue only in the kindest way, except with those among them who are unjust, and say, "We believe in what was revealed to us and in what was revealed to you. Our God and your God is one; and we are submissive to Him
Hence, We have sent down the Book to you [Prophet]. Those to whom We previously gave the Book believe in it, and so do some of these [other] people. No one rejects Our revelations except those who deny an obvious truth
You never recited any Book before We revealed this one to you, nor did you ever write one with your own hand. Otherwise, those who try to disprove the truth would have had cause for doubt
Rather, the Qur'an is a clear message to the hearts of those who have been given knowledge. No one knowingly rejects Our verses except those who are unjust [to themselves]
But they say, "Why have no miracles been sent down to him from his Lord?" Say, "The miracles are only with God, and I am only sent to give you a clear warning
Isn't it enough for them that We inspired you to recite the Book to them? There is a mercy in this and a reminder for believing people
Say, "God is sufficient witness between you and me. He knows what is in the heavens and earth. Those who believe in falsehood and deny God will be the losers
They dare you to hasten judgment against them. They would already have received a punishment had its time not already been set [by God], but it will surely come to them suddenly, when they least expect it
They dare you to hasten their punishment, but Hell will surely encompass the unbelievers
on the Day when the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from beneath their feet, and He will say, "Taste [the result of] what you have done
My worshipers who have believed My earth is spacious, so worship only Me
Every soul will taste death. Then you will be returned to Us
To those who have believed and done righteous deeds, We will assign mansions in Paradise through which rivers flow, where they will remain forever-an excellent reward for those who do good work
who have been patient, and who have put their trust in their Lord
How many a creature gives no thought to their [own] sustenance, but God provides for them and for you. He is the All-Hearing, the All-knowing
If you asked them, "Who created the heavens and earth and made the sun and the moon subservient [to his laws]?" They will say, "God." Then why do they lie about it
God gives plenty to anyone He wants, and gives little to anyone He wants. God knows everything
And if you asked them, "Who sends down rain from the sky to give life to the earth after it was dead?" They would surely say "God." Say, "Praise be to God;" but most of them do not think
The life of this world is only diversion and amusement, whereas the true life is in the Hereafter. If they only knew
When they board a ship, they pray to God, dedicating their faith to him alone, but when He delivers them safely to shore, at once they associate others with Him
So let them deny what We have given them, and let them enjoy themselves, they will soon know
Do they not see that We have made [Mecca] a secure sanctuary, while, all around them, people are being taken away? How is it possible that they still believe in falsehood and deny the blessings of God
Who is more unjust than one who invents lies about God or denies the Truth when it has come to him? Is there not [sufficient] room in Hell for the unbelievers
But those who strive for Our cause, We will surely guide them in Our ways. Truly, God is with those who do good
Alif Lam Meem
the Byzantines have been defeated
in a nearby land, but, after their defeat, they will be victorious
within a few years. To God belongs the decision, from beginning to end. On that day [of victory] the Believers will rejoice
in God's victory. He gives victory to whoever He wills; He is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
This is God's promise, and God never breaks His promise, but most people do not know
They only know the outward aspect of this worldly life, but they are unaware of the Hereafter
Have they not considered in their own minds that God created the heavens, and the earth, and everything between them in Truth and for an appointed time? Yet many people deny that they will meet their Lord
Have they not traveled through the land and seen the final fate of those before them? They were greater in power than they are, cultivated the land, and built it up more than these have, and their messengers came to them with clear evidence. God would never have wronged them, but they did themselves wrong
The final fate of those who did evil was the worst, then, because they denied and ridiculed the signs of God
God brings creation into being; then, He reproduces it; then you will be returned to Him
On the day the hour comes, those, who force others to reject God's messages will be in despair
None of the partners they ascribed to God will intercede for them, so they will deny their partners
On the Day the Hour comes-on that Day, they will be sorted out
Those who believed and did good deeds, they will be jubilant in a [lovely] meadow
While those who denied the truth and denied Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, they will be delivered into everlasting punishment
So celebrate God's glory in the evening and in the morning
for to Him alone is praise due throughout the heavens and the earth, at night and at noon
He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living. He brings life to the earth after it has been dead. And you will be brought forth in the same way
Among His signs is that He created you from dust, and you became human beings, spread far and wide
And among His signs is that He created spouses for you from among yourselves, so that you may find peace with them, and He has placed affection and mercy between you. In this there are signs for people who think
And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your languages and your colors. These are signs for those who know
And among His signs is your [ability to] sleep by night and day, and to seek His bounties. These are signs for people who listen
And among His signs is [that] He shows you the lightening, [causing] fear and hope, and He sends down rain from the sky to revive the earth to life after it had been dead. These are signs for people who understand
And among His signs is that the heaven and the earth are sustained by His command. Then when He calls you forth from the earth, you will emerge immediately
To Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and earth; all are submissive to Him
It is He who brings forth creation, then He reproduces it, and that is easy for Him, for He is above all comparisons in the heavens and earth. He is the Almighty, The Wise
God gives you an example based on your lives: Do you make those whom your right hands held in trust your full partners with the wealth We have provided you, so that all of you own it equally? And do you fear [to use it without consulting] them, just as you might fear your equals? [No.] This is how We explain the verses for people who can understand
but those who persist on being evildoers follow their [own] whims and desires without knowledge. Who can guide those whom God allows to stray? They will have no helpers
So stand firm in your devotion to the faith, inclining to truth, [according to] the innate nature God has instilled in [all] people. There is no changing God's creation. This is the correct religion, but most people do not know it
turning to Him, being ever mindful of Him, performing prayer, and neither be from those who associate others with God
[Or] of those who have split up their faith and divided into sects, every faction rejoicing in what it has
When harm touches people, they call on their Lord, turning to Him for help. Then right after He gives them a taste of His mercy, some of them associate others with their Lord
[as if] to show their ingratitude for all that We have granted them. Enjoy your [brief] life, then, for you will soon know
Have We sent down to them an authority, that sanctions the partners they were associating with Him
When We give people a taste of mercy, they rejoice, but if something bad happens to them because of their own misdeeds, they immediately lose all hope
Do they not see that God gives much to anyone He wills or restricts it? In that are signs for people who believe
So give relatives their due, as well as the needy and the traveler. That is best for those who seek the pleasure of God; It is they who will prosper
And [remember]: what you lend in usury aiming to increase it from people's wealth will not increase in God's sight, but what you give in purifying alms, seeking God's approval, will multiply its rewards
It is God who created you, then provided for you, who will cause you to die and then will give you life again. Can any of your "partners" do any of those things? May He be exalted in His glory and high above anything they associate with Him
Corruption has appeared throughout the land and sea as a result of people's actions, so He will make them taste [the consequences of] some of their actions, so that perhaps they will return [to righteousness]
Say, "Travel through the land and observe the final fate of those who came before; most of them were idolaters
So stand firm in your devotion to the upright religion, before a Day comes from God that no one can stop. On that Day, they will be broken
Whoever denies the truth, his denial is against him; And whoever does good deeds, they are preparing the way for themselves
so, that He may reward, out of His bounty, those who have believed and done good deeds. He truly does not like the unbelievers
And of His signs is that He sends the winds bearing good news, to give you a taste of His mercy, and set ships to sail at His command, to enable you to seek His favor and, perhaps be thankful
We have already sent messengers to the people who came before you, and they came to them with clear evidence. Then, We imposed retribution on those who severed relations with Us, for We have taken it upon Ourselves to help the believers
It is God who sends the winds to raise the clouds. Then, He spreads them about the sky however He wills, and He makes them break up so you see the rain fall through them; and when He causes rain to fall on whomever of His worshipers He wills, they rejoice
even though, before it was sent down upon them they were in despair
So observe the effects of the God's mercy, how He gives life to the earth after it had been dead. He is the One who brings the dead to life; He has power over all things
But if We should [then] send a [bad] wind and they see [their crops turn] yellow, they would continue to deny the truth
Truly, you cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and go away
and you cannot guide the blind [of heart] away from their misguidance. You can make none hear you except those who believe in Our messages and thus submit themselves to us
It is God who creates you weak, then gives you strength, then after [a period of] strength, he ordains weakness and white hair. He creates what He wills. He is the All-knowing, the All-Powerful
On the Day the Hour comes, those who forced others to reject God's messages will swear they had idled [on earth] for only an hour, for they had always deluded themselves
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say, "You idled according to God's decree until the Day of Resurrection, and this is the Day of Resurrection, but you were determined not to know it
On that Day, the excuses of those who wronged [themselves] will not benefit them, nor will they be allowed to make amends
We have certainly presented to humanity all kind of parables in this Qur'an. Yet, if you [Prophet] should bring them a sign, the unbelievers will say, "You are all full of falsehood
This is how God seals the hearts of those who do not know
Be patient. God's promise is Truth, and do not let those who lack certainty dishearten you
Alif Lam Meem
these are verses of the wise Book
a guidance and mercy for those who do good
who establish prayer and give the purifying alms, and who are certain of the Hereafter
They are rightly guided by their Lord, and they are the successful
Some people prefer idle talk [over God's message] in order to lead those without knowledge away from God's path, and to ridicule it. They will have a humiliating punishment
And when our verses are recited to him, he turns away arrogantly, as if he had not heard, as if there was deafness in his ears, so give him news of a painful punishment
Those who believe and do good deeds will have Gardens of Delight
where they will remain forever. This is the true promise of God, for He is the Almighty, the Wise
He created the heavens without visible pillars, and firmly set mountains on earth, in case it should move under you, and spread every kind of creature over it. And We send down rain from the sky and make every kind of good plant grow
This is God's creation. Show me, then, what your other gods have created. Truly, the unjust are clearly lost
We gave Luqman Wisdom, "Be grateful to God. Whoever is grateful does so only for his own good, [whereas] whoever is ungrateful [should know that] God is rich beyond need and praiseworthy
Luqman said to his son while instructing him, "O my son, do not attribute any partners to God. Associating others with him is a great transgression
And We have commanded the human being to care for his parents. His mother carried him in weakness upon weakness, and his weaning is in two years. Be grateful to Me and to your parents; all will return to Me
But if they try to make you associate with Me other partners whom you don't know, do not obey them. Do, however, [continue to] keep them company in [this] world according to what is right, but follow the way of those who turn towards Me. Then you will all return to me, and I will make you understand all that you have done
My son, if something weighs as little as a mustard seed and should be within a rock or [anywhere] in the heavens or in the earth, God will bring it forth. God is Most-Subtle, All-Aware
My son, keep up prayer, order what is obviously right, forbid what is obviously wrong, and be patient [in the face of] all that happens to you. Surely, these acts require courage
And do not turn your cheek [in contempt] away from people, and do not walk in arrogance, for God does not like any vain and boastful person
And be moderate in your pace and lower your voice; the most disagreeable sound is the braying of donkeys
Do you not see that God has made everything in heaven and on earth subject to you, and has abundantly showered you with His favors, [both] seen and unseen? Yet some people argue about God in ignorance without guidance or illuminating Scripture
And when they are told, "Follow what God has revealed," they say, " We will follow what we found our fathers doing." [What?] Even if Satan was inviting them to the punishment of the Blazing Fire
Whoever turns his face in submission to God while he is doing good has grasped the most trustworthy handhold. God determines the outcome of [all] matters
And do not let the denial of those who continue to deny the truth grieve you, [Prophet]. They will return to Us, and We will tell them everything that they have done. God knows everything that lies within the heart
We will grant them some enjoyment for a while, [but] then We will force a massive punishment on them
And, if you asked them, "Who created the heavens and earth?" They would say, "God." Say, "[All] praise is [due] to God," but most of them do not understand
Whatever is in the heavens and earth belongs to God, for God is the Rich beyond need, the Praiseworthy
If all the trees on earth were pens and the sea [were] ink with seven [more] seas to replenish it, God's words would not be exhausted, for God is almighty and wise
Creating and resurrecting all of you is [for God] like creating and resurrecting a single soul. God is All-Hearing and All-Seeing
Do you not see that God causes the night to merge into the day and causes the day to merge into the night, and has made the sun and the moon subservient [to His laws], each running its course for a specified term, and that God is aware of all you do
Thus it is, because God is the Truth, and whatever they invoke besides Him is falsehood, and because God is the Most High, the Most Great
Do you not see that ships sail through the sea by the grace of God, so that He may show you some of His signs? In this are signs for everyone patient and grateful
And when waves come over them like [giant] shadows, they call out to God, sincere in their devotion to Him, but when He delivers them safely to shore, some of them waver. Only a treacherous and ungrateful person refuses to acknowledge Our signs
People, be conscious of your Lord and fear a Day when no father will be able to rescue his son, nor will a son be able to rescue his father at all. God's promise [of resurrection] is the Truth, so do not let this worldly life deceive you, nor deceptive thoughts about God delude you
God has knowledge of the Hour and sends down the rain, and knows what is in the wombs, but no soul knows what it will reap tomorrow, and no soul knows in what land it will die. God [alone] is All-Knowing and All-Aware
Alif Lam Meem
there is no doubt that this book has been sent down exactly as it is from the Lord of the Worlds
Or do they say, "He invented it?" Rather, it is the Truth from your Lord, so that you will warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, and that they may be guided
It is God who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days; then He sat down on the Throne of His majesty. Apart from Him, You have no one to protect you or to intercede for you, so, will you not remember this
He manages everything from heaven to earth; then, it will all ascend to Him on a Day whose measure is a thousand years as you count them
Such is He, the Knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
He perfected everything which He created, and began the creation of the human being from clay
then He made his discendents from the extract of a common fluid
then He formed him and breathed into him from His spirit, and made hearing and vision and hearts for you, yet you seldom are grateful
And they ask, "When we have decayed into the earth, will we be created anew?" In fact, they are denying that they will meet their Lord
Say, "The angel of death, who has been put in charge of you, will retrieve you. Then you will be brought back to your Lord
If you could only see those who forced others to reject Our messages, bowing their heads before their Lord, [saying], "Our Lord, We have seen and heard, so send us back, and we will do good, we are [now] certain
If it had been Our will, We could have given every soul its guidance, but My word came to be true: "I will surely fill up Hell with jinn and human beings all together
Taste [punishment]. Because you ignored the meeting of this Day of your Judgment, We will ignore you, so taste the punishment of eternity for all you have done
True believers in Our signs are those who, when they are reminded of them, fall down in prostration, and praise their Lord's limitless glory, and do not think they are too arrogant to do it
They forsake their beds as they call upon their Lord in fear and hope, and they share with others from what We have provided them
No soul knows what delight lies in store for them; a reward for what they have done
Is a believer the same as one who was defiantly disobedient? [No], they are not equal
As for those who believed and did good deeds, there will be Gardens of Refuge for them as an accommodation for what they have done
But as for those who defiantly disobeyed, their refuge is the Fire. Every time they want to get out of it, they will be returned to it, while being told, "Taste the punishment of the Fire which you used to deny
However, We will first let them taste a lesser punishment [on earth] prior to the greater punishment, so that perhaps they may return [to the right path]
Who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his Lord and then turns away from them? We will make those who force others to reject God's messages to pay a price
We gave Moses the Book, so do not be in doubt that you are receiving the same [revelation]. And we made the Book guidance for the Children of Israel
We raised leaders from among them who, as long as they were steadfast and believed firmly in Our messages, guided them according to Our command
Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their differences
Hasn't it become clear to them yet how many generations We destroyed before them, through whose ruined homes they now walk? In that are signs; don't they listen
Have they not seen that We drive rain to barren land and bring forth vegetation from which they and their livestock eat? Do they not see
They say, "When will this judgment be, if you are telling the truth
Say, "On the Day of Judgment, it will be of no use for the unbelievers to believe, nor will they be given amnesty
So turn away from them and wait. They are waiting
Prophet, be mindful of God and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites. God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord, for God is aware of all you do
and put your trust in God, for God is worthy of trust
God did not place two hearts inside any man's body. Nor has He made your wives whom you equate with your mothers your real mothers, nor has He made your adopted sons your actual sons. These are [merely] words coming out of your mouths. But God speaks the Truth, and He guides to the right path
Call [your adopted sons] after their fathers, this is right in the sight of God, but, if you do not know their fathers, then they are your brothers in faith and entrusted to you. You will not be blamed if you make mistakes [in such matters], but [only for] what your hearts intend. God is most Forgiving and the Mercy giver
The Prophet has a higher claim on the believers than [they do on] their own selves, and his wives are their mothers. Blood relations have a higher claim on one another, according to the Book of God, than do other believers and emigrants. Nevertheless, you may act kindly toward your friends. All this is inscribed in the Book
We took a pledge from the prophets: from you and from Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus, the Son of Mary. We took a solemn pledge from them
so that God may question the truthful about their sincerity. And, for the unbelievers He has prepared a painful punishment
Believers, remember God's blessings to you when armies came to [attack] you, and We sent a wind and forces that you could not see. God always sees what you do
When they [the enemy] came at you from above you and from below you, when eyes rolled [in fear], and your hearts rose to your throats, and you had [ill] thoughts of God
there, the believers were tested and severely shaken
The hypocrites and the sick at heart said, "The promise from God and His Messenger is a fantasy
and a faction of them said, "People of Yathrib, there is nothing for you [here], so return [home]." Yet another group asked permission of the Prophet, saying, "Our houses are exposed," although, in fact they were not. They intended only to flee
Had their town been invaded from every side, and they had been exhorted to revert to idolatry, [the hypocrites] would have done so with very little hesitation
even though they had already pledged before God not to turn back and flee. One is always responsible for a promise made before God
Say, "Fleeing will not benefit you. If you should flee from death or killing, you will be permitted to enjoy life for only a short while
Say, "Who is it that can prevent God from harming you, if He wishes, or being merciful to you, if He wishes?" They will find no protector or helper other than God
God knows those among you who would hold you back, as well as those who would say to their brothers, "Come to us," and hardly go to battle
They do not care about you, and, when fear [of battle] comes, you see them looking at you with their eyes rolling like one overtaken by death. Yet, as soon as the danger has gone, they lash out at you with sharp tongues, resenting any good that comes to you. Such people have no faith, so God has rendered their deeds worthless, that is easy for God
They think the war parties have not [yet] withdrawn, and, if the war parties should come [again], they would wish they were in the desert among the Bedouins, seeking news about you [from a safe distance]. Even if they were among you, they would hardly fight at all
The Messenger of God is an excellent model for anyone who puts his hope in God and the Last Day, and remembers God often
And when the Believers saw the war parties, they said, "This is what God and His Messenger had promised us; God and His Messenger spoke the truth." This only increased their faith and submission
Among the believers are men true to what they promised God. Some died while fulfilling their pledge, and some are still waiting, having never changed in the least
That God may reward the truthful for being true to their pledge and punish the hypocrites, if He wills, or accept their repentance, for God is the Ever-Forgiving, the Merciful-to-all
God drove back the unbelievers in their rage, and they gained no advantage; God spared the believers from fighting, for God is All-Strong and Almighty
He brought those People of the Book who supported [the unbelievers] down from their fortresses and threw terror into their hearts. Some of them you killed and others you took captive
He gave you their land, their homes, their property, and a land where you had not set foot before. God is able to do all things
Prophet, say to your wives, "If your desire is for this worldly life and its finery, then come, I will provide for you and release you with kindness
but if you desire God, His Messenger, and a home in the Hereafter, then God has prepared a great reward for those among you who do good
Wives of the Prophet, whoever of you should commit a clear immoral act, her punishment would be doubled, and this is easy for God
but the one of you who obeys God and His Messenger and does good deeds, We will give her a double reward, and We have prepared for her a generous provision
Wives of the Prophet, you are not like any of the other woman, provided that you remain mindful of God. Do not, then, be soft spoken, as you do not want the sick at heart to lust after you, but speak in an appropriate manner
Stay at home, and do not display your beauty as you did before, during the time of ignorance. Keep up your prayers, pay alms and obey God and His Messenger. God wishes to remove all impurity from you, people of the household, and to purify you to the utmost degree of purity
And remember all God's messages and Wisdom that is recited in your homes, God is Most-Subtle and All-Aware
The men and women who have submitted to God, the believing men and women, the obedient men and women, the truthful men and women, the patient men and women, the humble men and women, the charitable men and women, the fasting men and women, the men and women who guard their private parts, and the men and women who remember God often, for them, God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward
When God and His Messenger have decided a matter, it is not for a believing man or a believing woman, to have a choice about it. Anyone who disobeys God and His Messenger is clearly misguided
When you [Muhammad] said to the one whom God has blessed and you have favored, "Keep your wife and be mindful of God," while concealing within yourself that which God was about to disclose. [In doing so] You feared people, whereas it is God whom you should fear. So, when Zayd divorced her, We married her to you. We do not want believers to have restrictions concerning their adopted sons' wives after they divorce them, for God's command must be carried out
The Prophet should not have any uneasiness about that which God has ordained for him, since this is God's way with those [prophets] who passed away before. God's will is absolute destiny
[Such is how it is with] those who convey the messages of God, and fear only Him. God suffices as a reckoner
Muhammad is not the father of [any] one of your men, but [he is] the Messenger of God and last of the prophets. God has knowledge of all things
Believers, remember God often
and praise His limitless glory morning and evening
It is He who remembers you, as do His angels, so that He may bring you out of darkness into the enlightenment. He is the Mercy giver to the believers
On the Day they meet Him, their greeting will be, "Peace," and He has prepared a generous reward for them
He it is Who [in return for your remembrance of Him] bestows His special blessings upon you, with His angels [praying and asking His forgiveness for you], that He may lead you out of [all kinds of intellectual, spiritual, social, economic, and political] darkness into light [and keep them firm therein]. He is All-Compassionate toward the believers. Prophet, We have sent you as a witness and a bearer of good news and warning
and as one who calls people to God, with His permission and an illuminated beacon
Give good news to the believers that they will have great favor from God
Do not follow the call of the unbelievers and the hypocrites; ignore their abuse, but rely on God, for none is as trustworthy as God
Believers, you have no right to expect a waiting period when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them, so provide generously for them and give them an honorable release
Prophet, We have made lawful to you your wives to whom you have given their due wedding gifts, and those whom your right hand held in trust, given to you by God, and the daughters of your paternal uncles, the daughters of your paternal aunts, the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts who migrated with you, and any believing woman who has offered herself to the Prophet if the Prophet wishes to marry her, a privilege [exclusively] for you and not the rest of the believers. We know exactly what We have made obligatory to them concerning their wives and those whom their right hands hold in trust, hence you will not be at fault [if you act according to your privilege], for God is the All-Forgiving, the Mercy giver
You, may make any of them wait, and invite any of them as you wish, but you will not be at fault if you invite one whom you had previously set aside. That is more likely to keep them content and not grieve, and that they should be satisfied with what you have given them. God knows what is in your hearts, for God is All-Knowing and Forbearing
Beyond that, it is not permitted to you to take any additional women, nor to exchange them for other wives, even if their beauty were to please you, except those from among your own slaves. God is Watchful over all things
Believers, do not enter the Prophet's houses for a meal except when you are invited, and do not linger, waiting for the food to be ready; but when you are invited, then enter, and, when you have eaten, leave, and do not stay around to chat. That [behavior] troubles the Prophet, and he may be shy about [dismissing] you, but God is not shy about [telling you] the truth. And when you ask [his wives] for something, ask them from behind a partition; that is purer for your hearts and theirs. You are not permitted to offend the Messenger of God or to marry his wives after him, ever; that would be a huge offense in God's site
Whatever you reveal or conceal, God knows all things
Women are not to blame if they are seen by their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons or their women [servants], or their slaves, if they are mindful of God, for God is the Witness over all things
God and His angels bless the Prophet, so, believers, bless him and give yourselves up in total submission [to his message]
Those who insult God and His Messenger, God rejects them in this world and the Hereafter, and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment
And those who unjustifiably harm believing men and women will bear the guilt of slander and clear wrongdoing
Prophet, tell your wives, your daughters and the believers' women to bring down over themselves [part] of their outer garments. This will make it more likely that they will be recognized and not abused. God is the All-Forgiving, the Mercy-giver
If the hypocrites and the sick at heart and those who spread bad rumors in Medina do not stop, We will stir you up against them; then they will be living there with you for only a short while
They are cursed, and they should be arrested and put to death wherever they are found
This has been God's way with those who went before, and you will not find any change in the way of God
People ask you about the Hour [of Judgment]. Say," God alone has Knowledge of It. You never know; the Hour maybe near
The unbelievers have earned God's anger, and He has prepared a Blazing Fire for them
There they will stay forever, where they will find no protector or helper
On the Day, their faces will be turned about in the Fire, and they will say, "How we wish we had obeyed God and obeyed the Messenger
And they will say, "Our Lord, we obeyed our masters and our dignitaries, and they led us down the wrong path
Our Lord, give them double the punishment and curse them in a huge way
Believers, do not be like those who slandered Moses, but God cleared him of what they said, and that he was distinguished in God's sight
Believers, be mindful of God, and speak in a straightforward way
He will rectify your deeds and forgive you your sins. And whoever obeys God and His Messenger has certainly achieved a great success
We offered the Trust to the heavens, the earth and the mountains; but they refused to bear it and feared it, yet the human being took it on. He has always been unjust and ignorant
[This is in order that] God punishes the hypocrites, men and women, as well as the men and women who associate others with Him, and why God turns mercifully towards the believing men and women, for God is the Ever-Forgiving, the Mercy Giver
[All] praise is [due] to God, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth, and to Him belongs [all] praise in the Hereafter. He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware
He knows what goes into the earth and what comes out of it, and what comes down from the heaven and what goes up into it. He is the Mercy-Giver, the Forgiving
The unbelievers say, "The Hour of Judgment will never come to us." Say [Prophet], "Yes by God, it will surely come to you. [God is] the Knower of all that is beyond our knowledge." Not even an atom's weight within the heavens or within the earth escapes His knowledge, nor anything smaller or larger than that. All is in a clear record
so that He may reward those who believe and do good deeds. They will have forgiveness and generous provision
but for those who strive against Our message, trying to undermine it, there will be a painful punishment of agonizing pain
Those who have been given knowledge see that what is sent down to you from your Lord is the Truth, and that it guides to the path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
The unbelievers say, "Shall we show you a man who will tell you that when you are totally decayed, you will be raised as a new creation
Has he invented a lie about God or is he mad?" Rather, they who do not believe in the Hereafter will received punishment and are extremely misguided
Have they not looked at what is before them and what is behind them of the heaven and earth? If We wanted, We could cause the earth to swallow them or let fragments from the sky fall down on them. There is a sign in that for every worshiper who turns back to God in repentance
We gave David great favors from Us: "Mountains, repeat [Our] praises with him, and the birds [as well]." And We made iron pliable for him
[instructing him to], "Make full coats of mail, measuring the links carefully. Do good all of you. I am aware of everything you do
And [We subjected] the wind to Solomon; its morning course [covered] a month's journey, and its evening course [covered] a month's journey. And We made a fountain of molten copper flow for him. And among the jinn were those who worked for him with his Lord's permission, and whoever among them deviated from Our command, We will make him taste of the punishment of the Blazing flame
They made him whatever he wanted: high arches and statues, bowls like reservoirs, and firmly anchored kettles. [We said], "Work in gratitude, family of David, for few of My worshipers are grateful
And when We decreed Solomon's death, nothing indicated his death to the jinn except an earthworm eating his staff, but, when he fell down, it became clear to the jinn that, had they known the reality which was beyond their knowledge, they would not have remained in humiliating punishment
There was a sign [of God's grace] for the people of Sheba in their homeland: two gardens one on the right and one on the left. [They were told], "Eat from the provisions of your Lord, and be grateful to Him for a good land and a forgiving Lord
But they turned away, so We loosed on them the flood from the dam, and We replaced their two gardens with two others of bitter fruit, tamarisk bushes and a few thorn trees
This is how We repaid them for their ingratitude. Are any but the ungrateful repaid like this
[Before their demise] We had placed between them and the towns We had blessed other towns within sight of one another to which they could easily have traveled, "Travel safely between them by night or day
But [they complained], "Our Lord has made the distance between our staging posts so long." [In so doing] they wronged themselves, so We made their fate a tale for all and scattered them in small groups throughout the land. There are certainly signs in this for everyone patient and grateful
What Iblis thought of them was proven right, since they all followed him, except for a group of believers
He had no authority over them, but We wanted to know who believes in the Hereafter and who is in doubt about it. Your Lord is the Preserver over all things
Say, "Call on those you claim to be gods other than God." They have no power over the smallest particle, either in the heavens or on earth, and they do not have partnership [with Him], nor does He need any assistant from among them
Intercession does not work with Him except when He permits it. [But, on the day of Judgment,] when the terror is removed from their hearts, they will say [to one another], "What has your Lord said?" They will say, "The truth." And He is the Most High, the Most Great
Say, "Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?"" Say, "God does. Then either we or you are rightly guided or clearly lost
Say, "You will not be asked about what we have done, and we will not be asked about what you do
Say, "Our Lord will bring us together; then He will judge between us in Truth, for He is the All-knowing, the Just Decider
Say, "Show me those whom you have joined to Him as partners. No! Rather, He [alone] is God, the Almighty, the Wise
And We have sent you to all people as bearer of good news and to deliver a warning, but most people do not know
And they say, "When is this promise coming, if you are truthful
Say, "You have an appointment for a Day which you cannot delay nor bring forward even by a single hour
Those who deny the truth say, "We will never believe in this Qur'an or in what came before it." But if only you could see when the unjust are made to stand before their Lord, blaming each other; those who were thought weak will say to those who had been arrogant, "Had it not been for you, we would have been believers
Those who had been arrogant will say to those who they deemed to be weak, "Did we prevent you from following the right guidance after it had come to you? Rather, you rejected it
Those who had been thought weak will say to those who had been arrogant, "Rather, it was your scheming, night and day, ordering us to deny God and attribute equals to Him." But when they all see the punishment [that awaits them], they will be unable to express their remorse. We will put shackles around the necks of those who rejected the truth, and they will be repaid only for what they have done
Never have We sent a warning into a town without those who were corrupted by wealth saying, "We reject the message with which you have been sent
They also say, "We are wealthier and have more children [than you], and We will not be punished
Say, [Prophet] "My Lord gives abundant provisions to whom He wills, or [likewise] restricts [it], but most people do not know
It is neither your wealth nor your children that will bring you nearer to Us , but rather [your choice] to believe and to do good deeds. For those there will be double reward for what they did, and they will be safe in the upper chambers [of Paradise]
But as for those who rejected Our messages, trying to undermine them, they will be consigned to the punishment
Say, "My Lord gives abundantly to whomever of His worshipers He wills, or [likewise] restricts [it], but whatever you spend [in His cause], He will replace, for He is the Best of Providers
And one Day He will gather them all and say to the angels, "Was it you whom these people worshipped
They will say, "May You be exalted in Your glory. You are our protector, not them. Rather, they [the unbelievers] used to worship the jinn; most of them believed in them
Today, none of you hold any power to benefit or harm another," and We will say to those who wronged themselves, "Taste the punishment of the Fire, which you used to deny
When our clear verses are recited to them [your people], they say, "This is only a man who wants to turn you away from what your ancestors worshipped." They [also] say, "This is only a lie that he has invented." When the Truth comes to them, the unbelievers say, "This is nothing but sorcery
[Even] though We had not given them any Books to study nor sent any one before you, [Prophet], to warn them
Those before them similarly rejected the truth, when they did not receive a tenth of what We had given them [your people], yet they [the previous people] rejected My Messengers, and how [terrible] was My disapproval
Say, "I only have one advice for you: Stand up before God, in pairs or individually, and then reflect. Your companion is not crazy. He is here only to warn you of a severe impending punishment
Say, "The payment for which you think I ask you is yours. My payment comes only from God, and He is the Witness over all things
Say, "My Lord hurls forth the Truth, for He has the full knowledge of all that is beyond our knowledge
Say, "The Truth has come, and falsehood can neither originate anything nor regenerate it
Say, "If I should be misguided, it is only to my own detriment, but if I am guided, it is through what my Lord reveals to me. He is the All-Hearing, the Near
If only you could see when they are terrified, but there will be no escape, and they are seized from a place nearby
They will [then] say, "We do believe in it!" But how can they reach it from such a distant place
They had already denied the truth and were prone to guessing from afar about things beyond their perception
A barrier will be placed between them and what they desire, as was done with their kind before, for they too were in hopeless doubt
[All] praise is due to God, the Programmer of the heavens and the earth. He made the angels messengers with wings, two, three and four [pairs]. He adds to His creation anyway He wills, for God has power over all things
Whatever mercy God grants to people, no one can prevent, whatever He withholds, no one can release, for He is the Almighty, the Wise
People, remember the favor of God upon you. Is there any creator other than God who provides for you from the heaven and earth? There is no God except Him, so what lies are you inventing
And if they deny you [Prophet], other messengers were denied before you. To God will all matters be returned
People, God's promise is true, so do not let the worldly life delude you, and don't let the deceiver deceive you about God
Satan is your enemy, so treat him as an enemy. His call on his followers [will only lead them] to be among those of the Blazing Fire
The unbelievers will have a severe punishment, and those who believe and do good deeds will have forgiveness and great reward
What about the one whose evil deeds were made to look attractive to him so he regards them as good? God lets stray [those] who choose [to be misguided] and guides [those] who choose [guidance], so don't let your sorrow over them destroy you. God knows what they do
It is God who sends the winds, which lift the clouds, which We then drive to a dead land and thereby bring the earth to life after its death. Such is the resurrection
Whoever desires might, [they should know that] all might belongs to God. To Him all good words ascend, and He lifts up righteous deeds. But they who plot evil deeds will have a severe punishment, and their plots will perish
God created you from dust, then from a fertilized ovum, and then He made you into pairs. No female conceives nor does she give birth without His knowledge, and no being grows old or has his life cut short except in accordance with a record. That is easy for God
The two seas are not alike: one is fresh and sweet, suitable for drinking, and the other is salty and bitter. Yet from each you eat fresh meat and extract ornaments to wear. You see ships making their way through [each of them] so that you might seek His bounty and so perhaps you will be thankful
He merges the night into the day and the day into the night, and has made the sun and the moon subservient [to His laws], each running [its course] for an appointed time. This is God, your Lord. Sovereignty belongs to Him, while those whom you invoke beside Him do not even control [as much as] the skin of a date seed
If you invoke them, they do not hear you, and even if they could hear, they would not respond to you. On the Day of Resurrection, they will reject your having associated them with God, and no one can inform you [of the Truth] like the One who is All-Aware
People, you are in need of God, while God is the Rich Beyond Need, the One the Praiseworthy
If He wishes, He can do away with you and bring forth a new creation
[which] for God is not difficult
No bearer of burdens will bear the burdens of another and if a heavily laden soul calls [another] to [carry some of] its load, nothing of it will be carried, even if they were related. You can only warn those who stand in awe of their Lord even though He is beyond the reach of their perception, and those who perform prayer. Whoever purifies himself [does so] for the good of his soul. God is the [final] destination
The blind and the seeing are not equal
nor are ignorance and enlightenment
nor shade and heat
nor are the living and the dead alike. God can make anyone He wills hear, but you cannot make those in the grave hear
You are only a warner
We have sent you with the Truth as a bearer of good news and a warner, for there is no community to which a warner has not come
If they reject you, those before them also rejected the truth. Their messengers came to them with clear signs and Psalms and with the enlightening Book
Then I seized the ones who denied the truth, and how [terrible] was My punishment
Don't you see that God sends down rain from the sky, with which We produce fruits of varying colors, [just as] in the mountains there are layers, white and red of varying shades, and some extremely black
Similarly, among people, animals, and livestock there are also many hues. Of all of his worshipers, only those with knowledge, are in awe of God. God is Almighty, most forgiving
Those who recite the Book of God, and perform prayer and spend out [on charity] from what We have provided them, secretly and openly, may expect a trade that will never perish
for He may give them their full rewards and increase for them out of His bounty. He is ever-forgiving and ever-thankful
What We revealed to you of the Book, is the very Truth, confirming what is available to you of previous revelations. God is All-Aware of His worshipers, and All-Seeing
We then bestowed this Book as an inheritance on those of our worshipers whom We selected; and among them are some who wrong their own souls, some are moderate, and some who, by God's grace, are foremost in good deeds. That is the greatest favor
for they will enter Gardens of Eden, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and where their garments will be silk
They will say, "Praise be to God, who has removed all our sorrow from us, for Our Lord is truly ever-forgiving and ever-thankful
It is He who has settled us in the everlasting Home out of His favor, where no weariness or fatigue will touch us
But the unbelievers will be in Hell, where they will neither be finished off and die, nor will they be relieved from Hell's punishment. That is how we reward everyone who is ungrateful
They will cry out loud, "Our Lord, let us out; We will do good deeds, different from what we were doing before!" "But didn't We give you sufficient time so that those who would be mindful could be mindful? And we even sent you the warner. Taste, then, [the punishment], for the unjust will have no helper
God knows all the unknown of the heavens and earth; He knows what is in the hearts
It is He who has put you in charge of the earth. Whoever denies the truth will bear the consequences. Their denial will increase their rejection in the sight of their Lord, and their denial will only increase their loss
Say, "Have you considered your 'partners' whom you invoke besides God? Show me what part of earth they have created, or do they have a partnership [with Him] in the heavens? Or have We given them a Book that has clear evidence? [No indeed]; Rather, the unjust promise each other nothing but delusion
God upholds the heavens and the earth lest they fall apart, and, should they fall apart, no one other than He could hold them [in place], for He is forbearing and most forgiving
They swore by God their most solemn oaths that, if a warning came to them, they would be better guided than any one of the previous communities. But, when a warner did come to them, they only turned further away
because of their arrogance on earth and their evil schemes. Yet evil schemes overwhelm only those who plot them. Do they expect anything different, given what happened to earlier people? You will never find any change in the way of God, and you will never find any deviation in the His way
Have they not traveled through the land and observed the final fate of those who preceded them, who were even greater than they in strength? Nothing in the heavens or earth will prevent God from accomplishing His purpose, for He is All-Knowing, infinite in His power
Were God to take people to task for what they have earned, He would not leave any creature on the earth, but He defers them for a specified time. Then when their time comes, God sees all that is in [the hearts of] His worshipers
Ya Seen
by the wise Qur'an
you are one of the messengers
on a straight path
This revelation has been gradually sent down from the Almighty, the Merciful
to warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, so they are unaware
[However], the word [of God] is bound to come true for most of them, for they will not believe
We have put shackles round their necks, reaching to their chins, so that their heads are forced up
and We have put a barrier before them and behind them, and have blindfolded them, so that they cannot see
It is all the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them, they won't believe
You can only warn someone who follows the message and stands in awe of the Merciful-to-all even though He is beyond his perception. So give him good news of forgiveness and a generous reward
It is We who bring the dead to life, and record what they have done and the results of their deeds. We account for everything in a clear record
Give them the example of the people whose town was visited by the messengers
We sent two to them, but they rejected both, so We reinforced them with a third, and they declared, "We are messengers to you
They replied, "You are only human beings like us, and the Merciful-to-all has not revealed a thing. You are only telling lies
They said, "Our Lord knows that we are messengers to you
and we are responsible only for delivering [the message] clearly
They said, "We feel that you are an evil omen. If you do not stop, We will surely stone you, and cause you to suffer severely
They said, "Your evil omen is upon you. How can it be evil that you were reminded [about God]? You are rather going too far
Then a man came running from the farthest end of the town, saying, "O, my people, follow the Messengers
Follow those who do not ask you for [any] payment; they are [rightly] guided
Why should I not worship the One who brought me into being and gave me a purpose and to whom you will be returned
Would I take any gods other than Him? if the Merciful intends me some harm, their intercession will not help me at all, nor can they save me
I would then be clearly misguided
I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me
It was said [to him], "Enter Paradise." He said, "I wish that my people only knew
how my Lord has forgiven me and placed me among the highly honored
After him, We did not send any host from heaven to his people, nor would We send one down
It was only one shout, and immediately they were extinguished
Alas for our servants. Whenever a messenger comes to them, they ridicule him
Have they not considered how many generations We destroyed before them, none of whom will ever come back to them
Yet each and every one of them will be brought before Us
A sign for them is the dead land that We have brought to life; from it We have brought forth grain, from which they eat
And We have placed gardens of palm trees and grapevines in it, and caused springs of water to burst from it
so that they may eat its fruit. It was not their hands that produced it, will they not be grateful
Exalted in His glory is He who created pairs out of whatever the earth produces, as well as from themselves and from other things unknown to them
Night is a sign for them. We remove the daylight from it, so they are [left] in darkness
and the sun runs its course toward its destined point. Such is the determination of the Almighty, the All-Knowing
And the moon, We have determined it's phases, until it finally appears like the old date-palm stalk
The sun is not allowed to reach the moon, nor does the night overtake the day, but each floats in their own orbit
Another sign for them is that We carried their offspring in the loaded Ark
And that We have created for them similar vessels in which to ride
If We wish, We could drown them, with no one to respond to their cry for help, nor would they be saved
except through Our mercy, that they could be given a while to enjoy life
But when they are told, "Beware of what lies before you and what lies behind you; perhaps you will be shown mercy
they turn away from every sign that comes to them from their Lord
And when It is said to them, "Give to others from what God has provided for you," the unbelievers say to those who believe, "Should we feed one whom, if God had willed, He would have fed? You are clearly misguided
They say, "When will this promise come about, if you are truthful
All it takes is one blast that will seize them while they still arguing about it
They will not be able [to give] any testimony, nor will they return to their people
And then the Horn will be blown, and at once they will rush out of the graves to their Lord
They will say, "How terrible for us! Who has raised us up from our resting-place?" [They will be told], "This is what the Merciful-to-all had promised, and the Messengers told the Truth
It will be only one blast, and at once they are all brought before Us
Today no soul will be wronged at all, and you will be repaid for what you did
The people of Paradise will on that Day be joyfully engaged
they and their spouses will lie in shades, reclining on couches
where they will have fruit and whatever they wish
and their Lord, the Mercy giver, will great them with "Peace
[But to the guilty, He will say], "Those who forced others to reject Our messages should stand apart today
Children of Adam, did I not make a covenant with you not to worship Satan, who is clearly your enemy
and that you worship [only] Me? This is a straight path
[Satan] has already led a great many of you astray; why do you not use your reason
This is the Hell that you were promised
Enter it today as a result of your having denied the truth
Today, We will seal over their mouths, but their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will testify about what they used to do
And if We willed it, We could have taken away their sight, and they would have struggled to [find] the path, but how could they have seen it
And if We had so willed, We could have crippled them where they stood, so that they could move neither forward nor backward
When We grant a person long life, We also cause him to decline in power, so will they not understand
We did not teach [the Prophet] poetry, nor it is suitable for him. This is simply a reminder and a self-evident Qur'an
to warn those whose hearts are alive, and to pass God's verdict against the unbelievers
Can they not see that, by Our own handiwork, We have created livestock for them, that they now control
We have tamed [those animals] for them, so that they can ride some of them, and some they can eat
and some have other benefits, [such as milk] to drink. Will they not, then, be grateful
Yet they have taken [false] gods besides God, hoping that they will help them
but [their false gods] cannot help them, even if they were soldiers standing by, ready to support them
So do not let what they say grieve you. We know what they conceal and what they reveal
Does a human being not consider that We created him from a [mere] fertilized ovum, yet he becomes a fierce adversary
Now, he argues about Us while he overlooks how he himself was created. He says, "Who will give life to bones when they are disintegrated
Say, "He who made them in the first instance will give them life again. He has full knowledge of all creation
He, who produces fire for you from green trees, so that you use them to light your fires
Is not He who created the heavens and the earth able to create the same again? Yes, indeed, for He is the All-Knowing, the Creator
When He wills something to be, His simply says, "Be"- and it is
Exalted in His glory is He who has the dominion of all things in His hand, and to Him you will return
By those lined up in ranks
and those who warn, crying warnings
and those who recite God's word
your God is One
Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, Lord of every sunrise
We have adorned the nearest heaven with planets
and protected them against every rebellious devil
[so that the devils] may not listen to the highest assembly [of angels] but be repelled from every side
driven away. For them there is a continuous punishment
except for him who snatches a glimpse [of such knowledge], He will be pursued by a piercing flame
Then ask those who persist on denying the truth if they were more difficult to create than those other beings We have created, for We created them from sticky clay
No wonder you are surprised, to see them ridicule [the message]
and when they are reminded [of the Truth], they don't want to remember
and when they see a sign, they ridicule it
saying, "This is mere magic
When We have died and become dust and bones, are we to be resurrected
and our forefathers too
Say, "Yes, and [on that Day of Judgment] you will be humiliated
[On that Day,] there will be only a single shout, and at once they will begin to see
They will say, "How terrible for us! This is the Day of Judgment
and [They will be told], "This is the Day of separation [between the good and the bad], which you used to deny
[The angels will be ordered], "Gather those who were unjust, all those like them, and the idols they used to worship
instead of God, and show them to the path of Hell
And stop them, for they are to be questioned
Why do you not help each other now
No, today they come in absolute submission
and they will turn on one another, questioning each other
[Some] will say, "You used to approach us from a position of power
The others will say, "No, you [yourselves] were not believers
and we had no authority over you, but you were exceedingly arrogant people
Our Lord's Word has been carried out against us, and we will all taste punishment
We misled you, and we were ourselves misled
On that Day, they will share in the punishment
for that is how We deal with those who forced others to reject Our messages
Whenever they were told, "There is no god but God," they became arrogant
and would say, "Are we to give up our gods for a mad poet
Rather, the Prophet has come with the Truth and confirmed the [previous] messengers
You [who deny the truth] will taste the painful punishment
and you will be repaid only for what you used to do
Not so for God's devoted worshipers
they will have recognizable provision
of fruits, and they will be honored
in Gardens of delight
[resting] on couches and facing one another
A cup from a flowing spring will be passed among them
white and delicious to the drinkers
which will neither sicken nor intoxicate them
With them are mates of modest gaze with beautiful eyes
just like closely guarded pearls
They will turn to one another, inquiring
One of them says" I used to have a friend [on earth]
who used to say to me, are you of those who believe
that, when we have died and become dust and bones, we will be brought for judgment
And he will add, "Shall we look for him
And he looks and sees [his former companion] in the midst of Hell
He says to him, "By God, you almost ruined me
Were It not for the grace of my Lord, I would have been with those taken [to Hell]
Then, [he says to those in paradise], "Will we really not die
except for our first death, and will we really not be punished
Truly, this is the ultimate success
This is what everyone should strive to attain
Is Paradise a better place to be, or the tree of Bitterness
We have made [this tree] a punishment for the unjust
It is a tree that grows in the heart of Hell
Its fruit like devils' heads
and [the people in Hell] will eat from it and fill their bellies with it
On top of that, they will have a boiling brew to drink
Then they will return to Hell
for they found their fathers misguided
so they rushed [to follow] in their footsteps
Most of the earlier peoples went astray before them
though We had already sent them someone to give warning
Look, then, at the final fate of those who were warned
except for the devout worshipers of God
Noah called Us, and how excellent was Our response
We saved him and his family from the great distress
We made his descendants the survivors
and left for him [favorable mention] among later generations
Peace upon Noah, among all people
This is how we reward those who do good
for he was among Our believing worshipers
We drowned the rest
Abraham was like him
He came to his Lord with a faultless heart
and said to his father and his people, "What are you worshiping
Are you fooling yourselves by choosing false gods other than God
What do you think about the Lord of the worlds
Then he took a look at the stars
and said, "I am sick [of you worshipping these]
so they turned away from him and left
Then he turned to their gods and said, "Will you not eat
What is wrong with you that you do not speak
And he turned on them, striking them with his right hand
His people came rushing back to him
He said, "How can you worship that which you [yourselves] carve
while God created you and everything you do
They said, "Construct a furnace and throw him into the burning fire
They plotted against him, but We humiliated them
[Abraham] said, "I will go away to my Lord, He will guide me
My Lord, grant me a righteous son
So We gave him the good news of a gentle boy
And when [the boy] was old enough to work with him, he said, "My son, I have seen in a dream that I [must] sacrifice you, so see what you think." He said, "My father, do as you are ordered. You will find me, God willing, patient
But as soon as they had both submitted to [what they thought to be] God's will, and [Abraham] had laid [his son] down on the side of his face
We called to him, "Abraham
you have fulfilled the vision." This is how we reward those who do good
This was clearly a grave trial
and We ransomed him with a great sacrifice
and We left the later generations saying of him
Peace be upon Abraham
This is how we reward those who do good
for [Abraham] was among Our believing worshipers
Then We gave him the good news of Isaac, a prophet from among the righteous
and We blessed him and Isaac. Among their descendants are doers of good, and those who clearly wrong themselves
We certainly showed great kindness to Moses and Aaron
We saved them and their people from a terrible predicament
and We supported them so that they prevailed
and We gave them the clarifying Book
and We guided them on the straight path
and We left the later generations saying of them
Peace be upon Moses and Aaron
This is how We reward those who do good
for they were among Our believing worshipers
Elijah was indeed one of the messengers
When he said to his people, "Will you not remain mindful of God
Do you call upon Baal and leave the best of creators
God, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
But they denied him, so they will be brought [for punishment]
except for God's devout worshipers
And We left the later generations saying of him
Peace be upon the House of Elijah
This how we reward those who do good
for he was among Our believing worshipers
Lot was indeed one of the messengers
We saved him and all of his family
except an old woman who stayed behind
Then We destroyed the others
You pass by them morning
and night, so will you not use your reason
Jonah was one of the messengers
He ran away to an loaded ship
but they cast lots, and he lost
[so they threw him into the sea], and a great fish swallowed him, for He was blameworthy [for what he had done]
And had he not been one of those who glorify God's limitless glory
he would have remained inside its belly until the Day they are resurrected
But We cast him, ill, on an open shore
and We made a gourd vine to grow over him
and We sent him to a hundred thousand people or more
They believed, so We let them enjoy their life
So [Prophet] inquire [of the idolaters], "Why do they think their Lord has daughters while they have sons
Or, maybe they witnessed the creation of the angels as females
No indeed, It is out of their [invented] falsehood that they say
God has begotten," and they are liars
Has He chosen daughters over sons
What is [wrong] with you? How do you reach your judgments
Will you not be reminded [of the warning against such thinking]
Or do you have a clear authority [for what you allege]
Then, produce your Book, if you are truthful
They also claimed a lineage between Him and the jinn, but the jinn know that they will be brought before Him for [judgment]
May God be exalted in His glory above all they describe
except for God's devout worshipers [who don't make such claims]
So you [who deny the truth] and whatever you worship
cannot tempt [anyone] away from Him
except for him who will burn in Hell
[All of God's creations will say], "Among us, too, there is none but has a known place
We are ranged in ranks
and we are those who glorify God
The unbelievers used to say
If only we had a message from those who lived before us
we would have been faithful worshipers of God
But they rejected the message, so they will soon realize [the consequences]
Our word has already been given to Our worshiping Messengers
[that] they would indeed be victorious
and [that] Our soldiers will be those who overcome
So [Prophet], leave them for a time
And watch them, for they will soon see
Do they really want to hasten Our punishment
When it descends on them, how terrible will that morning be for those who were warned
Leave them for a time
and watch them, for they will soon see
May your Lord, the Lord of Might, be exalted in His glory above all they describe
And Peace be on the Messengers
and praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Saad, by the Qur'an, which contains all that one ought to know
The unbelievers are full of arrogance and dissent
How many generations have We destroyed before them (for the same sins)? They called out (to Us), but it was too late to escape
They are surprised that one of their own has come out to warn them, so those who want to deny the truth are saying, "This is a magician and a liar
How can he claim that the gods are [only] one God? This is a strange thing
Their leaders went off, saying, "Walk away, and be faithful to your gods. This is what you must do
We have not heard of this in the latest religion. This must be an invention
How can the message be revealed to him alone out of all of us?"In fact, they are in doubt about My message. In fact, they have not yet tasted My punishment
Or do They have the stores of your Lord's mercy, the Almighty, the Ever-Giving
Or is theirs the dominion of the heavens, and the earth, and what is between them? Then let them ascend through any means of access
[They are only] soldiers [who will be] defeated regardless of what alliance they have
The people of Noah denied [My messages] before them, as did [the tribe of] Aad, Pharaoh-the owner of [many] tent-poles
[the tribe of] Thamud, the people of Lot, the woods-dwellers: those were the parties
each of whom rejected the messengers, so My punishment was justified
And these, too, [who now deny the truth] are only awaiting a single blast, which will not be stopped
And they say, "Our Lord, hasten for us our share [of the punishment] before the Day of Account
Be patient over what they say, and remember Our servant, David, the possessor of strength; he was one who repeatedly turned back [to Us]
We subjected the mountains to join him in praising Our limitless glory in the evening and daybreak
and the birds to assemble, all repeating [praises] with him
And We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and keen judgment
And has the story come to you of the disputants who climbed over the wall of [his] prayer chamber
When they entered upon David, he was alarmed, [but] they said, "Do not be afraid. [We are] two disputants. One of us has wronged the other, so judge between us with truth, and do not be unjust, and guide us to the right way
This is my brother. He has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe, so he said, 'Entrust it to me,' and got the better of me with his words
[David] said, "He has certainly wronged you in demanding that your ewe be added to his ewes. And many associates oppress one another, except for those who believe and do righteous deeds, and they are few." David then realized that We had been testing him, and he asked forgiveness of his Lord, and fell down bowing [in prostration], and turned [to God] in repentance
so We forgave him, and, he has nearness to Us, and a good place in the Hereafter
[We said], "David, We have made you a steward over this land, so judge between the people in truth and do not follow [your own] whim, as it will lead you away from the way of God." Those who wander away from His path will have a severe punishment for having forgotten the Day of Account
We have not created the heaven and the earth and all that lies between them without meaning and purpose. That is the assumption of the unbelievers. How terrible the fire will be for the unbelievers
Would we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption on earth? Or would We treat those who are mindful of God like the wicked
This is a blessed Book, which We have revealed to you so that they might reflect upon its verses and that those of understanding would be reminded
And to David We gave Solomon, an excellent servant. He repeatedly turned back [to Us]
When well-bred, swift horses were paraded before him at dusk
he said, "I love to love good things out of remembrance of my Lord," [and when] the horses disappeared into the distance
he would say, "Bring them back to me," and stroke their legs and necks
But [previously], We had indeed tested Solomon [by] placing a lifeless body on his throne, he then turned toward us
and prayed, "My Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingdom the like of which will not belong to anyone after me. You are the Ever Giving
So We gave him power over the wind, to direct it to blow gently wherever he wished
and over the devils, every kind of builder and diver
and over others bound in shackles
[We said], "This is Our gift, [for you to] give or withhold without [rendering any] account
He is closed to Us and [has] a good place in the Hereafter
And remember Our servant Job, when he called to his Lord, "Satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering
[So he was told], "Strike [the ground] with your foot; here is a [spring for] a cool bath and a drink
And We restored his family, and their like with them; as a mercy from Us and a reminder for those of understanding
[We said], "And take in your hand a bunch of grass and strike with it, and do not break your oath." We found him patient, an excellent servant, one who repeatedly turned back [to Us]
And remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of true strength and vision
for We purified them with a most pure quality-remembrance of the [Hereafter]
and [in our sight] they are among the chosen and the outstanding
And remember Ishmael, Elisha and Dhul-Kifl, for they are all among the truly outstanding
This is a reminder, for the mindful of God will have a good place of return
Gardens of Eden, whose gates will open to them
where they will recline, calling for abundant fruit and drink
having beside them well-matched mates of modest gaze
This is what you are promised for the Day of Account
This is Our provision, which will never run out
But, truly, for the transgressors is an evil place of return
Hell, where they will burn. What an evil resting place
This! So let them taste boiling water and [foul] pus
and other such punishments
[Its inhabitants will say], "This is a crowd [of people] rushing in to where you are. No welcome for them. They will burn in the Fire
They will say, "Nor you! No welcome for you. You, [our leaders], brought this upon us, what an evil place to settle
They will say, "Our Lord, whoever brought this upon us, double his punishment in the Fire
and they will wonder, "Why we do not see men whom we used to count among the worst
whom we used to mock? Did our eyes miss them
This is how it will really be, the bickering of the people of the Fire
Say [Prophet], "I am only here to give a warning, and there is no god but God, the One, the All- Conquering
Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them, the Almighty, the Ever-Forgiving
Say, "It is tremendous news
yet you ignore it
I had no knowledge of what those on high bicker about
had it not been revealed to me. However, I am but a clear warner
[So mention] when your Lord said to the angels, " I am going to create a human being from clay
and when I have proportioned him and breathed of My spirit into him, then prostrate yourselves to him
The angels prostrated, all of them together
except Iblis ; he was arrogant and became a [rebel] who denied the truth
[God] said, "Iblis , what prevented you from prostrating yourself to what I created with My hands? Is it your arrogance, or do you think that you are so high above all others
He said, "I am better than him. You created me from fire and created him from clay
[God] said, "Then be gone, you are expelled
and My curse will follow you until the Day of Judgment
[Iblis ] said, "My Lord, reprieve me until the Day they are resurrected
[God] said, "You are reprieved
until the Day of the time well-known
[Iblis] said, "By your might, I will mislead them all
except for Your devoted worshipers among them
[God] said, "This is the Truth, and the Truth do I speak
I will fill Hell with you and those of them that follow you, all of you together
SAY : " I ask from you no reward for this [message], and I am not one of those who claim to be what they are not
This is no less than a reminder to all the worlds
and you will come to grasp its significance in the fullness of time
This Book is sent down to you from God, the Almighty, the Wise
We have sent down the Book to you in Truth, so worship God, sincere in your faith in Him alone
Pure faith is owed to God alone. Those who take protectors besides Him [say], "We worship them only so that they may bring us nearer to God." God will judge between them concerning their differences. God does not guide any liar and denier of the truth
If God had intended to take a son, He could have chosen anyone He willed from whatever He created, may He be exalted in His glory! He is God, the One God, the One who holds absolute sway over all that exists
He created the heavens and earth in Truth. He wraps the night over the day and wraps the day over the night, and has made the sun and the moon subservient [to His laws], each running [its course] for an appointed time. He is the Almighty, the Ever-Forgiving
He created you from a single soul, from which He made its mate, and He gave you eight kinds of grazing livestock in pairs [male and female]. He creates you in your mothers' wombs, one creation after another, within threefold of darkness. That is God, your Lord; to Him belongs all Sovereignty. There is no deity except Him, so how can you lose site of the truth
If you deny the truth, God has no need of you. Yet He does not approve of ingratitude in His servants, but, if you do show gratitude, He welcomes it in you. No bearer of burdens will bear the burdens of another. Then you will return to your Lord, and He will inform you of what you have done. He knows what is within your hearts
When a human being encounters some hard times, he calls upon his Lord, turning to Him [in repentance], but when He blesses him with His favors, he forgets his Lord whom he called before and he sets up equals to God in order to mislead others from His way. Say, "Enjoy your unbelief for a little, for you are included among the inhabitants of the Fire
Is one who worships devoutly during periods of the night-bowing down and standing [in prayer], being mindful of the Hereafter, and hoping for his Lord's mercy-[like one who does not]? Say, "Are those who know equal to those who do not know?" Only those who have understanding will keep this in mind
Say, "O My worshipers who have believed, be ever mindful of your Lord. Good [reward] awaits those who persevere in doing good in this world. [Remember that] God's earth is spacious. They who are patient will be given their reward beyond all account
Say, "I have been commanded to worship God, dedicating my faith to Him
And I have been commanded to be the first [among you] to submit
Say," I fear the punishment of a terrible Day should I disobey my Lord
Say, "God [alone] do I worship, sincere to Him in my faith
so worship what you will besides Him." Say, "Truly doomed are the ones who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Truly, that is a self-evident loss
They will have curtains of fire above them and below them. With this God puts fear into His worshipers. So be ever mindful of Me, My worshipers
Those who have avoided the worship of false deities and turned toward God will have good news, so give good news to My worshipers
who listen to what is said and follow what is best. Those are the ones God has guided, and those are the people endowed with insight
As for one who deserved the decree of punishment, can you [Prophet] save one who is already in the Fire
But those who are mindful of their Lord, for them are dwellings built one above the other, beneath which rivers flow. [This is] God's promise and God does not fail to deliver [His] promise
Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky and guides it through the earth to flow as springs? Then with it He produces vegetation of varying colors, which later withers, and you see it turning yellow, then He turns it into waste. That is a reminder for those endowed with insight
Is one whose heart God has opened to submit to Him and who has received enlightenment from his Lord [like one whose heart rejects God]? Misery, then, to those whose hearts are hardened even more by the mention of God. They are clearly lost
God has sent down the best of narrations: a Book that is perfectly consistent within itself, repeating various statements [of the Truth] in forms that causes the skin of those who revere their Lord to shiver [in awe], after which their skin and their hearts soften at the mention of God. Such is God's guidance; He guides with it [the Qur'an] whoever is willing to be guided, but no one can guide those God leaves to stray
What about someone who shields his face against the worst of punishment on the Day of Resurrection [is he like one secure from it]? [On that day] it will be said to the unjust, "Taste what you have earned
Those before them also denied the truth, and punishment came upon them before they realize what is happening
God made them taste disgrace in this worldly life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is greater, if they only knew
We have cited in this Qur'an every [kind of] example for people, so that they might remember
[It is] an Arabic Qur'an, without any distortion, so that they might become mindful
[To this end], God presents an example: [consider] a man owned by quarreling partners, and another [who is] devoted exclusively to one master, are they considered equal in status? All praise be to God! But most of them do not know
You will die, and they will die
Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will dispute with each other before your Lord
So who is more unjust than one who invents lies about God and denies the Truth when it has come to him? Is there not [enough] room in Hell for the unbelievers
He who promotes the truth and testifies to it, it is they who are mindful of God
They will have with their Lord whatever they desire. This is the reward for those who do good
that God may remove from them the worst of their deeds and reward them according to the best of what they have done
Is not God adequately sufficient for His worshiper? [Yet], they threaten you with others beside Him. If God allows someone to be lost, for him there is no guide
and whomever God guides, no one can mislead him. Is not God Almighty and capable of retribution
If you asked them, "Who created the heavens and the earth?" They would say, "God." So say, "Then do you see those you pray to besides God? If God wishes to harm me, can they remove His harm; or if He wants to show me a blessing, can they withhold His blessing?" Say, "God suffices for me; all those who truly trust put their trust in Him
Say, "My people, do all you can, and so will I. Eventually you will know
who will receive a shameful punishment, and on whom will fall a lasting punishment
We sent down to you the Book offering the Truth to humankind. So whoever is guided, it is for his own good; and he who strays only does so to his own detriment. You are not their guardian
God retrieves people's souls at the time of their death, and the souls of the living during their sleep. He then keeps those for which He has decreed death and releases the others until an appointed term. There are signs in this for people who reflect
Or have they taken intercessors besides God? Say, "Even though they do not have any power, nor do they reason
Say, "To God belongs all intercession. To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Then to Him you will all return
The hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink with disgust when God alone is mentioned, but when those other than Him are mentioned, they suddenly rejoice
Say, "Our God, the Programmer of the heavens and the earth, Knower of all that is beyond our ability to witness and all that we can witness, You will judge between your worshipers concerning their differences
If the unjust owned everything on earth and the like of it with it, they would gladly offer it to ransom themselves from the terrible suffering on the Day of Resurrection, but there will appear to them from God what they never expected
The evils of their deeds will become clear to them, and they will be surrounded by what they used to ridicule
If hard times touch man, he calls on Us. Then, when We favor him with a Our blessing, he says, "I have only been given this only because of my knowledge." In fact, it is only a test, though most of them do not know
Those [who lived] before them said [the same thing], but what they had earned did not do them any good
for the evil of their deeds caught up with them. [Similarly,] the evil deeds of those who have wronged themselves among these people will also catch up with them, and they will not be able to evade God
Do they not know that God expands and restricts His provision for whomever He wills? In this are signs for a People who believe
Say, "My worshipers who have transgressed against themselves do not despair of God's mercy, for God forgives all sins. He is the Ever-Forgiving, the Mercy-Giver
Turn in repentance to your Lord and submit to Him before the punishment comes upon you and you cannot be helped
Follow the best teaching sent down to you from your Lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly, when you are not expecting it
so that a soul may not say, " How sorry I am for having neglected my duty to God and having been among the mockers
or say, "Had God guided me, I would have been among those who are mindful of God
or say, when it sees the punishment, "If only I had another chance to be among those who do good
[But God will reply] "No! My verses did come to you, but you denied them, turned arrogant, and denied the truth
On the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied about God with their faces darkened [by grief and sorrow]. Is not Hell the proper place for the arrogant
God will save those who were mindful of Him by the virtue of their successful choices; no harm will touch them, nor will they grieve
God is the Creator of all things, and He is the Guardian over all things
The keys of the heavens and the earth are His. Those who reject the verses of God, it is they who are the doomed
Say, "Do you order me to worship something other than God, you ignorant people
Yet, It has already been revealed to you, and to those before you, that "If you should associate [anything] with God, your work will be in vain, and you will surely be among the doomed
Then, worship [only] God and be among the grateful
[The unbelievers] have not valued God the way He ought to be valued. The whole earth will lie within His grasp on the Day of Resurrection, while heaven will be folded up in His right hand. May He be exalted in His glory, high above anything they associate with Him
The Horn will be blown, and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be stunned, except whom God wills. Then it will be blown again, and they will stand, looking on
And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord. The Book will be set in place, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought in. Judgment will be passed among them equitably, and they will not be wronged
Every soul will be fully compensated [for] what it has done, for He knows best what they do
Those who denied the truth will be driven to Hell in crowds. When they reach it, its gates will open and its custodians will say, "Did not messengers from among you come to you, reciting to you the verses of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?" They will say, "Yes, but the decree of punishment is justified against the unbelievers
They will be told, "Enter the gates of Hell and stay there eternally. How evil is the residence of the arrogant
But those who were mindful of their Lord will be driven to Paradise in crowds. When they reach it, its gates will open, and custodians will say, "Peace be upon you; you have done well, so enter it to reside there eternally
And they will say, "Praise be to God, who has fulfilled His promise to us and made us inherit the land, letting us settle in Paradise wherever we will. How excellent is the reward for those who act on their faith
You will see the angels hovering around the Throne of His majesty, glorifying their Lord with praise. It will be judged between them equitably, and it will be said, "All praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Ha Meem
the revelation of the Book is from God, the Almighty, the All-knowing
Forgiver of sin, Acceptor of repentance, Severe in punishment and Infinite in favor, there is no god except Him, and to Him is the ultimate return
No one argues about God's signs except the unbelievers, so do not be deceived by their freedom to move around in the land
Before them the people of Noah rejected the truth, as did the parties after them. Every nation plotted to destroy their messenger and argued to defeat truth with falsehood. So, I seized them. What a punishment it was
In this way, your Lord's sentence was passed against those who denied the truth, that they would be the inhabitants of the Fire
Those who carry the Throne of His majesty, and those around it, praise their Lord's limitless glory, and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for the believers, [saying], "Our Lord, Your mercy and knowledge have encompassed all things, so forgive those who repent and follow Your path, and spare them from the punishment of Hell
Our Lord, admit them to Gardens of Eden, which You have promised them, together with the righteous among their fathers, their spouses and their offspring. You are the Almighty, the Wise
And guide them away [from committing] evil deeds. You would be Merciful that Day to anyone you have guided away [from committing] evil deeds, and that is the supreme triumph
The unbelievers will be told [on the same Day], "When you were called to believe and rejected it, God's disgust with you was even greater than the self-disgust you now feel
They will say, "Our Lord, twice You caused us to die, and twice You gave us life. We now admit our sins. Is there possibly a way out
[They will be told] "That is because, when God alone was called upon, you denied Him, but when others were associated with Him, you believed. Judgment belongs to God, the Most High, the Most Great
It is He who shows you His signs, and sends down provisions from the sky to sustain you, but only the one who turns to God will take heed
so call upon God and dedicate your faith sincerely to Him, even though it is resented by unbelievers
He is high above [all] ranks, the Lord of the Throne. He confers the Spirit by His command on whoever He wills of His worshipers to warn of the Day when they will meet Him
The Day they will emerge, when nothing about them is concealed from God. "To whom belongs [all] sovereignty this Day?" "To God, the One, the All-Conquering
This Day every soul will be rewarded for what it earned. There will be no injustice today, for God is swift to settle accounts
And warn them, of the Imminent Day, when the hearts are at the throats, choking them. The unjust will have no dependable friend and no intercessor [who is] obeyed
God knows the eyes' deceptive glances and what the hearts conceal
God judges with Truth, while those besides Him whom they invoke will not judge with anything at all. It is God who is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing
Have they not traveled through the land and seen the fate of those [who lived] before them? They were mightier than they are, and they left more impact on the land, but God seized them for their sins, and they had no protector from God
This is because they repeatedly rejected the self-evident signs their messengers brought them, so God seized them. He is All-Strong and severe in punishment
We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority
to Pharaoh, Haman and Korah, but they said, "[He is] a lying magician
Then, when he brought them the Truth from Us, they said, "Kill the sons of those who have believed with him and spare the women." But the schemes of the unbelievers can only fail
Pharaoh said, "Let me kill Moses and let him appeal to his Lord. I fear that he may change your religion or spread disorder in the land
But Moses said, "I have sought refuge in my Lord and yours from every arrogant tyrant who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning
A believing man from Pharaoh's family, who concealed his faith, said, "Are you going to kill a man [merely] because he says, 'My Lord is God, 'when he has brought you clear signs from your Lord? If he is lying, then the consequence of his lie will be on him, but if he is truthful, then some of what he promises you will happen to you. God does not guide the blatant liars
My people, you reign today, masters in the land, but who will protect us from God's mighty punishment if it should come to us?" Pharaoh said, "I show you only what I see, and I am guiding you along the right path
But the believer said, "My people, I fear for you a day as befell the parties [who opposed their messengers]
Like what happen to Noah's people, Aad and Thamud and those after them. God does not want any injustice for His worshipers
My people, I fear for you the Day of Calling
the Day when you will turn away, hoping to flee, with no one to protect you from God. Whomever God allows to stray has no guide
Joseph had already come to you with clear evidence, but you never stopped doubting what he brought to you until, when he perished, you said, 'God will never send a messenger after him.' This is how God lets those who never cease doubting to stray
Those who argue about God's revelations without having been given an authority are doing something despised by God and by those who believe. This is how God seals up the heart of every arrogant tyrant
[Then] Pharaoh said, "Haman, build me a tower that I may gain means of access
access to the heavens, so that I may have a look at this god of Moses, though I think he is a liar." This is how Pharaoh's evil deeds were made to appear good to him, and he was diverted from the [right] way. Pharaoh's scheming led to nothing but ruin
But he who believed said, "My people, follow me, I will guide you through the correct path
My people, this worldly life is only temporary enjoyment, but the Hereafter is the lasting home
Whoever does a bad deed will be repaid with its like, but whoever does good and is a believer, whether male or female, they will enter Paradise, where they will be provided for without measure
My people, how is it that I call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire
You call me to deny God and to associate with Him something of which I have no knowledge, whereas I call you to the Almighty, the Ever-Forgiving
Without a doubt, that to which you call me has no foundation either in this world or in the Hereafter, [nor is there doubt] that our return is to God, whereas those who overstate (their disbelieve] shall inhabit the Fire
You will remember what I say to you, so I entrust myself to God, for God is well aware of [His] worshipers
So God protected him from the evils they plotted, while a terrible punishment encompassed Pharaoh's clan
the Fire, to which they will be exposed morning and evening. On the Day the Hour comes [it will be said], "Admit Pharaoh's clan to the most intense punishment
In the Fire, they will bicker, and the meek will say to those who were arrogant, "We were your followers, so can you provide us some relief from the Fire
But those who were arrogant will say, "We are all in it together. God has judged between the worshipers
Those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, "Pray to your Lord to lighten our punishment for a day
[The keepers] will say, "Did not your messengers come to you with clear evidence?" They will say, "Yes." [The keepers] will reply, "Then pray [yourselves], but the prayers of the unbelievers will always be in vain
We will surely support Our Messengers and those who believe during this life; and, on the Day when the witnesses arise
The Day when excuses will not benefit the unjust- they will be rejected and they will have the worst of homes
We gave Moses guidance, and We made the Children of Israel heirs to the Book
as guidance and a reminder for those with understanding
Be patient, for God's promise is true. And ask forgiveness for your sin, and glorify your Lord with praise evening and morning
Those who dispute God's revelations without any authority to do so have nothing within their hearts except arrogance, which they will never be able to satisfy, so seek refuge in God, for He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing
The creation of the heavens and earth is far greater than the creation of human beings, but most people do not know
The blind and the seeing are not the same, nor are those who believe and do good deeds equal to the evildoers. How seldom you reflect
The Hour is sure to come, there is no doubt about it, but most people do not believe
Your Lord says, "Call upon Me, and I will answer you, but those who are too proud to worship Me will enter Hell, humiliated
It is God who made the night for you so that you may rest, and the day [so that you may] see. God is truly gracious to people, but most people are not thankful
Such is God, your Lord, Creator of all things. There is no God but Him, so how can you be so misled
Thus it is: those who reject God's signs are misled
It is God who made the earth for you to settle and the heaven as a canopy. He designed you, and perfected your design, and provided you with wholesome things. Such is God, your Lord, so blessed be God, Lord of the worlds
He is the Ever-Living. There is no God except Him, so call on Him, making your faith sincerely His. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Say, "Now that clear evidence has come to me from my Lord, I have been prohibited from worshiping those you call upon besides God, and I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds
It is He who created you from dust, then from a fertilized ovum, then from a clinging leach like; then He brings you out as infants; then He allows you to reach maturity; and then you become elderly, although some of you die sooner-so that you may reach a predetermined age, and perhaps you may understand
It is He who gives life and death; when He decides on a thing, He simply says, "Be," and It is
Do you not see how misled are those who dispute God's signs
those who deny the Book and the messages We sent with Our Messengers? They will surely come to know
when they have shackles and chains around their necks, and are dragged
in boiling water, and are then thrown into the Fire, where they will be consumed
It will then be said to them, "Where are those [associates] whom you used to consider divine
other than God?" They will say, "They have departed from us; or, rather, those we used to call upon proved to be nothing. [They will be told,] "This is how God let those who deny the truth stray
all because you used to rejoice on earth in things other than the truth, and you were full of vanity
Enter the gates of Hell, to remain there eternally, a terrible home for the arrogant
So be patient, [Prophet,] for God's promise is true. Whether We show you some of what We have promised them or We cause you to die, It is to Us that they will be returned
We have sent messengers before you. Some We have told you about, and others We did not. No messenger can produce a miracle except with God's permission. Then, when God's command comes, just judgment will be passed, and those who followed falsehood will be lost then and there
It is God who made the domestic animals, some for you to ride, and some to eat
You have other benefits from them as well. You can reach any destination you wish on them, and on them and on ships, you are transported
And [thus] He shows you His signs. So, which of God's signs do you deny
Have they not traveled through the land and seen the fate of those who lived before them? They were more numerous than they are, and had greater power, and left more impressive marks on the land. Yet what they achieved was of no use to them
When their messengers came to them with self-evident signs, they showed satisfaction with the knowledge they had, and so they were engulfed by the very punishment they had mocked
Then, when they saw Our might, they said," We believe in God alone, and we reject what we used to associate with Him
But believing after seeing Our might did not help them at all. This has been God's way of dealing with His worshipers, and those who denied the truth were lost, then and there
Ha Meem
revelations have come down to you from the Merciful-to-All, the Mercy Giver
a Book whose verses have been made clear, an Arabic Qur'an for people who know
giving good news and warning. Yet, most of them turn away, so they do not hear
and they say, "There is a barrier between our hearts and what you call us to, and there is heaviness in our ears. There is a curtain between us and you. So do whatever you want, and so shall we
Say, "I am only a human like you. It has been revealed to me that your god is but One God. So be upright towards Him, and seek His forgiveness." How terrible it is for the idolaters
those who do not give the purifying alms and refuse to believe in the Hereafter
Those who believe and do good deeds will have an endless reward
Say, "Do you deny the One who created the earth in two days, and attribute equals to Him? That is the Lord of the worlds
He placed firm mountains over it, and He blessed it and apportioned its provisions to all who would seek them, [all] in four days
Then He turned to the Heaven while it was smoke and said to it and to the earth, "Come willingly or unwillingly." They said, "We come willingly
He decreed that they are seven heavens in two days, and He revealed to each its mandate. And We decorated the lower heaven with lanterns and protection. Such is the design of the Almighty, the All-Knowing
If they turn away, say, "I have warned you of a thunderbolt like the one which struck Aad and Thamud
when their messengers came to them from all around them, saying "Do not worship anyone but God." They said, "Had our Lord willed, He would have sent down angels; therefore, we reject the message with which you were sent
As for Aad, they were arrogant in the land, opposed justice, and said, "Who could have a power greater than ours?" Did they not see that God who created them is more powerful than they? But they continued to reject Our signs
so We sent a screaming wind upon them for a few miserable days to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in this worldly life; but the punishment of the Hereafter will be more humiliating, and they will not be helped
As for Thamud, We guided them, but they preferred blindness over guidance, so the thunderbolt of humiliating punishment seized them, just as they deserved
And We saved those who believed and were mindful of God
On the Day when God's enemies will be herded to the Fire, driven in rows
until, when they have reached it, their hearing, their sight and their skins will testify against them concerning what they were doing
They will ask their skins, "Why did you testified against us?" They will say, "God, who gave speech to everything, has given us speech; it is He Who created you the first time, and to Him you will return
You did not even try to conceal yourselves from your hearing or your sights or your skins to prevent them from testifying against you, but you assumed that God did not know much of what you were doing
It is this thought which you assumed about your Lord that led you to ruin, so that you became doomed
So [even] if they are patient, the Fire will be their home, and if they plead for a favor, none will be given them
[for] We had assigned them companions, who made what is before them and what was behind them seem alluring. But the sentence has already been passed against them, together with generations of jinn and men before them: they were doomed
The unbelievers say, "Do not listen to this Qur'an but talk over it, so that you may prevail
But We will surely cause the unbelievers to taste a severe punishment, and We will reward them according to the worst of their deeds
Such is the repayment of God's enemies, the Fire, where they will have their permanent home as payment for having disregarded Our revelations
The unbelievers will say, "Our Lord, show us those jinn and men who misled us; we will trample them under our feet so that they become the lowest of the low
Those who say, "Our Lord is God," and then stay on the right course, on them the angels will descend on them and say, "Do not fear or grieve, but [rather] rejoice in the news of Paradise, which you have been promised
we are your allies in this life and in the Hereafter, where you will have whatever your souls desire, and you will have whatever you wish
as a welcoming gift from the Most Forgiving, the Mercy Giver
Who speaks better than someone who calls people to God, does good deeds, and says, "I am among those who submit to God
Good and evil are never equal. Repel evil with good, and your enemy will become like an intimate friend
But, none will attain it except those who are steadfast in patience, and none will attain it except the very fortunate
And when a temptation from Satan provokes you, seek refuge in God; He is the All-Hearing and the All-knowing
Among His signs are the night, the day, the sun and the moon. Do not bow down in worship to the sun, nor to the moon, but bow down to God, Who created them, if it is Him that you worship
But if they respond arrogantly, [it matters not] for those who are near your Lord praise His limitless glory by night and by day, and never grow tired
Another of His signs is that you see the earth humbly desolate, but when We send down rain on it, it quivers and swells. He who revived it will revive the dead. He has power over all things
Those who distort Our verses are not hidden from Us. Does he who is thrown into the Fire fare better than he who will arrive securely on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you want; He Sees everything you do
Those who reject this Reminder after it has come to them [are losers], as it is a mighty Book
that falsehood cannot approach neither openly or secretly, [one] sent down from the All-Wise and Praiseworthy
Nothing has been said to you [Prophet] that was not said to the messengers before you. Your Lord is a Lord of Forgiveness, but also of painful punishment
Had We made it a Qur'an in a foreign language, they would have said, "If only its verses were made clear." What? A [book in a] foreign language to an Arab?" Say, "It is guidance and healing for those who believe, but for those who do not believe, it is heaviness in their ears, and it is blindness for them, as if they were being called from a distant place
We gave Moses the Book, but there was disagreement about it, and had it not for a prior decree from your Lord, their differences would already have been settled. But they are still suspicious and in doubt about it
Whoever does good works, does so for his own soul; and whoever does evil, does so to its detriment. Your Lord is never unjust to His worshipers
Knowledge of the Hour belongs solely to him; no fruit emerges from its husk nor does a female conceive or give birth without His knowledge. On the Day when He calls out to them, "Where are My associates?" They will then say, "We admit to You, none of us witnessed any
What they used to pray to before will forsake them, and they will realize that they have no escape
A human being never tires of praying for good things; but when hard times afflict him, he despairs and loses hope
And if We let him taste mercy from Us, after hard times have afflicted him, he will say, "This is my due, and I do not think the Hour [of Judgment] is going to come; but even if I were to be returned to my Lord, I will [surely] have the very best reward from Him." But We will inform the unbelievers of what they did, and We will make them taste an awful punishment
And whenever We're gracious to a human being, he turns away and distances himself, but when hard times touch him, he starts endless prayers
Say, "What if this revelation is truly from God, and you are rejecting it? Who is more misguided than he who is cutoff and alienated [from God]
We will show them Our signs on the horizons and in themselves, until it is clear to them that this is the Truth. Is it not sufficient that your Lord is a Witness over all things
Surely, they are in doubt about meeting their Lord. Surely, He encompasses everything
Ha Meem
A'yn Seen Qaf
thus God, the Almighty, the Wise reveals to you, as He did to those before you
To Him belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth. He is the Most High, the Most Great
The heavens above them almost burst apart [from awe of Him], while the angels praise their Lord's limitless glory and ask forgiveness for those on earth. God is indeed the Ever Forgiving, the Mercy giver
As for those who take others than Him as protectors, God is in charge of them and you are not their keeper
Thus We have revealed to you an Arabic Qur'an that you may warn this main city and all others around it and to give warning of the Day of Gathering, about which there is no doubt, when some will be in the Garden and some in the Blazing Fire
Had God willed, He could have made them one community, but He admits into His mercy him that wills. As for the unjust, they will have no protector and no helper
Or do they think that they have protectors other than Him? God is the Protector, for He gives life to the dead, and He is able to do all things
Whatever matters you differ about, is for God to judge. Such is God, my Lord, in whom I trust, and unto Him I repent
the Creator of the heavens and earth who separated them and gave each a purpose. He has made mates for you from among yourselves, and gave mates to the animals, so that you may multiply. There is nothing like Him. He is the All-Hearing, the All- Seeing
To Him belongs control of the heavens and the earth. He provides abundantly or scarcely to whoever He wills. He is, the All-knowing
He has ordained for you the same faith He commanded Noah, and what We have revealed to you, and what We commanded Abraham and Moses and Jesus: "You shall uphold the faith and do not break up into factions." Although what you are calling the idolaters to do is too hard for them. [However] God draws to Himself everyone who is willing, and guides unto Himself everyone who turns to Him
Yet they [the followers] split into factions, out of rivalry between them only after they came to know the truth. Judgment between them would have been pronounced, were it not for a decision from your Lord to postpone it until a set time. Yet those who have inherited the Book after them are in grave doubt about it
Therefore, go on inviting them and stay the course as you have been commanded. Do not follow their whims and desires but say, "I have believed in what God has sent down of the Book, and I have been commanded to judge equitably between you. God is our Lord and your Lord. We have our deeds, and you have your deeds. Let there be no quarrel between us and you. God will bring us all together, and to Him is the ultimate return
And those who argue about God after having answered His call, their argument has no basis whatsoever with their Lord. Anger enfolds them, and a severe punishment awaits them
It is God who has sent down the Book with the Truth and the Balance. For all you know, the Hour might be near
Those who do not believe in it seek to hasten it; but those who believe are concerned about it, as they know it is the Truth. Unquestionably, those who question the Hour are in extreme error
God is very gentle with His worshipers; He provides for whomever He wills. He is the All- Powerful, the Almighty
If anyone desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase for him his harvest. And if he desires the harvest of this world, We will give him a share of it, but He will have no share of the Hereafter
Or do they have partners who have ordained for them some faith that is not authorized by God? Were it not for [God's] decisive word, Judgment would have been made between them. The unjust will have a painful punishment
You will see the unjust worried about what they have committed, as they will have to answer for it. While those who have believed and done good deeds are in flowering meadows of the Gardens, having whatever they wish from their Lord: that is the supreme blessing
This is the good news God gives to His worshipers who believe and do good deeds.Say, "I do not ask you any wage for it, except affection due to kin." Whoever does a good deed, We will increase it for him. God is Ever Forgiving and Most Appreciative
Or do they say, "He falsely claimed lies about God?" If God so willed, He could have sealed your heart, exterminated falsehood and confirmed the Truth with His Words. He has full Knowledge of what is in the hearts
It is He who accepts repentance from his worshipers and forgives bad deeds, He knows what you do
He answers those who have believed and done good deeds and increases for them out of His grace. But the unbelievers will have a severe punishment
Were God to expand provision to His worshipers, they would have committed tyranny on earth. But He sends down whatever He wills in due measures. He is, well Acquainted and Fully Aware of His worshipers
It is He who sends down the rain after they have lost hope and unfolds His mercy. He is the Protector, the Praiseworthy
Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and the creatures He has spread throughout them: He is Able to gather them together if He so wishes
Whatever disaster strikes you, It is for what your hands have done; Yet He forgives much
On earth you will not be beyond God's reach. You do not have any protector or helper besides God
Among His Signs are ships floating like mountains through the sea
If He wills, He could have settled down the winds, leaving them motionless on its surface. Surely in that are signs for every patient and grateful person
Or He could destroy them for what they have earned; yet He pardons much
Those who argue about Our signs know that there is no escape for them
Whatever you have been given is only the provision of this life. But that which is with God is better and more enduring for those who believe and trust in their Lord
those who avoid major sins and gross indecencies, and even if they become angry, they will forgive
and those who respond to their Lord, pray regularly, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and give of what We have provided for them
and those who, when tyranny strikes them, they defend themselves
The retribution for a bad deed is one like it, but whoever forgives and makes peace will have his reward with God. He certainly does not like those who do wrong
Yet whoever defends himself after having been wronged, there is no blame on them
Blame lies on those who wrong others and transgress in the land without any justification. Those will have a painful punishment
As for him who endures patiently and forgives, that is a sign of real resolve
Whoever God lets go astray will have no protector apart from Him. And you will see the transgressors, when they see the punishment, saying, "Is there a way of going back
As they are exposed to the Fire, you will see them humbled from humiliation, glancing around covertly. While those who believed will say, "The losers are those who lost themselves and their kin on the Day of Resurrection." Verily, the unjust are in an enduring punishment
they have no allies to support them apart from God. Anyone God lets go astray will find no way out
Respond to your Lord before a Day comes from God's judgment that cannot be turned back. You will have no refuge on that Day and no means of denial
But if they turn away, We did not send you as their guardian. Your only duty is to deliver the message. When We let man taste Our mercy, he rejoices in it; but if harm afflicts him for what his hands have done, then man turns to denial
The kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to God. He creates what he wills. He gives daughters to whomever He wills, and He gives sons to whom He wills
Or, and He makes whom He wills sterile. He is All-knowing and Able to do all things
God will not speak to any human being except by revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger who then reveals, by His permission, whatever He wills. He is Most High and All Wise
Accordingly We have revealed to you a Spirit of Our command. You did not know what is the Book or what faith is, but We have made it an enlightenment, guiding with it whom We wish of Our worshipers. You indeed guide to a straight path
the path of God, to whom belongs everything that is in the heavens and earth. Truly, all will eventually return to God
Ha Meem
by the Book that make things clear
We have caused it to be an Arabic Qur'an that you may understand
It is in the Source of the Book with Us, exalted and full of Wisdom
Should we then withdraw the Reminder from you, because you are excessive in your rejection
How many prophets We sent among the earlier people
and they used to ridicule every one of them
We destroyed people mightier than these, and their example has gone down in history
And if you ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth?" they would say, "They were created by the Almighty, the All-knowing
It is He who made the earth a cradle for you and made pathways in it for you, that you might be guided
It is He who sends down rain from the sky in measured portions; We resurrect with it a dead town back to life. Similarly you will be brought forth
It is He who created the pairs, all of them, and has made it possible for you to ride ships and animals
That you may settle on their backs and remember your Lord's blessings when you have settled and say. "Exalted in His glory is He who subjected this to us. We on our own would not have been able to have it
We will surely return to our Lord
Yet they attribute to Him only some of what He has created. Man is clearly ungrateful
Or has He taken daughters for himself and favored you with sons
Yet when any of them is given the good news of what he himself attributes to the Merciful, his face darkens, and he suppresses grief
what [am I to have a daughter], someone to be brought up in ornaments but cannot help in a fight
Yet, they designated the angels, who are created to worship the Merciful, as females. Have they witnessed their creation? Their claim will be recorded, and they will be questioned about it
They say, "If the Merciful willed it, we would not have worshipped them." But they do not know that. They are merely guessing
Or have We given them a Book prior to this one, to which they are adhering
No they say, but "We found our fathers following this path, and we are guided by their footsteps
Similarly, every time We sent someone before you to a town to warn them, those corrupted by abundance would say, "We found our fathers following this path, and we are following in their footsteps
Say, even if I bring you better guidance than what you found your fathers following?" They reply, "We reject, what You have been sent with
So we punish them; reflect then on the end of those who rejected the truth
And when Abraham said to his father and his people, "I have nothing to do with what you worship
I worship only the One who created me and gave me purpose, He will guide me
He made this as an enduring word remaining among Abraham's descendants that they might return [to it]
Now, I let these people of yours [Prophet] and their forefathers have some enjoyment, until the Truth and a messenger who made things clear came to them
But when the Truth came to them, they said, "This is magic and we refuse to believe it
They also said, "If only this Qur'an was sent down to a great man from the two cities
Is it they who distribute your Lord's blessing? It is We who have allocated their livelihood among them in this life. We have raised some of them in rank, so that some would hire others for service. But your Lord's mercy is better than whatever they accumulate
Were it not that people might become a single community, We would have provided those who deny the Merciful-to-all, silver roofs for their houses and silver stairways to ascend
and silver doors to their houses and furnishings on which to recline
and gold ornaments. But all that is merely the possessions of this life, while the Hereafter with your Lord is for those who are mindful of Him
Whoever overlooks the remembrance of the Merciful, We assign him a devil, for a companion
They hinder them from the path, though they think they are guided
Then, when such a person comes to Us, he says [to his companion] "I wish you had been as far away from me as east is from west. What an evil companion
Since you were both unjust, It will not benefit you today to know, that you are partners in the punishment
Can you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind and whoever is clearly misguided
Whether We take you away, We will afflict retribution on them
Or, We show you what We have promised them; for We have perfect ability to control them
So adhere to what is revealed to you. You are on a straight path
It is a remembrance for you and your people, and you are all going to be questioned
Ask those of Our messengers We sent before you; did We ever appoint any deities besides the Merciful to be worshipped
We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his inner circle. He said, "I am the Messenger of the Lord of the worlds
But when he came to them with Our signs, they laughed at them
Each sign We showed them was more marvelous than the previous one. So We afflicted them with punishment, so that they might return
They said "Magician, pray to your Lord for us, as He has a covenant with you, and We will be guided
But when We lifted the punishment from them, they broke their word
Then Pharaoh called out among his people; he said, "My people, does not the kingdom of Egypt belong to me, and these rivers that flow under my feet? Do not you see
Am I not better than this insignificant person who can barely make himself understood
Why then are not golden bracelets placed on him, or the angels are accompanying him
He [Pharaoh] easily swayed his people, and they obeyed him. [To Us] they were disobedient people
but when they continued to challenge Us, We inflicted Our punishment on them, and drowned them all
We made them a precedent and an example for the others
And when the son of Mary was given as an example, immediately your people [Prophet] loudly objected
and they said, "who is better, our gods or him?" They cite him only for arguments sake. In fact, they are a confrontational people
[Jesus] was a servant whom We blessed, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel
Had We so willed, We could have made you into angels succeeding one another on earth
He [Jesus] is a [sign for] knowledge of the Hour, so have no doubt about it, and follow Me. This is a straight path
Never let Satan divert you. He is a clear enemy to you all
When Jesus came with clear evidence, he said, "I have brought you Wisdom and to clarify for you some of what you differ about. Be always mindful of God and obey me
God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path
But the factions differed among themselves. How terrible is the punishment of a painful Day to the unjust
What are they waiting for except for the Hour to come suddenly upon them when they are not expecting it
On that Day, close friends will be enemies to each other, except for those who are mindful of God
My worshipers, you have nothing to fear on that Day, nor will you grieve
those who believed in Our revelations and were submissive
Enter the Garden, you and your spouses, filled with Joy
Passed among them will be plates and cups of gold. They will have whatever their soul desire and whatever delights their eyes. There you will remain forever
That is the Garden which you are made to inherit because of what you have done
There will be much fruit for you to eat
Those who force others to reject Our messages will be in the punishment of Hell forever
It will not be allowed to be eased for them. In it, they will be crushed by despair
We did not wrong them, but it was they who were the unjust
They will call, "Malik, let your Lord finish us off!" He will say, "You are staying
We have given you the Truth, but most of you, hate the Truth
Or have they thought up some scheme? We too have been scheming
Or do they think that We cannot hear their secrets and their private talk? Yes, We can, and Our messengers are with them writing it down
Say, "If the Merciful-to-all had a son, then I would be the first to worship him
Exalted is the Lord of the heavens and the earth in His glory, Lord of the Throne, totally above what they ascribe to Him
So, let them indulge in idle talk and play until they face that Day of theirs which they have been promised
It is He who is God in heaven, and God on earth. He is the All-Wise, the All-Knowing
And blessed is He Who has sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and everything between them. He alone has knowledge of the Hour. You will all be returned to Him
Those deities they invoke besides Him have no power of intercession; only those who testify to the Truth and have full knowledge
And if you asked them who created them, they would say, "God." Why do they mislead
As for his saying, "My Lord, these are people who do not believe
So forgive them and talk peace. Eventually they will come to know
Ha Meem
by the Book that makes things clear
We have revealed it on a Blessed Night; We have been warning
On that night every matter of wisdom is made distinct
A decree from Us. We have been sending messages
as mercy from your Lord. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing
The Sustainer of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, if you only can grasp this with certainty
There is no god but Him; He gives life and causes death. [He is] your Sustainer and the Sustainer of your forefathers from the beginning
Yet they who lack certainty toy with their doubts
So watch out for the Day when the sky will bring visible smoke
enveloping all people; "This is a painful punishment
[Then they will say], "Our Lord, lift the punishment from us, we now believe
But how can this sudden remembrance benefit them? When a messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them
and they turned away from him saying, "He is tutored but possessed
We will postpone the punishment for a while. But you will eventually return to us
The Day when We will strike with the greatest assault, We will take retribution
We had already tested Pharaoh's people before them, when a noble messenger came to them
[saying], "Hand over to me the servants of God. I am a trustworthy Messenger to you
Never be arrogant with God. I come to you with clear authority
I have sought refuge with my Lord and your Lord, against your condemnation
If you don't believe me, then [at least] leave me alone
He then called out to his Lord that these were evil people
[God said], "Then set out with My servants by night. You will be pursued
Cross the sea quickly and leave it as is. They are an army to be drowned
How many gardens and fountains did they leave behind
And crops and noble residences
and that life of ease that they used to enjoy
So it was; Yet We passed it on to other people to inherit
Neither heaven nor earth wept for them, nor were they given a reprieve
And We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating persecution
from Pharaoh. He was an arrogant transgressor
And We chose them knowingly over all people
and We gave them many revelations, that were an obvious trial
Yet these people say
There is nothing but our one death, and we will not be resurrected
Bring back our forefathers, if you are telling the truth
Are they better than the people of Tubba' and those before them? We destroyed them, [for] they were among those who rejected our messages and have severed all relations to God
And We did not create the heavens and earth and everything between them to play a game
We created them with the Truth [for a meaningful purpose], but most of them do not know
The Day of Distinction is the appointed time for all of them
The Day when a friend will not be of any use to his friend, nor will they be helped
except those on whom God has mercy. He is the Almighty, the Merciful-to-all
The tree of Zaqqum
is food for the sinner
It boils inside bellies like boiling oil
like the boiling of seething water
Seize him and drag him into the midst of Hell
then pour scalding water over his head as punishment
Taste it, you are the mighty one, the noble
this is what you used to dispute
But those who were mindful of God will be in a safe place
in the midst of Gardens and springs
wearing fine silk and brocade, facing each other
So it will be. And We shall pair them with Hoor Ein
Safe and secure, they will call there for every kind of fruit
Except the first death, they will not taste death there. He will protect them from the punishment of Hell
a grace from your Lord. That is the supreme triumph
We have made this Qur'an easy to understand in your own language that they might remember
So wait and watch; they are also on their watch
Ha Meem
the gradual revelations of the Book are from God, the Almighty, the Wise
In the heavens and earth are Signs for the believers
And in your creation and in the creatures He scattered are Signs for people gifted with inner certainty
The alternation of night and day, the sustenance God sends down from the sky, using it to revive the earth after its death, and the circulation of the winds are all Signs for people who use their reason
These are God's verses, We convey them to you, setting forth the Truth.If they deny God and His verses, what message will they then believe
How terrible it is to every sinful liar
who hears God's revelations being recited to him, yet he persists arrogantly, as if he did not hear them. So give him the news of a painful punishment awaiting him
And when he does learn some of Our verses, he ridicules them. Such people will have a humiliating punishment
Hell awaits them. Nothing they have earned will be of any use to them, nor will those they have adopted as protectors instead of God. They will have a great punishment
This is true guidance. Those who have rejected the truth of their Lord's revelations will have a punishment of grievous pain
It is God who subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail with His approval and that you may seek His favor, and that you may give Him thanks
And He has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and on the earth; a blessing from Him. There are signs in this for people who reflect
Tell the believers that they should forgive those who do not anticipate the Days of God as it is He alone who will hold people accountable for what they have earned
Whoever does good, benefits his own soul; and whoever does evil, harms his soul. Then you will all be returned to your Lord
We gave the Children of Israel the Book, Wisdom and prophecy. We provided them with good things and preferred them over all people
We gave them clear details of the matter [faith]. Yet, they differed out of rivalry between them, only after knowledge came to them. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their differences
Then We put you on a pathway of the matter, so follow it, and do not follow the whims and desires of those who do not know
They will not help you in any way if you decide to defy God. The unjust protect each other, while God is the Protector of those who are mindful of Him
This is clear insight for mankind and guidance and mercy for people gifted with inner certainty
Or do those who indulge in evil deeds assume that We will regard them the same as those who believe and do good deeds, that they will be alike whether in life or in death? How bad is their judgment
God created the heavens and earth in Truth, so that every soul may be rewarded according to its deeds. They will not be wronged
Have you considered him who has taken his whims and desires for his god? Then God knowingly allows him to stray, sealing his hearing and his heart, and has placed a veil over his vision. So who can guide him after God? Will you not reflect
They say, "There is nothing but our life in this world; we die, we live, and nothing but time destroys us." But they have no knowledge of this; they are only guessing
And when Our clear verses are recited to them, their only argument is to say, "Bring back our forefathers, if you are telling the truth
Say, "It is God who gives you life , then causes you to die, and then He gathers you for the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. But most people do not know
To God belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On the Day when the Hour takes place, on that Day those who dealt in falsehood will lose
You will see every nation on its knees; every nation summoned to its Book, "Today you are being repaid for what you did
This is Our record, it speaks about you in Truth. We were recording what You have been doing
As for those who believed and did good deeds, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. That is the clear triumph
But for the unbelievers, "Were My verses not recited to you? But you were an arrogant and dissenting people
And when you were told, 'God's promise is true and there is no doubt about the Hour,' you said, 'We do not know what is the Hour. We're assuming that these are only speculations, and we're by no means certain
The evil consequences of what they did will become evident to them, and the very thing they used to ridicule will haunt them
They were told, "Today We will ignore you as you ignored the encounter of this Day. The Fire will be your refuge, and you will have no helpers
That is because you took the verses of God in ridicule, and the worldly life enticed you." Therefore, today they will not get out of it and they will no longer have the opportunity to repent
All praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, Lord of the worlds
His alone is all majestic greatness within the heavens and the earth. He is the Almighty, the Wise
Ha Meem
the gradual revelations of the Book are from God, the Almighty, the Wise
We did not create the heavens and earth and everything in between them except in Truth and for a specified term. Yet the unbelievers continue to ignore what they have been warned about
Say, "Do you see those you pray to other than God? Show me what part of earth they have; or do they own a share in the heavens? Bring me a Book preceding this one, or a shred of knowledge, if you are truthful
Who can be more misguided than he who calls on others beside God that do not respond to him even till the Day of Resurrection? and are not even aware that callers are calling on them
And when people are gathered [that Day], they will be enemies to those who worshiped them, and they will renounce their worship
But when our clear verses are recited to them, the unbelievers say to the Truth when it comes to them: "This is obvious magic
Or do they say, "He has invented it?" Say, "If I have invented it, there is nothing at all you can do to protect me from God. He knows well what you are engaged in. He is sufficient Witness between me and you. He is the Most-Forgiving the Merciful-to-all
Say, "I am not different from the other messengers, and I do not know what will be done with me, or with you. I only follow what has been revealed to me. I only warn plainly
Say, "Have you considered: what if the Qur'an is really from God, and you are rejecting it? When a witness from the Children of Israel has already testified to its similarity [to earlier scripture] and believed in it, and yet you are too proud to do the same? God does not guide the unjust people
The unbelievers say about the believers, "If it were anything good, they would not have preceded us to it." And since they were not guided by it, they will say, "This is an ancient lie
Yet before it, was the Book revealed to Moses, a guide and as a mercy. And this a Book confirming it in Arabic tongue to warn those who are unjust and to bring good news to those who do good
Those who say, "Our Lord is God," and then remained on a straight path, they will have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve
Those are destined for Paradise, where they will dwell forever, a reward for what they used to do
We have instructed man to be kind to his parents. His mother carried him with difficulty and gave birth to him with difficulty. His bearing and weaning period is thirty months. Until, when he reaches his full strength, and is forty years of age, he says, "My Lord, help me to be grateful for the blessings You have bestowed on me and on my parents; help me to do the right deeds that are pleasing to you. Make my children good. I have sincerely repented, and I am of those who submit to You
Those are the ones whose best deeds will be accepted and whose bad deeds will be overlooked. They will be among the dwellers of Paradise. This is the promise of truth which they had been promised
As for him who says to his parents, "Enough of you; Are you warning me that I will be resurrected when generations have passed and gone before me?" While they both cry for God's help, "Please believe! The promise of God is true." But he says, "These are only ancient tales
Those are the ones upon whom the verdict is justified, among nations that went before them of jinn and humans. They are truly doomed
Everyone will be ranked according to what they have done. He will pay them in full for their deeds, and they will not be wronged
On the Day when the unbelievers are exposed to the Fire: "You have squandered the good things you had in your worldly life, and you took your portion of pleasure there. So today you are being repaid with a punishment of humiliation, because of your unjustifiable arrogance on earth, and for transgressing all bounds
And mention, the brother of Aad, as he warned his people at the sand dunes. Others, delivering warnings, have come and gone before him and after him: "Worship only God, they said. I fear for you the punishment of a terrible Day
They replied, "Did you come to turn us away from our gods? Then bring us the punishment you promise us, if you are telling the truth
He said, "Its knowledge is only with God, I only convey to you the message that I was sent with. But I see you are insolent people
When they saw a cloud approaching their valleys they said, "This is a cloud that will bring us rain." No, it is rather what you wanted to speed up : a wind, in which there is a painful punishment
it will destroy everything by the command of its Lord. That morning, there was nothing to be seen except their ruined dwellings. This is how We repay those who force others to reject Our messages
We had empowered them far better than We empowered you, and We gave them hearing, vision and hearts. But their hearing, vision and hearts were of no use to them as they were rejecting the signs of God; and so they became surrounded by the very punishment they used to ridicule
We have destroyed other towns around you, after We have diversified Our signs to them that perhaps they will return to the right path
Why then did those idols, whom they worshiped to bring them nearer to God, not help them? In fact, they abandoned them. It was all falsehood of their own making
We sent a group of jinn to you [Prophet) to listen to the Qur'an. When they heard it, they said "Listen quietly." Then when it was concluded, they went back to their people to warn them
They said, "Our people, We have heard a Book revealed after Moses confirming what is available of it, guiding to the Truth and to a straight path
Our people, respond to the Caller to God. Believe in Him; He will forgive you your sins and will protect you from a painful punishment
But he who does not respond to God's call can never escape God's reach on earth, and have no protectors besides Him. Those are clearly misguided
Do they not see that God, who created the heavens and earth and was never tired in doing so. Is He Able to bring the dead back to life? Yes indeed. He is Able to do all things
On the Day when the unbelievers are exposed to the Fire "Is this not the truth?" They will say, "Yes, by our Lord." He will say, "Then taste the punishment for having rejected the Truth
Be patient, as were those messengers of firm resolve. And do not seek to hasten punishment for them. On the Day when they see what they are promised, it will seem as they had only stayed for an hour of a single day [on earth]. An announcement: will any be destroyed except the defiantly rebellious people
Those who reject the truth and turn others away from the path of God, He will let their deeds go to waste
While those who believe, and do good deeds and believe in what has been sent down to Muhammad as the Truth from their Lord, He will remove their bad deeds and relieve their concerns
That is because those who deny the truth follow falsehood, while those who believe follow the Truth from their Lord. In this way God shows to mankind their examples
So, when you encounter the unbelievers [in battle], strike at their necks. Then, once they are defeated, bind them firmly. Then either release them by grace, or by ransom, until the war is over. God could have defeated them Himself if He had willed, but He wants to test some of you by means of others. As for those who are killed in the cause of God, He will not let their deeds go to waste
He will guide them and will put their mind at ease
And He will admit them to Paradise, which He has already made known to them
Believers, if you help God, He will help you and make you stand firm
As for the unbelievers, how miserable will they be? God brought their deeds to nothing
They hated what God revealed, so He rendered their deeds worthless
Have they not journeyed through the land and seen the fate of those before them? God destroyed them, and a similar fate awaits all those who persist on denying the truth
That is because God is the protector of those who believe while those who deny the truth have no protector
God will admit those who have believed and done good deeds to Gardens with rivers flowing through them. While those who disbelieved, who enjoyed themselves, and eat like cattle eat, the Fire will be their final dwelling
And how many towns We have destroyed who were greater in power than your town which drove you out? There was no helper for them
Is the one who has clear evidence from his Lord like someone whose evil deeds have been made to look attractive to him? So they follow their [own] whims and desires
The example of the Paradise promised to those who are mindful of God is that of a place that has rivers of pure water, and rivers of milk forever fresh, and rivers of wine delightful to all who drink it, and rivers of strained honey. They will have in it all kinds of fruits and forgiveness from their Lord. Is this like those who will abide eternally in the Fire and are given to drink boiling water that will cut through their bowels
Among them are those who listen to you, but when they leave you, they say to those given knowledge, "What was that he just said?" Those are the ones whose hearts God has sealed. They follow their own whims and desires
While those who were [willing to be] guided, God increases them in guidance and causes them to grow in God-consciousness
What are the unbelievers waiting for, other than the Hour to come upon them suddenly? Its Signs have already come. But what good will it be to remind them once the Hour has actually arrived
Know then that there is no god but God and ask forgiveness for your sins and for the believing men and women. God knows when you get up and when you lie down
Those who believe ask "why no chapter has been sent down [about fighting]." Yet when a decisive chapter is sent down, and fighting is mentioned in it, you see those with sickness in their hearts looking at you like someone about to faint from fear of death. It is more appropriate
To show Obedience and good words. Then, when the decision to fight has been made, being true to God would have been better for them
Would you prefer to turn away and go spreading corruption on earth and sever your ties of kinship
Those are the ones that God has rejected, so He deafened them and blinded their vision
Will they not ponder the Qur'an? Or are there locks upon their hearts
Those who turned back in their tracks after guidance became clear to them, Satan enticed them and has given them false hope
That is because they said to those who hate what God has sent down, "We will obey you in certain matters." But God knows their secrets
How will it be when the angels gather them in death, beating their faces and their backs
That is because they pursued what displeases God and hated what pleases Him. So He rendered their deeds worthless
Or do those with sickness in their hearts think that God will not expose their malice
Had We willed, We could have show them to you, and you would have recognized them by their features; Yet you will surely know them by the tone of their speech. God knows all you do
We will test you, until We know those who strive among you, and those who are patient, and We will test the sincerity of your assertions
The unbelievers who turn others away from the path of God and oppose the Messenger after guidance has become clear to them, will not hurt God in the least, but He will render their deeds worthless
Believers, obey God and obey the Messenger and do not let your deeds go to waste
The unbelievers who turn others away from the path of God and then die while they are unbelievers, God will not forgive them
So do not waiver and call for peace while you have the upper hand. God is with you. He will not waste your deeds
This worldly life is only amusement and pastime. But if you believe and become mindful of God, He will give you your rewards and not ask you for your properties
Were He to ask you for them and put you under pressure, you would become tightfisted, and He would expose your unwillingness
Here you are, called upon to spend in the cause of God. Among you are those who are tightfisted; but whoever withholds only withholds from his own soul. God is the Rich Beyond Need, while you are the needy. And if you turn away, He will replace you with another people, and they will not be the likes of you
We have opened the way for you to a clear victory
That God may forgive you your previous and later sins, complete His grace upon you and guide you on a straight path
That God may help you to a mighty victory
It is He who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the believers that they would add faith to their faith. To God belong the forces of the heavens and earth. God is All-Knowing and All-Wise
He will admit the believing men and the believing women to Gardens with rivers flowing through them to remain there eternally and to remove their offenses. That, with God, is a great triumph
And He will punish the hypocrite men and hypocrite women, and the idolater men and idolater women, those who harbor evil thoughts about God. They will suffer an evil turn of fate; God is angry with them, has rejected them, and has prepared Hell for them. What a miserable destination
And to God belongs the forces of heavens and earth. God is Almighty and All-Wise
We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of good news and a giver of warning
That you may believe in God and His Messenger, and honor Him, revere Him and to praise His limitless glory morning and evening
Those who pledge allegiance to you [Prophet], are actually pledging allegiance to God. God's hand is placed over theirs. Whoever breaks his pledge breaks it to his own detriment. And whoever fulfills his pledge with God, He will give him a great reward
The Dessert-Arabs who stayed behind [when you went to battle] will say to you, "We were preoccupied with our properties and our families, so ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, "If God intended harm for you or intended benefit, who can intervene for you? God is fully aware of what you do
But you thought that the Messenger and the believers will never return to their families, ever, and this seemed fine to your hearts. You harbored evil thoughts, and were corrupt people
For those who do not believe in God and His Messenger, We have prepared a blazing Fire
To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And ever is God Ever Forgiving, the Mercy Giver
As soon as you are about to depart on a war that promises gains, those who [previously] stayed behind will say, "Allow us to go with you". They wish to alter the Words of God. Say: "You may not go with us: God has said so before." They will say, "You envy us". How little they understand
Say to those Dessert-Arabs who stayed behind, "Eventually, you will be called to face people of great military might; you will either have to fight them, or they will submit to God's will. If you obey, God will give you a good reward; but if you turn away as you turned away before, He will punish you with a painful punishment
There is no blame on the blind, the lame or the ill. God will admit anyone who obeys Him and His Messenger to Gardens with rivers flowing through them; But He will painfully punish anyone who turns away
God was pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility to them, and rewarded them with an imminent victory
and abundant gains to capture. God is the Almighty and All-Wise
God has promised you abundant future gains. He has expedited this for you [victory], and has held hostile people's hands back from you; that it may be a sign for the believers, and that He may guide you to a straight path
And there are yet other gains to come. God has already covered for you. God is Able to do all things
If the unbelievers had fought you, they would have turned back and fled. Then they will find neither a protector nor a helper
Such is God's way which is ongoing. You will never find any change in God's way
It is He who held their hands from you and your hands from them, in the Makah valley, after He gave you the upper hand over them. God is ever seeing of what you do
It is they who denied the truth, and barred you from the Sacred House, and prevented the offering from reaching its destination. Were it not for some believing men and believing women, whom you did not know, you were about to hurt them, and become unknowingly guilty. Thus God admits into His mercy whomever He wills. Had the unbelievers been clearly distinguishable, We would have inflicted on them a painful punishment
The unbelievers had filled their hearts with fury, the fury of ignorance. But God sent down His tranquility on His Messenger and the believers, and made binding on them the word of God consciousness, to which they were most entitled and most deserving. God is Knowing of all things
God has fulfilled His Messenger's vision in Truth: "You will enter the Sacred House, God willing, in safety, with your heads shaved or hair shortened, with no fear. He knew what you did not know, and has granted you besides this, a victory soon to come
It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of Truth, to prevail over all religions. God suffices as a Witness
Muhammad is the Messenger of God.Those with him are tough on the unbelievers, yet compassionate to one another. You see them kneeling and bowing down, seeking God's blessings and His approval. Their faces bear the mark of their prostrations. Such is their example in the Torah. And their description in the Gospel is like a plant that sprouts, becoming strong, grows thick, and rises on its stem to the delight of the farmer. Through them God infuriates the unbelievers. God has promised forgiveness and a great reward to those among them, who believe and do good deeds
Believers, do not put your opinions ahead of that of God and His Messenger, but remain mindful of God. God is All-Hearing and All-knowing
Believers, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet or be as loud when you are speaking to him like you do to one another, unless you want your deeds to become worthless without you realizing
Those who lower their voices before the Messenger of God, they are the ones whose hearts God has tested for being fully aware of Him. For them, there is forgiveness and great reward
But those who call you from outside your private chambers, most of them do not understand
Had they been patient until you came out to them, it would have been better for them. But God is Ever Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Believers, if a known wicked person brings you news, investigate, to avoid harming people out of ignorance and later regret what you have done
Be aware that God's Messenger is among you. Had he obeyed you in many things, you would suffer hardship. But God has endeared your faith to you and made it pleasing to your hearts and made disbelief, mischief, and rebellion hateful to you. These are the rightly guided
a favor and a blessing from God. God is All-knowing and All-Wise
If two groups of believers should fight each other, then try to reconcile them. But if one of them oppresses the other, then fight the oppressing group until it complies with God's command. Once it has complied, make peace between them with justice and be equitable. God loves those who are equitable
The believers are brothers so make peace between your brothers and remain mindful of God that you may receive mercy
Believers, no men shall ridicule others, for they may be better than them. Nor shall any women ridicule other women, for they may be better than them. Nor shall you slander one another, nor shall you call each other names. How bad it is to be called disobedient after accepting faith! Those who do not repent of this behavior are unjust
Believers, avoid being suspicious. Some suspicions are sinful. And don't spy or backbite one another. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? No, you would hate it. So remain mindful of God. God is the Acceptor of repentance, the Mercy giver
People, We created you from a male and a female, and made you nations and tribes so that you may know one another. The best among you in the sight of God is the one who is most mindful of God. God is All-knowing and All-Aware
The Desert-Arabs say, "We have believed." Say, "You have not believed yet; but say [instead], 'We have submitted,' for faith has not yet entered your hearts. But if you obey God and His Messenger, He will not diminish any of your deeds. God is Ever Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
The believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger, leave all doubt behind, and strive with their wealth and their persons for God's cause. Those are the ones who are true to their word
Say, "Do you presume to inform God about your religion, when God knows everything in the heavens and earth, and God has full Knowledge of all things
They consider it a favor to you that they have submitted. Say, "Do not consider your submission a favor to me; it is God who has done you a favor, by guiding you to faith, if you are truly sincere
God knows all that is beyond our senses of the heavens and the earth. God sees everything you do
Qaf and the Glorious Qur'an
They marveled that someone from among their midst has come to them with a warning. The unbelievers say, "This is an amazing thing
Once We have died and become dust? That is a most unlikely return
We know how many of them the earth consumes, and We keep a comprehensive record [about each one of them]
But when the Truth came to them, they denied it; they are in a state of confusion
Have they not looked at the sky above them, how We structured it, and beautified it with all its gateways
And the earth, how We spread it out and placed on it firm mountains, and made every beautiful pair of plants grow in it
This is an insight and a reminder to every worshiper who willingly turns to God
And We sent down blessed rain from the sky and grew gardens and grain to harvest
And soaring palm trees, with clustered dates
as provision for the worshipers. By it [the rain] We gave life to a dead town. This is how the emergence [from the graves] will take place
Before them the people of Noah denied the truth, and so did the dwellers of Rass, Thamud
Aad, Pharaoh and the brothers of Lot
the woods-dwellers and the people of Tubba'. All of these people rejected their messengers, so My threat was justly fulfilled
Were We exhausted by the first creation? But they are dubious of a new creation
We have created man and We know what his inner soul is whispering. We are closer to him than his jugular vein
as he receives the two recording agents, seated one on the right and one on the left
He does not utter any word, without a vigilant observer present with him
Eventually, the trance of death will come with the Truth. This is what you were trying to evade
The Horn will be blown. This is the Promised Day
Every soul will come, with it a driver and a witness
You did not pay much attention to this day, but as We lifted your veil from you, your vision today is keen
His inseparable companion, will say, "This is what I have recorded
[God will say], "Cast into Hell everyone who stubbornly denied the truth
everyone who prevented good from reaching others, aggressor, who caused others to doubt
who made other gods as equal with God; then cast him into severe punishment
His [evil] companion will say, "Our Lord, I did not make him transgress, but he [himself], was extremely lost
[God] will say, "Do not feud in My presence, when I had warned you in advance
My judgment, once given, is not subject to change and I do not wrong My servants
On the Day We will say to Hell, "Are you full?" And it will say, "Are there some more
And Paradise will be brought near to those who were ever mindful of God, it will not be far
[It will be said], "This is what you were promised. for every repentant, keeper of his covenant with God
who feared the Merciful although He was beyond his perception and came with a repenting heart
Enter it in peace. This is the Day of Eternity
Whatever they want there, they will have and with Us is still more
How many a generation We destroyed before them, who were more powerful and had searched every land. Was there any escape
There is a reminder in this for whoever has a heart or cared to listen and witness
And We did create the heavens and earth and everything between them in six days, and We were not the least weary
So [Prophet] endure what they say and praise your Lord's limitless glory before the rising of the sun and before its setting
and glorify Him part of the night and after prostration
Listen for the Day when the Caller will call out from a place that is near
The Day they will hear the blast in all Truth, that is the Day of Emergence [from the graves]
It is We who give life and cause death, and to Us is their final destination
The Day when the earth cracks as they emerge rapidly; That is an easy gathering for Us
We know best what they say, and you are not there to force them. So remind with the Quran those who fear My warning
By those [winds] scattering dust
and those heavily laden [with water]
and those sailing with ease
and those distributing [rain] as ordained
what you are promised is true
The judgment will come
By the sky that is woven
you differ in what you say [about this message]
He who deceives himself is misled away from it
The speculators destroy themselves
they are unaware that they are lost in ignorance
They ask, "When is the Day of Judgment
The Day they will be tested when they see the Fire
[And will be told], "Taste your scheme. This is what you were rushing toward
While those who were mindful of God will be among Gardens and springs
accepting what their Lord has given them. Verily, they were those who do good
They used to sleep a little at night
and at dawn they would pray for forgiveness
and assign a share of their wealth to the needy and the deprived
For the certain [in faith], they are signs on earth
and in yourselves, will you not see
And in the heaven is your provision and whatever you are promised
By the Lord of the heaven and earth, it is as true as the fact that you speak
Has the story of Abraham's honored guests reached you
When they entered to see him, they said, "Peace." He answered, "Peace to you strangers
Then he went off to his family and came with a fat [roasted] calf
and placed it near them; he said, "Will you not eat
He then began to feel apprehensive. They said, "Do not fear," and gave him good news of a boy who would be gifted with knowledge
His wife approached with a scream, struck her face and protested, "A barren old woman [like me]
They said, "Thus said your Lord; He is the All-Wise, the All-knowing
[Abraham] then enquired, "What is your business, messengers
They said, " We have been sent to a dissenting people
to send down on them rocks of clay
marked by your Lord for those who rejected His messages and have severed all relations with God
So We brought out the believers that were in town
But found only one household of people who submitted to God
And We left in town a sign for those who fear the painful punishment
There is another sign in Moses, when We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority
But Pharaoh turned away with his supporters and said," A magician or a madman
So We seized him and his soldiers and threw them into the sea. Pharaoh was to blame
And a sign in Aad, when We unleashed against them the devastating wind
It spared nothing it came upon, and left it like decayed ruins
And a sign in Thamud, it was said to them, "Enjoy yourselves for a while
But they defied their Lord's command, so the thunderbolt struck them as they looked
They were unable to rise, nor could they find help
And before that the people of Noah. They were wicked people
We built the universe with power, and We are steadily expanding it
And the earth We spread it out, How well We smoothed it out
And of all things We created two mates; perhaps you will reflect
So flee towards God. I am sent from Him with a clear warning for you
And do not set up any other god with God. I come to you with a clear warning from Him
Similarly, every time a messenger came to those before them, they said, "A magician or a madman
Did they recommend it to one another? Rather, they are people full of tyranny
So turn away from them, you are not to blame
And go on reminding them. It is good for the believers to be reminded
I only created jinn and human beings to worship Me
I do not require any provision from them, nor do I require them to feed Me
It is God who is the Provider to all, the Possessor of Power, the Strong
Those who were unjust have their share of bad deeds just like their predecessors, so let them not rush My punishment
How terrible for the unbelievers their Day which they are promised
By the mountain called Al Tur
and [by] a Book inscribed
In a wide open parchment
and [by] the frequented House
and [by] the canopy raised high
and [by] the surf-swollen sea
the punishment of your Lord will occur
Nothing can prevent it
On the Day heaven sways with agitation
and the mountains shift about
how terrible it is that Day, for the unbelievers
who are chatting carelessly to amuse themselves
The Day they are forcefully shoved into the fire of Hell
This is the Fire which you didn't believe in
Is this magic, or do you still not see
Burn in it. Then be patient or impatient, it is all the same for you. You are only being repaid for what you have done
Those who were mindful of God will be in Gardens and bliss
rejoicing in what their Lord has given them. For their Lord has spared them the suffering of Hell
Eat and drink enjoyably, a reward for what You have done
Reclining on luxurious furniture, beautifully arranged laced, We will pair them with Hoor Ein
Those who believed and whose offspring followed them in faith, We will unite them with their offspring without depriving anybody of their reward for their deeds. Each one according to what he has earned
And We will provide them with any fruit and meat they desire
They pass around a cup which does not lead to either idle talk, or sin
Circulating among them to serve them, will be youths like hidden pearls
They will approach one another, wondering
they will say "When we were previously among our families we used to live in fear
But God blessed us, and spared us the suffering of the Scorching Fire
Before this, we used to pray to Him. It is He who is the Most Kind, the Merciful-to-all
So go on reminding.By the grace of your Lord, you are neither an oracle nor a madman
Or do they say [of you], "He's only a poet let's wait to see what time will do to him
Say, "Go on waiting, I will be waiting with you
Or is it their dreams compelling them to say this? Or are they people full of tyranny
Or do they say, "He has simply made it up?" Rather, they do not want to believe
Then let them produce something like it, if they are truthful
Or were they created out of nothing? Or are they the creators
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? In truth, they are not certain of anything
Or do they possess your Lord's treasuries? Or do they have control over them
Or do they have a stairway [into the heaven] to climb and eavesdrop? Then let their eavesdropper produce clear proof
Or does He have daughters while you have sons
Or do you demand a wage from them that would burden them with debt
Or if they know the future, so they write [it] down
Or are they plotting against you? The plot will fall back on the unbelievers
Or do they have a god other than God? May He be exalted in His glory. God is far above anything they associate with Him
Even if they were to see a piece the sky falling, they would say, "Just a heap of clouds
So leave them until they meet their Day in which they will be stunned
the Day when their plotting will not do them any good, nor will they be helped
Another punishment awaits the unjust, but most of them are unaware of it
So wait patiently for your Lord's judgment, for you are before Our eyes. And praise your Lord of limitless glory when you arise
And glorify Him at night, and at the time when the stars retreat
By the falling star
your friend has not strayed, nor has he erred
Nor does he speak from his own whims
It is a revealed revelation
taught to him by one with mighty powers
and splendor who stood still
while he was at the highest horizon
Then he drew near coming down
to within two bows' length or closer
Then God [through that angel] revealed to His servant what He revealed
The heart did not doubt what it saw
Do you dispute with him what he saw
Indeed, he saw him in another descent
at the Sidra beyond which none may pass
near the Garden of Refuge
where that Sidra was shrouded [in mystery] with what shrouded it
The eye did not waver, nor did it exceed its limit
He saw some of the greatest signs of his Lord
So have you considered al-Lat and al-'Uzza
and Manat, the third, the other one
Why do you chose for yourself male offspring and assign to God the female
That, then, is an unfair distribution
These [allegedly divine beings] are nothing but names, which you [who worship them] and your forefathers have invented. God sent no authority for them. They [who worship them] follow nothing but guesswork and their egotistical whims, although guidance has come to them [your people] from their Lord
Should man have whatever he wishes for
when this life and the life to come belong only to God
There are many angels in the heavens whose intercession is of no benefit at all until God gives permission to whomever He wills, and approves
Those who do not believe in the Hereafter give the angels female names
they have no knowledge of this. They only follow guesswork. Guesswork is no substitute at all for the Truth
So pay no attention to whoever turns away from Our message and desires only this worldly life
That is the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord knows best who strayed from His path, and He knows best who is guided
To God belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. He will repay those who do evil according to their deeds, and reward those who do good with the best
those who avoid major sins and indecencies, except for minor lapses excepted; your Lord's forgiveness is vast. He knows you well, ever since He created you from the earth and ever since you were embryos in your mothers' wombs. So do not attest to your own virtues; He knows best those who are mindful of Him
Have you seen the one who turned away
and gave a little and then held back
Does he have knowledge of all that is beyond, enabling him to see the future
Or has he not been told what was in the scrolls of Moses
and [of] Abraham, who fulfilled his duty
that no bearer of burdens will bear the burdens of another
that a human being attains only what he strives for
and that his striving will be seen
Then he will receive for it the fullest reward
The ultimate end is to your Lord
that It is He who causes [one] to laugh and weep
That it is He who causes death and gives life
that He creates the two mates - the male and female
from a fertilized ovum following ejaculation
that the next creation is incumbent upon Him
That it is He who enriches and impoverishes
that it is He who is the Lord of Sirius
that it is He who destroyed the first people of Aad
and Thamud. He spared no one
And before that the people of Noah who were most unjust and most oppressive
That it is He who brought down the ruined cities
And covered them by that whatever He covered them
Which then of your Lord's blessings do you doubt
This is a warning just like the earlier warnings
The inevitable Day draws near
No one, besides God, can disclose it
Do you marvel at this discourse
And you laugh and do not weep
While you are lost in your playfulness
So bow down before God and worship [Him]
The Hour has come near, and the moon has split
If they see a sign, they turn away and say, "same old magic
They rejected the truth and followed their desires. But everything has its time
Stories to warn them have already come, that should have restrained them
Profound Wisdom, yet these warnings had no effect
So, turn away from them. The Day the Caller calls to something terrible
with their eyes humbled, they will emerge from the graves as if they were swarming locusts
scrambling towards the Caller. The unbelievers will cry, "This is a disastrous Day
Before them the people of Noah rejected the truth, they rejected Our servant saying, "A madman," and he was rebuked
So he called upon his Lord, "I am overwhelmed, [please] help me
So We opened the floodgates of heaven with torrential rain
made the earth burst with gushing springs, and the waters met for an already destined purpose
And We carried him on a craft of planks and nails
sailing before our watchful eyes, a reward for him who was rejected
We left it as a sign, who then is willing to take it to heart
How terrible was My punishment and My warning
Hence, We made it easy to understand this Qur'an and to remember it. Who, then, is willing to keep it in mind
The people of Aad rejected the truth. How then was My punishment and My warning
We unleashed upon them a screaming wind, on a day of continuous catastrophe
plucking people away, as if they were trunks of uprooted palm trees
How terrible was My punishment and My warning
Hence, We made it easy to bear this Qur'an in mind. Who, then, is willing to keep it in mind
The people of Thamud rejected the warnings
They said, "Are we to follow a human being, one of us? We would then be misguided and quite insane
Why should he alone from among all of us be chosen to receive the message? He is nothing but a wicked liar
They will know tomorrow who the wicked liar is
We are sending the she-camel as a test for them. Just watch them and be patient
Tell them that the water is to be shared between them, with each share equitably apportioned
But they called their friend, who dared to slaughter [her]
How then was My punishment and My warning
We released against them a single blast, and they became like crumbling twigs
Hence, We made it easy to bear this Qur'an in mind. Who, then, is willing to keep it in mind
The people of Lot rejected the warnings
We unleashed upon them a shower of stones, except for the family of Lot; We rescued them before dawn
as a blessing from us. Thus We reward those who are thankful
Lot had already warned them of Our assault, but they dismissed the warning
They even lusted for his guest, so We blinded their eyes. "Taste My punishment and [the fulfillment of] My warnings
Early morning brought them enduring punishment
So taste My punishment [which is the fulfillment of] My warning
Hence, We made it easy to bear this Qur'an in mind. Who, then, is willing to keep it in mind
The people of Pharaoh also received warnings
They rejected all Our signs, so We seized them as only the Almighty, the Dominant will
Are those among you who deny the truth any better than these others, or do you have immunity in the Books
Or do they say, "We are united and bound to win
They will all be defeated, and they will turn their backs and flee
Rather the Hour is their appointed time and the Hour is more disastrous and bitter
Those who force others to reject God's messages are misguided and insane
The Day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire: "Taste the scorching touch of Saqar
We have created all things in precise measure
Our command is but one word, like a twinkling of an eye
And We have already destroyed the likes of you. Who, then, is willing to take heed
Everything they have done is noted in their records
Every action small or big is written down
Those who are mindful of God will be among Gardens and rivers
In a seat of honor in the presence of a Sovereign who determines all things
The Merciful-to-all
taught the Qur'an
created man
taught him articulate speech
The sun and the moon run on precise calculations
The stars and the trees submit to Him
The skies, He raised high and has established the balance
That you may not transgress in the balance
but weigh with justice, and do not violate the balance
The earth, He laid out for all living creatures
In it are fruits, and date-palms in clusters
And grains on flourishing stems and fragrant plants
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
He created Humankind from dry clay, ringing like pottery
And He created the jinn from a fusion of fire
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
He is Lord of the two sunrises and Lord of the two sunsets
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
He merged the two seas, converging together
with a barrier they do not over run between them
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
From out of both comes pearl and coral
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
His are all floating objects, raised above the sea like mountain peaks
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Everyone on it is perishing
but forever will remain the Face of your Lord, full of Majesty and Glory
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
To Him turn everyone in the heavens and on earth for their needs; and every day He manifests Himself in yet another way
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
We will soon attend to your judgment, you burdensome two
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Jinn and Humankind, if you are able to break through the confines of the heavens and earth, then break through them. You will not break through except with authority
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
A flash of fire and brass will be sent against you, and you will not be helped
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
And when the heaven is split open and becomes rose-colored like oil
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
On that Day, no human and no jinn will be asked about his sins
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Those who forced others to reject Our messages, will be known by their marks, and they will be seized by the foreheads and the feet
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
This is Hell, which those who forced others to reject Our messages denied
They will circulate them between fire and scalding water
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
But for he who feared to be one day in the Presence of his Lord are two Gardens
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
With shading branches
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
In them are two flowing springs
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
and they have pairs of every kind of fruits
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
They will be reclining on couches lined with silk brocade, and the fruit of the two Gardens are near at hand
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
In them are creature-mates of modest gaze, untouched before them by man or jinn
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
As though they were rubies and coral
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Will the reward for goodness be anything but goodness
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
And beneath them are two other gardens
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Dark green
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
With two gushing springs
So which of your Lord's blessings do you both deny
In them are fruits, date-palms and pomegranates
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
In them are sweet and lovely creatures
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Hoor, kept close in their pavilions
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Untouched before them by man or jinn
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Reclining on green cushions and beautiful fine carpets
So which of your Lord's blessings will you deny
Blessed be the name of your Lord, full of Majesty and Glory
When the Inevitable Event occurs
no one will deny its occurrence
Lowering some and raising others
When the earth is shaken violently
and the mountains are crushed and crumble
and become scattered dust
then you [human beings] will be divided into three separate groups
Those on the right. What of those on the right
And those on the left. What of those on the left
And those who are ahead upfront
they are the ones brought near
in the Gardens of Bliss
They are a large group of the earlier generations
and a few of later generations
They recline on luxurious woven couches
Reclining on them, facing each other
circulating among them will be ever youthful beings
with vessels, pitchers and a cup of a pure drink
causing no headache and no intoxication
There will be a selection of fruits
and any bird meat they desire
and Hoor Ein
like well-protected pearls
a reward for what they used to do
They will hear no idle or sinful talk there
only the greeting: "Peace, peace
Those on the right, what of those on the right
[They will be] among thorns free lotus trees
and fruit-laden acacias
and extended shade
outpouring water
abundant fruits
neither withheld nor forbidden
on elevated daybeds
We have specially created them
originals
perfectly created and perfectly matching
For those of the right
a group of the earlier generation
and a group of the later generation
Those of the left, what of those on the left
[They will be] amidst scorching fire and scalding water
and a shade of black smoke
neither cool nor refreshing
They used to live luxuriously
but they persisted in the greatest offenses against God
And they used to say, "When we're dead and turned to dust and bones, shall we then be resurrected
and our forefathers too
Say, "The former and the later people
will all be gathered on a predetermined Day
Then you, you who are misguided and reject the truth
will be eating from trees of Zaqqum
You will be filling your bellies with it
drinking boiling water on top of it
drinking it like thirsty camels
That will be their welcome on Judgment Day
We created you, so why you do not believe
Have you seen the semen which you ejaculate
Is it you who creates it, or are We the Creator
We have decreed death among you, and nothing can stop Us
if We want to replace you and to recreate you in a way that you know nothing about
You have already known the first creation, so will you not remember
Have you seen what you cultivate
Is it you who makes it grow, or are We the grower
If We wish, We can turn it into ruins, and you would be left to wonder
[Saying], "we are now in debt
Rather, We have been deprived
And have you seen the water that you drink
Is it you who sent it down from the clouds, or are We the Sender
If We wish, We can make it bitter, why then you are not grateful
And have you seen the fire that you kindle
Is it you who produced its tree, or are We the Producer
We have made it a reminder and provision for all who kindle it
exalt, then, the glory of your Lord's Name; the Magnificent
I swear by the positioning of the stars
a tremendous oath, if you only knew
it is a noble Qur'an
kept in a well-protected record
where none will be allowed to touch it except the purified
revealed gradually by the Lord of the worlds
Is it then this statement that you are ridiculing
and you deny it as if your livelihood depends on it
Why then, when the soul at death reaches the throat
and you are at that time looking on
when we're closer to him than you are, but you do not see
Why then, if you are not dependent on Us
don't you restore his soul back to him, if your claim is true
If the deceased was of those brought near to God
he will then have eternal harmony, eternal delight and a Garden of Bliss
And if he was from those on the right
then "Peace be to you, from your companions on the right
But if he was from those who called the truth a lie and were misguided
he will be welcomed with boiling water
and will burn in Hell
This is the certain Truth
exalt, then, the glory of your Lord's name; the Magnificent
Everything in the heavens and earth exalts God's limitless glory. He is the Almighty, the Wise
The Kingdom of the heavens and earth belongs to Him. He gives life and causes death, and He is able to do all things
He is the First and the Last, the Outer and the Inner, and He has knowledge of all things
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then established Himself above the Throne. He knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes out of it, and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it. He is with you wherever you may be. God sees everything you do
The Kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. All matters are referred back to God
He merges the night into the day and merges the day into the night. He knows what is in your hearts
Believe in God and His Messenger and give out from that with which He has entrusted you. Those among the believers who give will have a great reward
Why would you not believe in God, when the Messenger is inviting you to believe in your Lord and He has received a pledge from you, if you are believers
It is He who sends down clear revelations to His servant, that He may bring you out from the darkness of ignorance into enlightenment. God is kind to you and Merciful-to-all
And why shouldn't you spend in the cause of God, when the inheritance of the heavens and the earth belongs to God? Those of you who contributed before the conquest, and fought, are not equal to those who contributed and fought afterwards. They are higher in rank. But God promises both a good reward. God is All-Aware of what you do
Who will make a loan of goodness to God, so that He may multiply it for him and reward him generously
On the Day when you see the believing men and believing women, their light proceeding ahead of them and to their right, "Good news for you today: Gardens with rivers flowing through them, where you will remain eternally. That is the great victory
On the Day, the hypocritical men and hypocritical women will say to the believers, "Wait for us. Let us have some of your light." They will be told, "Go back and look for light." And a wall will be raised between them with a gate in it; inside it there is mercy, but outside lies punishment
The hypocrites will call to the believers, "Were we not with you?" They will say, "Yes, but you allowed yourselves to be tempted, and waited and doubted, deceived by wishful thinking until God's command came and the Deceiver deceived you about God
Today no ransom will be accepted from you, nor from those who rejected the truth. Your home is the Fire. It is most worthy of you. What a miserable destination
Is it not time for those believers hearts to become humbly submissive to the remembrance of God and to the Truth He has sent down? So they are not like those who were given the Book before them, whose time was extended but whose hearts hardened, and many of them are wicked
Know that God revives the earth after it dies. We made clear to you the signs; that you may comprehend
For charitable men and women who have loaned God a loan of goodness, it will be multiplied for them, and they will have a generous reward
Those who believed in God and His Messengers are the truthful ones who will bear witness before their Lord. They will have their reward and their light. But the unbelievers and those who reject Our revelations will be the inhabitants of Hell
Know that the life of this world is just a game; recreation, glitter, boasting to one another and rivalry in wealth and children. It is like a rain that helps plants grow, pleasing the growers, but then it dries up and you see it turn yellow, then it becomes stubble. There is severe punishment in the Hereafter, as well as forgiveness from God and [His] approval. The life of this world is only an illusion
So pursue forgiveness from your Lord and a Garden as vast as the heavens and the earth is prepared for [or 'awaits'] those who believed in God and His Messengers. That is the blessing of God which He gives to whom He wills. God is limitless in His blessings
No misfortune occurs, either on earth or in your souls but it is recorded in a Book even before We make it happen. That is easy for God
So you will not grieve for what you missed or rejoice over what He has given you. For God does not like the vain and the arrogant
those who are stingy and direct others to be stingy. Whoever turns away, [remember] God is rich beyond need, worthy of all praise
We sent Our Messengers with clear evidence and We sent down with them the Book and the Balance, that people may establish justice. And We sent down iron, which can be used for military might and to benefit people in many different ways. So that God may know those who uplifted Him and His Messengers though He is beyond their senses. God is All-Powerful, Almighty
We sent Noah and Abraham and placed prophethood and the Book among some of their descendants. Some of them were guided, but many were wicked
Then We sent Our Messengers to follow in their footsteps and followed up with Jesus, the son of Mary, and gave him the Gospel. We placed compassion and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. As for monasticism, which they invented to seek God's pleasure, We did not ordain for them, and they did not observe properly. So We gave those who believed among them their reward, but many of them are wicked
Believers, be ever mindful of God and believe in His Messenger; He will give you a double share of His mercy, provide you a light to guide you and forgive you; God is Ever Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
That the people of the Book may know that they have no power whatsoever over God's blessings, and that all blessings are in God's Hand; He gives it to whomever He wills. God is limitless with His blessings
God has heard the words of the woman who argued with you concerning her husband, while complaining to God. God heard your conversation. God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
There are those of you who divorce their wives by equating them with their mothers, they are not their mothers. Their mothers are those who gave birth to them. What they said is wrong and a blatant lie. But God is All-Pardoning and All-Forgiving
Those of you who divorce your wives by equating them with your mothers, then wish to go back on what you said, must set free a slave before they touch one another. This is what you are instructed to do, and God is well aware of what you do
But he who does not find the means, must fast for two months consecutively before touching one another. And if he is unable, then he should feed sixty needy people. This is to affirm your faith in God and His Messenger. These are the limits set by God. And the unbelievers will have a painful punishment
Those who oppose God and His Messenger will be restrained, like those before them. We have sent down self-evident messages. The unbelievers will have a painful punishment
on the Day when God will resurrect them all, and tells them what they did. God has kept accounts of it all, while they have forgotten it; God is Witness over all things
Do not you realize that God knows everything in the heavens and on earth? There is no secret conversation between three people, but He is their fourth; nor between five, but He is their sixth; nor between less than that, nor more, but He is with them wherever they are. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did. God is All-knowing of everything
Have you not noticed that those who were prohibited from conspiring secretly, have returned to what they were prohibited from doing? They conspire to commit wrongdoing, aggression, and defiance of the Messenger. And when they come to you, they greet you with a greeting that God never greeted you with. And they say to themselves, "Why does not God punish us for what we say?" Hell will be enough for them. They will burn there. What a miserable destiny
Believers, when you converse privately, do not converse about committing wrongdoing, aggression and defiance of the Messenger, but converse about righteousness and being mindful of God. Be ever mindful of God, to whom you will be gathered
Conversing in secret to conspire is from Satan, to dishearten the believers, though it will not harm them at all, unless God permits it. So let the believers put their trust in God
Believers, when you are told to make room in your gathering, then do so; God will make room for you. And when you are told, "Get up," then get up; God will elevate in rank those who believed among you and those who were given knowledge. God is well aware of what you do
Believers, when you privately converse with the Messenger, proceed by offering something in charity. That is better for you and purer. But if you do not find the means to do so, then God is Ever-Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Do you regret not offering charity before your conversation with the Prophet? If you did not give, and God pardoned you, then perform prayers, and give charitable gifts, and obey God and His Messenger. God is well Aware of what you do
Don't you see those who befriend a people with whom God is angry? They are neither with you nor with them, and knowingly swear to lies
God has prepared a severe punishment for them. What they were doing is evil
They took their oaths as a cover-up, and turned others away from the way of God. They will have a humiliating punishment
Neither their wealth nor their children will be of any use to them against God. They will be the inhabitants of the Fire, where they will remain
On the Day when God will resurrect them altogether, they will swear to Him as they swear to you, thinking that this will help them. What liars they are
Satan has overcome them and made them forget the remembrance of God. Those are the party of Satan. Unquestionably, the party of Satan will be the doomed
Those who oppose God and His Messenger are among the most humiliated
God has written, "I will surely prevail, I and My Messengers." God is All- Powerful, Almighty
You will not find a people who believe in God and the Last Day, loyal to those who oppose God and His Messenger, even if they were their parents or their children, or their brothers or their close relatives. God has written faith into the hearts of these people, and has strengthened them with His spirit. He will admit them to Gardens graced with flowing streams, where they will dwell forever. God is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. These are of the party of God. Unquestionably, the party of God will be the successful
All that exists in the heavens and the earth is praising God's limitless glory. He is the Almighty, the Most Wise
It is He who evicted those who broke faith among the people of the Book from their homes at the first mobilization. You did not think they would leave, and they thought their fortresses would protect them from God. But God came at them from where they least expected it, and He put panic into their hearts. They wrecked their homes with their own hands, and by the hands of the believers. Therefore, take a lesson, all of you with insight
Had God not decreed evacuation for them, He would have punished them in this world, and in the Hereafter they will have the punishment of the Fire
That is because they opposed God and His Messenger. God is severe in punishment toward anyone opposing God
Whatever you have cut down of their palm trees or left standing on its roots, it is by permission of God. So that He might disgrace the defiantly disobedient
Whatever God has given to His Messenger from them; you did not have to spur your horses or camels for them, but God gives authority to His Messengers over whomever He will. God is able to do all things
Whatever gains God has restored to His Messenger from the villages' inhabitants belongs to God, the Messenger, the relatives, the orphans, the needy, and to the wayfarer; so that it may not circulate mainly between the wealthy among you. So accept whatever the Messenger gives you, and abstain from whatever he forbids you. And be mindful of God. God is severe in punishment
It is also for the poor emigrants who were driven out of their homes and their possessions, who seek God's blessings and His approval, and support God and His Messenger. Those are the truly sincere
And (also for] those who before them, were already established in their homes [in Medina], and have accepted faith. They love those who migrated to them, and find no hesitation in their hearts in helping them. They give them preference over themselves, even if they themselves are needy. Whoever is spared from his own soul's greed is truly successful
Those who came after them, say, "Our Lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith, and leave no malice in our hearts toward those who believe. Our Lord, You are Most Compassionate, Merciful-to-all
Have you noticed those who act hypocritically? They say to their brothers, the faithless among the people of the Book, "If you are driven out, we will surely leave with you, and we will not obey anyone who wants to harm you; and should anyone fight you, we will certainly support you." But God bears witness that they are truly liars
If they are driven out, they will not leave with them, and if they are fought, they will not support them. Even if they should support them, they will surely turn their backs and flee; then they will not be helped
Indeed, you [believers] strike more terror in their hearts than their fear of God. That is because they are a people who do not understand
Even united they will not fight you except within fortified strongholds, or from behind walls. There is much hostility between them. You think they are united, but their hearts are diverse. That is because they are a people without reason
Like those who went shortly before them. They experience the evil consequences of their decisions. A painful punishment awaits them
They are like Satan who says to a human being, "Do not believe." But when he denies the truth, he says, "I disown you; I fear God, the Lord of the worlds
The ultimate end of both is the Fire, where they will dwell forever. That is the reward of the unjust
Believers, be mindful of God. And let every soul consider what it has put forth for tomorrow, and be mindful of God, for God is well aware of what you do
And do not be like those who forgot God, so He made them forget themselves. These are the defiantly disobedient
The inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise are not equal. It is the inhabitants of Paradise who are the winners
Had We sent down this Qur'an on a mountain, you would have seen it humbling itself and crumbling in awe of God. These examples We mention for the people, that they may reflect
He is God, there is no god but Him, the Knower of all that is beyond our senses and all that we can witness. He is the Mercy giver, the Merciful-to-all
He is God, there is no god but Him, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Peace Giver, the Faith Giver, the Overseer, the Almighty, the Powerful, the Supremely Great. May God be exalted in His glory, above all they associate with Him
He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; to Him belongs the Most Beautiful Names. Whatever is in the heavens and earth glorifies Him. He is the Almighty, the Wise
Believers do not take My enemies and yours as allies, offering them affection, when they have rejected the Truth that has come to you. They have driven you and the Messenger out, because you believe in God, your Lord. If you have decided to struggle in My way, seeking My approval, how can you secretly love them? I know what you concealed and what you reveal. Whoever among you does that is straying from the right path
If they ever gain dominance over you, they will treat you as enemies, and they will stretch out their hands and tongues to hurt you. They would dearly wish that you renounce your faith
Never will your blood lines or your children be of any use to you. God will separate you on the Day of Resurrection. God is All-Seeing of what you do
There has already been a good example for you in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, "we disown you and what you worship besides God. We reject you, and there will be animosity and hatred forever between us and you until you believe in God alone." Except for Abraham's words to his father, "I will ask forgiveness for you, though I cannot protect you from God". "Our Lord, in You we trust, and to You we repent. To You is the ultimate destination
Our Lord, do not make us a target for the unbelievers, and forgive us. Our Lord, You are the Almighty, the Wise
There is a good example in them for you, for anyone who seeks God and the Last Day. But if anyone turns away, God is the Rich Beyond Need, the Praiseworthy
Perhaps God will restore affection between you and your present enemies. God is able to do all things. God is Ever Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
God does not forbid you from dealing kindly and equitably with those who did not fight you because of your faith and did not drive you out of your homes. God loves those who are equitable
But God forbids you from befriending those who fought against you over your faith and drove you from your homes and helped others to drive you out. Any who takes them for friends are the wrongdoers
Believers, when believing women come to you as emigrants, test them. God knows best about their faith. And if you find them to be faithful, then do not return them to the unbelievers. They are not lawful wives for them, nor are they their lawful husbands. But give the unbelievers what they have spent. You are not to blame if you marry them later provided you give them their dues. And do not hold to marriage bonds with unbelieving women, but ask for what you have spent and let them ask for what they have spent. This is God's judgment; He judges between you. God is All-knowing and All-Wise
If any of your wives rejoin the unbelievers, and you decide to penalize them, then give those whose wives have gone the equivalent of what they had spent [out of what you owe the unbelievers]. And be mindful of God, in whom you are believers
Prophet, when believing women come to you, pledging that they will not associate anything with God, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor will they kill their children, nor lie about who has fathered their children, nor disobey you in what is right, then accept their pledge of allegiance and ask God's forgiveness for them. God is Forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Believers do not take as allies those with whom God is angry. They have despaired of the Hereafter, as unbelievers despair of those buried in their graves
Everything in the heavens and the earth declare the praises of God's limitless glory. He is the Almighty, the Wise
Believers, why do you say what you do not do
it is most despicable in God's sight that you say what you do not do
God loves those who fight in solid lines for His cause, as though they were a well-built structure
And mention when Moses said to his people, "My people, why do you hurt me when you know that I am God's Messenger to you?" And when they turned away, God caused their hearts to turn away. God does not guide the defiantly disobedient people
And when Jesus son of Mary said, "O children of Israel, I am God's Messenger to you, confirming what is available of the Torah, and bringing good news of a messenger who will come after me, whose name is Ahmad." But when he came to them with clear evidence, they said, "This is obvious magic
And who is more unjust than one who invents lies and attributes them to God when invited to submit? God does not guide unjust people
They wish to extinguish God's enlightenment with their mouths, but God will perfect His light, even though the unbelievers dislike it
It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of Truth, that he may proclaim it over all religions, even though those who associate others with God will dislike it
Believers, will I guide you to a transaction that will save you from a painful punishment
That you believe in God and His Messenger, and strive in the cause of God with your wealth and yourselves. That is best for you, if you only knew
He will forgive you your sins; and will admit you to Gardens with rivers flowing through them and pleasant dwellings in the Gardens of Eden. That is the great success
And another thing you love: support from God and imminent victory; Give good news to the believers
Believers, be supporters of God, as Jesus, the son of Mary, said to the disciples, "Who are my supporters to God?" The disciples said, "We are God's supporters." A faction of the Children of Israel believed, and another faction disbelieved. So We supported those who believed against their enemy, and they became dominant
Everything in the heavens and the earth declare the praises of God's limitless glory, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Almighty, the Wise
It is He who raised a messenger from among the Gentiles; reciting His revelations to them, purifying them, and teaching them the Book and Wisdom; although before that they were clearly misguided
and [he is sent] to others of them who have not yet joined them. God is the Almighty, the Wise
Such is God's favor, which He gives to whom He wills; God is the possessor of great favors
The example of those who were entrusted to uphold the Torah, but then failed to uphold it, is that of a donkey carrying volumes of knowledge. Terrible is the example of the people who reject the signs of God. God does not guide the unjust People
Say, " you who follow Judaism, if you claim that out of all people you alone are friends of God, then wish for death if you are truthful
But they will not wish for it, ever, because of what their hands have done. God knows the unjust well
Say, "The death from which you are fleeing will catch up with you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the unknown and the known, and He will inform you about what you used to do
Believers, when the call is made for prayer on Friday, drop all business and rush to the remembrance of God. That is better for you, if you only knew
Then when the prayer is concluded, disperse through the land, and seek God's favor, and remember to call on God without ceasing, so that you may prosper
Yet whenever they come across some business, or some entertainment, they scramble towards it, and leave you standing there. Say, "That which is with God is better than entertainment and business; God is the Best of providers
When the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you are indeed God's Messenger." God knows that you are indeed His Messenger and God bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars
They have taken their oaths as a cover, to divert people from the way of God. Evil is what they do
That is because they believed, and then rejected the truth; so their hearts have been sealed, and they cannot understand
When you see them, their appearance appeals to you. And when they speak, you listen to what they say. They are like propped up timber. They think every shout is aimed at them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. May God destroy them; how devious they are
And when It is said to them, "Come, the Messenger of God will ask forgiveness for you," they turn their heads aside in contempt and you see them turning away arrogantly
It is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them; God will not forgive them. God does not guide such defiantly disobedient people
It is they who say, "Give nothing to those who follow God's Messenger, until they dispersed from around him." To God belongs the treasuries of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites do not understand
They say, "If we return to Medina, the more worthy will drive out the disgraced." But all worth belongs to God, His Messenger, and the believers; though the hypocrites do not know it
Believers, let neither your wealth nor your children distract you from remembering to call upon God. Whoever does that are the doomed
Give from what We have provided for you, before death comes to one of you, and he says, "My Lord, if You would only delay me for a little while, so that I may be charitable, and be among the righteous
But God will never delay a soul when its time has come. God is well aware of what you do
Everything in the heavens and the earth declare the praises of God's limitless glory. To Him belongs the Kingdom, and to Him all praise is due. He is able to do all things
It is He who created you. Yet some of you deny the truth, and some believe it. God sees everything you do
He created the heavens and earth in Truth, and shaped you and perfected your shapes; and to Him is the ultimate destination
He knows everything in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. God knows very well the secrets of every heart
Has the news not reached you, of those who rejected the truth before you? They tasted the ill consequences of their conduct, and they will have a painful punishment
That is because their messengers came to them with clear evidence, but they said, "Are human beings going to guide us?" So they denied their messengers and turned away. God had no need for them; God is reach beyond need and praiseworthy
The unbelievers claim that they will never be resurrected. Say, "Yes indeed, by my Lord, you will be resurrected; then you will be informed of everything you did; that is easy for God
So believe in God and His Messenger and the enlightenment We have sent down. God is well aware of what you do
When He gathers you for the Day of Gathering, the Day of mutual neglect, whoever believes in God and does good deeds, He will forgive him his misdeeds and admit him to Gardens with rivers flowing through them, where they will remain forever. That is the great success
But for those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, these are the companions of the Fire, remaining there forever; and what a miserable destination
No disaster occurs except by permission of God. Whoever believes in God, He will guide his heart. God has full knowledge of everything
Obey God and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, it is only incumbent on Our messenger to deliver the clear message
God, there is no god but Him. So let the believers put their trust in Him
Believers, there are enemies to you among your wives and your children, so beware of them. But if you pardon, overlook, and forgive, God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
Your possessions and your children are a test for you, but with God there is a great reward
So be mindful of God as much as you can; hear and obey and be charitable, it is for your own good. He who is safe-guarded from his own greed, those are the successful ones
If you loan God a loan of goodness, He will multiply it for you, and forgive you. God is appreciative and forbearing
He's the Knower of all that is beyond our senses and all that we can witness, the Almighty, the Wise
Prophet, when any of you intend to divorce wives, do so at the beginning of their prescribed waiting period. Calculate the period's term carefully and be mindful of God, your Lord. Do not drive them out of their homes, nor should they leave during that period, unless they have committed a proven adultery. These are the limits of God and whoever oversteps God's limits wrongs his own soul. You never know what new situation God may bring about
When they have fulfilled their term, either retain them honorably, or part with them honorably. And call from among your just witnesses, to give testimony for God's sake. Anyone who believes in God and the Last Day should heed this. God will find a way out for whoever is mindful of Him
and will provide for him from an unexpected source. God will suffice for those who put their trust in Him. God will achieve His purpose. God has set a due measure for everything
If you have any doubts, regarding a wife who has ceased menstruating and for one who have not yet menstruated, the period of waiting shall be three months. And for those who are pregnant, their term shall be until they have delivered. God makes things easy for those who are mindful of Him
This is God's command which He sent down to you. God will forgive the misdeeds and increase the rewards of anyone who is mindful of Him
Allow the wives you are divorcing to reside where you reside, according to your means. Do not harass them in order to make things difficult for them. If they are pregnant, maintain them until they give birth. And if they nurse your infant, compensate them fairly. Maintain your relationship in a friendly and honorable way. But if you disagree, then let another woman nurse him
Let the wealthy spend according to his wealth, and he whose resources are restricted shall spend according to what God has given him. God does not burden a soul beyond what He has given it. After hardship, God will bring ease
Many a town defied the command of its Lord and His Messengers, so We held them strictly accountable, and We punished them with a horrifying punishment
to experience the consequences of its decisions, and the outcome of its decisions was total loss
God has prepared a severe punishment for them.So you who are endowed with insight and have faith, be conscious of God. He has sent down a Reminder to you
a Messenger who recites God's verses that make things clear to you, that he may bring those who believe and do good deeds from the darkness of ignorance into enlightenment. God will admit those who believe in Him and do good deeds into Gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell there forever and ever. God has provided excellently for them
It is God who created seven heavens, and a similar number of earths. His command descends through them, so that you may know that God is able to do all things, and that God's knowledge has encompassed all things
Prophet, why do you prohibit what God has made lawful to you, seeking to please your wives? God is forgiving and Merciful-to-all
God has already ordained for you [believers) to release you from such oaths. God is your protector and He is the All-knowing, the All-Wise
The Prophet told something in confidence to one of his wives. But when she disclosed it [to another wife], God made it known to him; he confirmed part of it, and ignored another part. Then when he confronted her with it, she asked, "Who told you this?" He said, "I was informed by the All-knowing, the All-Aware
You two [wives] need to repent to God, for your hearts have clearly deviated. But if you band together against him, then God is his protector, as is Gabriel and the righteous believers. In addition, the angels will come to his support
Perhaps if he divorced you, his Lord will give him wives better than you: submissive to God, believing, obedient, repentant, worshipping, who fast much; previously married as well as virgins
Believers, safeguard yourselves and your families from a Fire fueled by people and stones. fierce and powerful angels stand over it. They never disobey God's commands to them, but do as they are commanded
Unbelievers make no excuses today. You are only being repaid for what you used to do
Believers, turn to God in sincere repentance. Your Lord may remove your sins, and admit you into Gardens with rivers flowing through them, on the Day when God will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believed with him. Their light will proceed before them, and to their right, they will say, "Our Lord, perfect our light for us and forgive us. You are able to do all things
Prophet, strive against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be harsh with them. Hell will be their dwelling. What a miserable destination
God has given an example to those who reject the truth: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were married to two of Our righteous worshipers but they betrayed them. They were not able to help them at all with God, and it was said, "Enter the Fire with those who are entering
And God has given an example to those who believed: Pharaoh's wife, when she said, "My Lord, build for me near You, a house in Paradise, and rescue me from Pharaoh and his works and save me from the unjust people
And the example of Mary, Imran's daughter, who guarded her chastity. So We breathed into her from Our Spirit; and she believed in her Lord's Words and His Books, and was one of the devoutly obedient
Exalted is He who has all Sovereignty in His Hand, who has power over all things
He who created death and life to test you as to which of you is best in deed. He is the Almighty, the Forgiving
it is He who created seven heavens in total harmony with one another. You will not see any discrepancy in the creation of the Merciful-to-all. Look again, do you see any gaps
Then look again, and again, and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted
We have beautified the lowest heaven with lit objects and use them as tools to stone devils and have prepared for them the punishment of the Blazing fire
For those who reject their Lord, there is the punishment of Hell, a miserable destination
When they are thrown into it, they will hear it roaring, as it seethes
It almost bursts with rage. Every time a group is thrown into it, its keepers ask them, "Did no one come to warn you
They will say, "Yes, someone came to warn us, but we did not believe in him and said, 'God has not sent down anything. You are in greatly misguided
They will say, "Had we listened or reasoned, we would not have been included among the inhabitants of the Blazing fire
So they will come to realize and admit their sin. Away with the inhabitants of the Blazing fire
Forgiveness and great reward await those who stand in awe of their Lord although He is beyond the reach of their perception
Whether you keep your thoughts to yourself, or state them openly, He knows what is within the heart
Would He who created not know, when He is the Most Subtle, the Totally Aware
It is He who tamed the earth for you, so travel its regions, and eat of His provision. To Him you will be resurrected
Do you feel confident that He who is in the heaven would not cause the earth to swallow you as it spins
Or are you confident that He who is in heaven would not unleash a violent storm of stones against you?Then you will know how true My warning was
Those before them had already denied my warnings, and how terrible was My condemnation
Have they not seen the birds above them, with wings outspread or folded in? None holds them except the Merciful-to-all. He is, The Ever Insightful
Or who can be a force to protect you other than the Merciful-to-all? The unbelievers are really living in delusion
Or who can provide for you if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist in their disrespect and evasion
Is he who walks, stumbles and falls on his face better guided or he who walks upright on a straight path
Say, "It is He who brought you into being; and gave you hearing and vision and understanding. But you are rarely grateful
Say, "It is He who scattered you on earth, and to Him you will be gathered
And they say, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if what you say is true
Say, "God alone has knowledge of this, and I am only delivering a clear warning
But when they see it approaching, the unbelievers' faces will turn gloomy, and it will be said, "This is what you were calling for
Say, "Just think: Should God destroy me and those with me, or if He decides to have mercy on us, who will protect the unbelievers from a painful punishment
Say, "He is the Merciful-to-all; We have believed in Him, and in Him We trust. You will come to know who is in evident error
Say, "Just think: if your water drains away, who will bring you pure flowing water
Nun. By the pen and all they write
you are not, by the grace of your Lord, a madman
And you will have a never ending reward
And you are a man of great moral character
You will see and they will see
which of you is afflicted by madness
Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path, and He knows best who is guided
Then do not obey the unbelievers
They wish that you compromise, so they too can compromise
And do not obey any worthless contemptible swearer
or any backbiter and slander-monger
preventer of good, aggressor and one who is sinner
cruel, moreover, and furthermore one who is despicable
Just because he has money and children
when Our verses are recited to him, he says, "Myth of former people
We will brand him on the snout
We have tested them, as We tested the owners of a certain garden, when they vowed to harvest it in the morning
and made no allowance [for the Will of God]
But a disaster from your Lord came upon it while they slept
By morning it became barren and bleak
At day break they called to one another
saying, "Go early to your crop if you want to harvest the fruit
So they set out, whispering
Make sure no poor person enters the garden today
And early they went bent on their purpose
But when they saw it, they said, " We are lost
Rather, we have been ruined
The most moderate of them said, "Did I not say to you, that you should praise your Lord's glory
They said, "May our Lord be exalted in His glory, we were unjust
Then they turned to one another, each blaming the other
They said, "How terrible for us; we were aggressors
Perhaps our Lord will give us a better substitute for it. We are turning to our Lord in hope
Such is the punishment. And the punishment of the Hereafter is greater, if they only knew
There will be Gardens of delight for those who are mindful of God
Would We treat those who submit to us like those who forced others to reject Our messages
What is the matter with you? How do you judge
Or do you have a Book which you study
And in it do you find all that you wish for
Or do you have oaths from Us, that are binding until the Day of Resurrection, allowing you to have whatever you want
Ask them which of them, will be responsible for that claim
Or do they have partners? Then let them bring their partners, if they are telling the truth
On the Day when legs are bared, they will be called to bow down, but will not be able
Their eyes humbled, humiliation will cover them. They were invited to bow down while they were healthy
So leave those who deny this revelation to Me. We will proceed against them gradually, from whence they do not know
And I will give them time. My plan is firm
Or do you ask them for a wage, so they are burdened with debt
Or do they know the future, and they write what is going to happen
So be patient for your Lord's judgment, and do not be like the fellow of the whale who called out in despair
Had a blessing from his Lord not reached him, he would have been abandoned and disgraced on a naked shore
But his Lord chose him and made him among the righteous
Those unbelievers all but kill you with their evil looks when they hear the message, and they say, "He must be mad
But it is only a reminder to all people
The Hour of Truth
What is the Hour of Truth
And how would you know what is the Hour of Truth
The people of Thamud and 'Aad denied [that there would be a] sudden calamity
So as for Thamud, they were destroyed by the overpowering blast
And as for Aad, they were destroyed by a furious, roaring wind
which He unleashed against them for seven nights and eight days, nonstop. You could have seen its people lying dead as if they were hollow palm tree trunks
Do you see anything left of them
Then came Pharaoh and those before him, and the destroyed towns that indulged in sin
They disobeyed their Lord's Messenger, so He seized them with an overpowering grip
When the water overflowed, We carried your ancestors in the sailing ship
To make it a lesson for you to remember, so listening ears may recall it
Then when the Horn is blown with a single blast
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with one blow
on that Day, the Hour of Truth will occur
The heaven will split open on that Day, since it will be so frail
And the angels will be round its edges. On that Day, eight of them will bear your Lord's Throne of His majesty above them
On that Day you will be exposed, and no secret of yours will remain hidden
As for him who is given his record in his right hand, he will say, "Here, take my record and read it
I expected that I would be held accountable
So, he will have a pleasant life
in an elevated Garden
its pickings are within easy reach
Eat and drink merrily for what you have done in days gone by
As for him who is given his record in his left hand, he will say, "I wish I was never given my record
and never knew what my account was
If only death had really been the end
My wealth has been of no use to me
and my power has vanished
[God will say], "Seize him and shackle him
Then drive him into Hell
Then tie him with a chain whose length is seventy cubits
For he would not believe in God, the Magnificent
nor would he encourage feeding of the poor
So he has no friend here this Day
nor any food except scum
that only sinners eat
So I swear by what you see
and what you do not see
that this is the word of a noble Messenger
And It is not the word of a poet; how little you believe
nor the word of a soothsayer; how little you remember
The gradual revelations of the Book, is from the Lord of the worlds
Had he [the Messenger] falsely attributed some statements to Us
We would have seized him by the right arm
Then We would have slashed his lifeline
and none of you could have protected him
It [The Qur'an] is a reminder for the those who are mindful of God
And We know that some of you will deny it
It is a cause of great distress to the unbelievers
And it is the Truth of certainty
Exalt, then, the limitless glory of your Lord's magnificent name
An inquirer asked about an impending punishment
to the unbelievers that cannot be prevented
from God, the Lord of the Gates of Ascent
Unto Him the angels and the Spirit will ascend in a Day whose length is fifty thousand years
So be patient with gracious patience
They [the unbelievers] see it as something distant
but We see it near
On the Day the sky will be like molten brass
and the mountains will be like tufted wool
No good friend will ask about his friend
even though they can see each other. The one who forced others to reject Our messages will wish he could ransom himself from the punishment of that Day, by sacrificing his children
and his wife and his brother
and his family who shelter him
and everyone on earth, if that could save him
Not today! But a raging blaze
that strips away the skin
and claims everyone who turned his back to the truth and went away
and accumulated and hoarded [wealth]
The Human being was created full of anxiety
desperate when bad things happen
but tight-fisted when good fortune comes his way
The exception are those who pray
those who are steady in their prayer
and those who have set aside a known rightful share within their wealth
for the poor and the deprived
and those who believe in the Day of Judgment
and those who dread their Lord's punishment
They know not to take their Lord's punishment for granted
Those who guard their chastity
except from their spouses and from those whom their right hands hold in trust, are free of blame
But whoever seeks beyond that, they are transgressors
Those who honor their trusts and pledges
and those who stand by their testimonies
and those who maintain their prayer with dedication
those will be honored in Gardens
So what is [the matter] with the unbelievers? They run about in front of you in groups, with outstretched necks and staring eyes
from the right, and from the left
Does each one of them aspire to enter the Garden of Delight
Never! We have created them from that which they well know
So I swear by the Lord of all risings and settings that We are able
to replace them with better than they; and nothing can prevent Us from doing this
So leave them to blunder and play around, until they meet their Day which they are promised
The Day when they will emerge from the graves rushing as if rallying to a flag
their eyes humbled, overwhelmed by humiliation. This is the Day which they were promised
We sent Noah to his people, [saying], "Warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them
He said, "My people, I am coming to you with clear warnings
Worship God, be mindful of Him and obey me
God will forgive you of your sins, and reprieve you until an appointed time. When God's appointed time arrives it cannot be postponed, if you only knew
He said, "My Lord, I invited my people night and day
but the more I called them, the further they ran away
Every time I called them to Your forgiveness, they put their fingers into their ears, wrapped themselves in their garments, and insisted, and became increasingly more arrogant
I invited them openly
Then I appealed to them publicly, and I spoke to them privately
and said, 'Ask forgiveness of your Lord. He is ever forgiving
He will send down abundant rain from the sky for you
and will provide you with wealth and children and He will give you gardens and rivers
What is the matter with you? Why can't you appreciate God's majesty
when He has created you stage by stage
Do you not see how God created seven superimposed heavens
and placed the moon in them as a enlightenment and He made the sun a source of light
God germinated you from the earth like plants
Then He will return you into it, and will bring you out again
And God has spread the earth out for you
that you may travel its valleys as roadways
Noah said, "My Lord, they have defied me, and followed those whose wealth and children lead them increasingly into loss
And they schemed outrageously
And said, 'Do not abandon your gods. Never leave Wadd or Suwa' or Yaghuth and Ya'uq and Nasr
They have already misled many. My Lord, increase these transgressors only in misguidance
Because of their sins they were drowned and sent to Hell. They could not find any one to help them against God
And Noah said, "My Lord, do not leave a single unbeliever on the face of the earth
If You leave them, they will mislead Your worshipers and breed only wicked unbelievers
My Lord, forgive me and my parents and whoever enters my house as a believer. Forgive all the believing men and women, but bring nothing but ruin down on the transgressors
Say, "It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listened in and said, 'We have heard an amazing Recitation
It guides to righteousness, and we have believed it: We will never assign divinity to anyone except our Lord
And exalted be the glory of our Lord! He never had a spouse nor a child
But the fools among us had been saying outrageous things about God
although we had thought that no human or jinn would dare tell a lie about God
Some individual humans used to seek power through some individual jinn, but they [the jinn] only increased their confusion
And they thought, as you thought, that God would not send anyone [as a messenger]
We as usual probed heaven [in search of news], and found it filled with fierce guards and projectiles
We used to take up certain positions to listen in; but anyone trying to listen now finds a projectile in wait for him
We do not know therefore whether ill is intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends to guide them
Some of us are righteous, but others are less so; we follow different paths
And we have come to realize that we can never evade God living on earth, nor can we evade Him by escaping [from life]
So when we heard this call to guidance, we believed in it. Whoever believes in his Lord will no longer fear the burden of life or injustice
Some of us submitted to God, while others are transgressors. Those who submitted have sought out right guidance
As for the transgressors, they will be firewood for Hell
Had [your people] kept true to the path, We would have given them abundant drinking water supply
a test for them. Whoever turns away from remembering to call on his Lord will be put into an arduous punishment
Places of worship are for God. So do not call on anyone else besides God
Yet when God's servant stood up calling on Him, they [the unbelievers] overwhelmed him with their crowds
Say, "I only call on my Lord and I never associate anyone with Him
Say, "It is not in my power to harm you, nor to guide you rightly
Say, "No one can protect me from God, and I will never find any refuge except in Him
I only deliver what I receive from God and His messages.He who disobeys God and His Messenger, will have the fire of Hell where they will be forever
until they see that which they were promised and they will know who has less support and are fewer in number
Say, "I do not know whether what you are promised will happen soon or whether it will be delayed by my Lord for a period
He alone knows what is beyond our perception, and He doesn't disclose His knowledge of the unseen to anyone
except to a Messenger of His choosing. He then dispatches guards before him and behind him
That he may know that they have conveyed the messages of their Lord. He encompasses what they have, and has counted everything by number
You who wraps himself [in his clothing]
stay up during the night, except for a little
for half of it, or a little less
or a little more, and recite the Qur'an slowly and distinctly
We will send a weighty message to you
Rising at night has a stronger effect and is more conducive to concentration
In the daytime, you are kept busy for long periods
So remember to call upon the name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly
The Lord of the East and the West; there is no god but Him. So, assign to Him alone the power to determine your fate
And patiently endure what they say, and withdraw from them politely
and leave those who deny the truth and live in luxury to Me. Just bear with them a little longer
We have shackles and Hell
And food that chokes and a painful punishment reserved for them
on the Day when the earth and the mountains tremble, and the mountains become heaps of sand
We have sent to you a messenger, a witness over you just as We sent to Pharaoh a messenger
But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We seized him with a crushing grip
How, then, if you refuse to acknowledge the truth, will you protect yourself from a Day which will turn the children gray-haired
A Day when the heavens will shatter. God's promise is always fulfilled
This is a reminder, so let anyone who wills set a path towards his Lord
Your Lord knows that you stay up praying nearly two-thirds of the night, or half of it, or one-third of it, along with a group of those with you. God justly evaluates the night and the day. He knows that you will not be able to sustain it, so He will not require it of you. Read from the Qur'an what you can. He knows that some of you may be ill; and others travelling through the land, seeking God's bounty; yet others will be fighting in God's cause. So read from it what is easy for you, and observe the prayers, and pay The purifying alms, and lend God a loan of goodness. Whatever good you advance for yourselves, you will find it with God, improved and increased for you. Ask God's forgiveness, for God is Forgiving and Merciful
You, wrapped in your shroud
arise and give warning
glorify your Lord' greatness
purify your clothing and
avoid all filth
Do not give out of a desire for gain
But be steadfast for your Lord's cause
When the Trumpet is blown
that Day will be a difficult day
not easy for the unbelievers
Leave Me alone with the one I created
to whom I gave great wealth
sons around him
and for whom I smoothed all things
Then he desires that I should add more
No! He was stubbornly hostile to Our revelation
I will increasingly exhaust him
He reflected and plotted
So, may he perish how he plotted
Then may he perish how he plotted
Then he looked
then he frowned and glared
Then he turned back to his old arrogance
and said, "This is nothing but magic handed down from the past
This is not but the word of a human being
I will roast him into Saqar
And how would you know what is Saqar
It neither leaves, nor spares
scorching the flesh
There are nineteen in charge of it
We have appointed only angels to be wardens of the Fire, and caused their number to be a stumbling block for those who disbelieve; so that those given the Book may attain certainty; and those who believe may increase in faith; and those given the Book and the believers may not doubt; and those in whose hearts is sickness and the unbelievers may say, "What did God ever mean by this example?" In this way God lets go astray the one who wishes to go astray, and guides him who wishes to be guided. None knows your Lord's forces but Him. This is nothing but a reminder to all human beings
No! By the moon
and the night when it departs
and the morning as it brightens
it is one of those great things
as a warning to human beings
to whomever among you wishes to advance or regress
Every soul, is held in pledge for its own deeds
Except for those on the right
in Gardens, inquiring
about those who forced others to reject Our messages
What caused you to be in Saqar
They will say, "We were not among those who prayed
nor did we feed the poor
And we used to indulge in vain discussions with those who indulged [in mocking the believers]
And we used to deny the Day of Judgment
until the Certain End came upon us
The intercession of intercessors will not help them
Why then are they turning away from this reminder
as if they were panicked donkeys
fleeing from a lion
Yet, every one of them wishes to be given scriptures unrolled before their very eyes
No! But they do not fear the Hereafter
No! This is but a reminder
and whoever wills may take it to heart
But they will not remember, unless God so wills. He is the Source of all righteousness, and the source of all forgiveness
I swear by the Day of Resurrection
And I swear by the self-reproaching soul
Does the human being think that We will not reassemble his bones
Yes indeed. We are able even to reshape his fingertips
Yet the human being wants to deny what lies ahead of him
He asks, "When is this Day of Resurrection
When vision is dazzled
the moon is eclipsed
and the sun and the moon are joined together
on that Day, man will say, "Where is the escape
No indeed! There is no refuge
Your Lord is the final destination on that Day
On that Day the Human being will be informed of all deeds he put forward for this day and everything that should have been left behind
Rather, the human being, will give evidence against himself
in spite of any excuses he presents
[Prophet], do not move your tongue attempting to rush your memorization of the Revelation
Its collection and recitation are up to us
So, when We recite it, follow its recitation
it is then, up to Us, to make it all clear
But you love this brief life
and disregard the Hereafter
There are faces on that Day that will be bright
looking toward their Lord
While other faces on that Day, will be gloomy with despair
realizing that a backbreaking blow has befallen them
But when the last breath has reached the throat
and It is said, "Who will heal him now
And he realizes that it is parting time
when one leg is entwined with the other
that Day the journey is to your Lord
He neither believed, nor prayed
but he denied and turned away
Then he went to his people, full of himself and false pride
Your demise is getting closer to you and closer
yet closer and closer still
Does the human being think that he [was created] to be forgotten
Was he not the sperm of ejaculated semen that fertilized the ovum
Then he became a clot. And [God] created and proportioned
and made of him the two sexes, the male and the female
Is not that [Creator] able to bring the dead to life
Has there come upon the human being a span of time when he was nothing to be mentioned
We created the human being from a fertilized ovum to test him; and We gave him hearing and sight
Then We guided him to the right path, whether he is grateful or not
We have prepared chains, shackles and a Searing Fire for the unbelievers
But the righteous will drink from a cup whose mixture is Kafour
a spring from which God's worshipers shall drink, making it gush abundantly at will
They are the ones who fulfill their vows and fear a Day whose evil will be widespread
They feed the needy, the orphan, and the prisoner, for the love of Him
[Saying], "We feed you for the sake of God. We want neither compensation, nor gratitude from you
We simply dread an austere and stressful Day promised by our Lord
So God will spare them the evil of that Day and will give them radiance and joy
and will reward them for what they patiently endured with a Garden and silk
reclining there on couches. They will not experience there either burning sun or bitter cold
Shades cover them, and its fruit hanging close ready to be picked
Circulated among them are vessels of silver, and cups of pure crystal
clear glasses made from silver according to their own measure
They will be given a drink mixed with ginger
from a spring there named Salsabeel
Passing among them are immortal youths. If you see them, you would think they were like sprinkled pearls
If you were to look around, you would see a heavenly and vast kingdom
They will wear green garments of fine silk and brocade. And they will be adorned with silver bracelets. Their Lord will give them a purified drink
This is a reward for you. Your efforts are well appreciated
It is We who have sent down the Qur'an to you in gradual revelations
So await your Lord's Judgment with patience; and do not obey a sinner or a denier of the truth from among them
Remember to call on the name of your Lord morning and evening
And during the night bow down to Him and exalt His limitless glory long into the night
These people love the present life, and leave behind a Heavy Day
We have created them, and strengthened their frame; and if we wish, We can replace them with others like them
This is a reminder. Let whoever wills, take a path to his Lord
Yet you cannot will, unless God wills. God is Knowing and Wise
He admits whom He wills into His mercy. But He has prepared a painful punishment for the unjust
By those [winds] sent forth in gusts
and those violently storming
consider these [messages] that spread [the Truth] far and wide
thus separating [right and wrong] with all clarity
and then delivering a reminder
[promising] freedom from blame or [offering] a warning
what you are promised will surely happen
So when the stars are extinguished
the heaven is split open
the mountains are blown away
And when the messengers are called together to an appointed time
for what Day was it postponed
For the Day of Decision
And what do you know about the Day of Decision
How horrible is that Day for those who deny the truth
Did We not destroy the earlier people
And We shall make the latter follow them
This is how We deal with those who forced others to reject Our messages
How horrible is that Day for those who reject the truth
Did We not create you from an insignificant liquid
Then lodged it in a secure place
for a known term
And We determined it, how excellently We determine
How terrible is that Day for the deniers of the truth
Have We not made the earth a home
for the living and the dead
And We placed firmly embedded mountains in it, rising high, and given you sweet water to drink
How terrible is that Day for the deniers of the truth
Proceed to what you used to deny
Proceed to a shadow with three columns
that has no shade and will not prevent you from the flame
It shoots sparks [as huge] as a fortress
like giant fiery ropes
How terrible is that Day for those who deny the truth
On that Day they will be speechless
and they not be given permission to offer any excuses
How terrible is that Day for those who deny the truth
This is the Day of Decision; We will have gathered you together with the earlier people
So if you have a ploy, then use it against my plan now
How terrible is that Day for those who deny the truth
The God-conscious will be amidst shades and springs
and any fruits they desire
Eat and drink and enjoy it as a reward for your deeds
This is how We reward those who do good
How terrible is that Day for those who deny the truth
You are but dissenters. So eat and enjoy yourselves a little [while you can]
How terrible is that Day for the deniers of the truth
And when It is said to them, "Bow down [in prayer]," they do not bow
How terrible is that Day for those who denied the truth
In what message beyond this will they believe
What are they wondering about
About the huge announcement
over which they are in disagreement
They will know
For sure they will know
Have We not made the earth a cradle
And the mountains as pegs
And We created you in pairs
And made your sleep to rest
And made the night a cover
And made the day for livelihood
And constructed above you seven strong [heavens]
And made [the sun] a glowing lamp
And sent down from the clouds pouring water
to produce with it grain, vegetation
and luxuriant gardens
The Day of Decision has been appointed
The Day the Horn is blown and you will come forth in droves
And the heavens are opened and becomes gateways
And the mountains are set in motion and will become a mirage
Hell has been lying in wait
to be a home for the oppressors
to stay in for a long, long time
They will not taste any coolness there or drink
except for boiling water and sizzling pus
An appropriate reward
They were not expecting to be held accountable
And utterly rejected Our verses
We have recorded everything in writing
So feel it, We will only increase your punishment
For those who were mindful of God there is a great achievement
gardens and grapevines
splendid, well matched spouses
and a full cup
There, they will hear no gossip or lies
A reward from your Lord, a fitting gift
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, the Merciful-to-all.They will have no authority from Him to speak
On the Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand in rows. They will not speak except for those to whom the Merciful gives permission, and he will say what is right
That is the True Day; so whoever wills, may take now a way back to his Lord
We have warned you of an eminent punishment on the Day when a person will see what he has done, and the unbeliever will say, "I wish that I were dust
By those [stars] who rise only to sit
And move [in their orbits] steadily
And float [through space] smoothly
And yet some overtake [others] swiftly
Thus they fulfill the [Creator's] purpose
On the Day when the world will shudder
Followed by a tremor
Hearts, that Day, will shiver
and eyes are humbled
They say, "Are we to be restored to the original condition
After we have turned into decayed bones
They say, "This will be a losing come back
But all it will take is a single blast
and they will be awake and above ground
Has there the story of Moses reached you
When his Lord called out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa
Go to Pharaoh. For he has transgressed
and ask him, "Would you be willing to purify yourself
And I will guide you to your Lord so you would be in awe of Him
And he showed him the greatest sign
but Pharaoh rejected the offer and disobeyed
Then he hastily turned away
and gathered [his people] and proclaimed
I am your lord, the most high
So God seized him with punishment, as an example, in the life to come as well as in this life
In this, there is a warning for whomever would fear [God]
Are you more difficult to create or is the heaven that He built
He raised it high and proportioned it
He darkened its night and brought out its morning light
After that He spread out the earth
From it, He produced its water and its pasture
And He set the mountains firmly in place
for you and for your animals to enjoy
But when the Great Calamity arrives
a Day when the human being will remember what he has done
and Hell will be there for all to see
for him who transgressed
and preferred the life of this world
Hell will be his home
But as for him who feared to stand one day in front of his Lord and therefore restrained himself from following his whims and desires
then Heaven will be home
They ask you about the Hour, "When will it take place
How can you possibly know that
Its time is only known to your Lord
You are only to warn those who dread it
On the Day they see it, it will seem as though they only stayed an evening or a morning
He frowned and turned away
when the blind man approached him
For all you know, he might be seeking to purify himself
or to be reminded and be helped by being reminded
As for him who was indifferent
you [Prophet] gave him your attention
Though it is not up to you whether or not he is purified
As for him who came to you eagerly
with God's fear in his heart
from him you are distracted
Indeed this is a reminder
So, whoever wills may remember it
it is [written] on honored sheets
Exalted and purified
by the hands of scribes
honorable and virtuous
How regretful it is for people to have so much self-destructive ingratitude
From what did He create him
From a fertilized ovum He created him and proportioned him
Then He eased the way for him
Then He causes him to die and to be buried
Then when He wills, He will resurrect him
No! He did not fulfill what He has commanded him
A human being has only to consider the food he eats
We poured down water in abundance
and caused the soil to break open
and grew grains in it
and grapes and legumes
olive and dates
and luxurious gardens
and fruits and vegetable
for you and your livestock to enjoy
But when the Deafening Blast comes
on the Day when a human being will flee from his brother
his mother, his father
his wife and his children
every one of them, on that Day, will have enough to preoccupy him
Faces on that Day will be beaming
laughing and rejoicing
And [other] faces, on that Day, will be covered with dust
overwhelmed by sorrow
These are the unbelievers, the wicked ones
When the sun folds
and the stars are dispersed
when the mountains are shifting
and when full-term she-camels are neglected
When the wild beasts are gathered
when the seas are set aflame
when the souls are paired
when the female baby who was buried alive is asked
for what sin she was killed
When the records are made public
when the sky is stripped away
when Hell is set ablaze
when Paradise is brought into view
every soul will then know what it has brought with it
I swear by the planets
the runners and sweepers
and by the night as it recedes
and the dawn when it breathes
this revelation is indeed the word of a honorable Messenger
endowed with strength, secure with the Lord of the Throne
obeyed and trustworthy
This fellow of yours is not mad
he has already seen him [Gabriel] in the clear horizon
He does not withhold what is revealed to him from beyond
And it (the Qur'an) is not the word of a devil, expelled from Heaven
So where, then, will you go
It is only a reminder to all humankind
for whoever wills among you to go straight
But you cannot will, unless God, the Lord of the worlds, so wills
When the heavens are torn apart
when the planets are sprinkled
when the oceans are exploded
when the graves are scattered
each soul will then know what it has sent on ahead and what it has left behind
People, what has lured you away from your Lord, the Most Generous
He Who created you, formed you, and proportioned you
In whatever shape He willed, He assembled you
Yet you still deny the Judgment
When guardians are standing over you
honorable recorders
They know everything you do
Indeed, the truly good will be in bliss
while the wicked will be in Hell
They will roast in it on the Day of Judgment
and will never get away from it
And how would you know what is the Day of Judgment
Truly, how would you know what is the Day of Judgment
It is the Day when no soul will be able to do anything for another soul; and the decision on that Day is God's alone
How terrible it is to those who give short measures
who, when they take a measure from people, take in full
But when they measure or weigh for others, they cheat
Don't such people realize that they will be resurrected
for a grievous Day
the Day when Humankind will stand before the Lord of the worlds
Indeed, the record of the wicked is in Sijjeen
And how would you know what Sijjeen is
It is a locked-in digital data record
How terrible it is that Day for the deniers
who deny the Day of Judgment
when only sinful aggressors deny it
When Our verses are recited to him, he says, "Legends of ancient people
Not at all! Rather, their hearts have become encrusted by what they were earning
They will be separated from their Lord, that Day
Then, they will be rekindling Hell
They will be then told, "This is what you used to deny
No indeed! The righteous' record is in 'Illiyyun
And how would you know what is Illiyyun
It is a digital data record
open to be witnessed by those brought near [to God]
Indeed, the righteous will be in perfect bliss
seated on couches, looking around
You will recognize the radiance of bliss on their faces
They will be given pure virgin nectar to drink
leaving a great taste in the mouth. Let people with aspirations, aspire to that
It is mixed with the water from Tasneem
a spring from which those near [to God] drink
Those who rejected the faith and severed their relation with God used to laugh at those who believed
They would wink at one another when the believers passed by them
joking about them when they returned to their people
And if they saw them, they would say, "Indeed, those are truly lost
Yet, they were not sent as guardians over them
So today those who believed will laugh at the unbelievers
while seated on luxurious furnishings, looking around
Have the unbelievers been rewarded for their deeds
When the sky is ruptured
obeying its Lord, as it is bound to do
When the earth is leveled out
and has cast out what is in it, and becomes empty
obeying its Lord as it is bound to do
O human being, you are laboring toward your Lord and you will meet Him
Then, as for him who is given his record in his right hand
he will have an easy settlement
and will return to his family delighted
But, as for him who is given his record behind his back
he will cry out for destruction
and will rekindle the Blaze
He used to be happy among his family
He thought he would never return [to His Lord]
Yes he will! His Lord was always watching him
So I swear by the twilight glow
and the night and all it gathers
and the moon when it is full
you will move onward from stage to stage
So what is the matter with them that they do not believe
and when the Qur'an is recited to them, they do not bow down [to God]
But the unbelievers say it is lies
but God knows best what they comprehend
So give them the news of a painful punishment
except for those who believe and do good deeds. They will have a never ending reward
By the heavens full of great constellations
by the promised Day
and by the witness and the witnessed
how terrible were the people of the trench
[using] fire supplied with fuel
while they sat around it
to watch what they were doing to the believers
The only reason they punish them was because they believed in God, the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
to whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. God, is Witness over all things
Those who persecute believing men and women, and have not repented afterwards, will have the punishment of Hell, and they will have the punishment of Burning
Indeed, those who believe and do good deeds will have Gardens with rivers flowing through them. That is the great victory
Your Lord's punishment is truly severe
It is He who begins [Creation] and repeats it
He alone is Truly-Forgiving, All-Embracing in His love
The Glorious Lord of the Throne
Doer of whatever He wills
Has the story of the legions reached you
[those of] Pharaoh and Thamud
Yet those who denied the truth are persistent in denial
while God will encircle them from behind
This is indeed a Glorious Qur'an
in a Preserved Tablet
By the sky and the knocking star
what do you know about the knocking star
It is the piercing Star
there is no soul without a protector over it
So let the human being consider what he was created from
He was created from ejected fluid
emerging from the vicinity of the backbone and the ribs
Indeed, God is able to bring him [the human being] back to life
On a Day when secrets are disclosed
a human being will have no power or anyone to help him
By the sky and its cyclical system
and the earth which cracks open
indeed, this is a decisive statement
not to be taken lightly
They plot and scheme
but I am planning too
So bear with the unbelievers. Let them be for a while
Praise the limitless glory of your Lord's name, the Most High
Who created and proportioned
Who destined and [then] guided
He who brought out the green pasture
and then made it black stubble
We will make you recite, and you will not forget
except what God wills. He knows what is open to one's perception and what is hidden
And We will ease you toward the easy way
So, remind, if reminding helps
He who fears God will remember
But the most wicked will ignore it
He will kindle the greatest fire
where he will remain, neither dying nor living
Successful is he who purifies himself
and remembers to call on his Lord and pray
But you prefer this worldly life
whereas the Hereafter is better and more enduring
All this is can be found in the earlier Scriptures
the Scriptures of Abraham and Moses
Have you heard about the Overwhelming Event
Some faces, that Day, will be humbled
working hard and exhausted
They will kindle an intensely hot Fire
and will be given drinks from a boiling spring
They will have no food except from a thorny plant
that neither nourishes nor satisfies hunger
Other faces, that day, will be peaceful
Well pleased with their endeavor
in an elevated Garden
where they will hear no idle talk
A flowing spring runs through it
Raised couches are placed there
cups put in place
cushions lined up
and carpets spread around
Don't they look at how the camels are created
at how the sky is raised
at how the mountains are erected
and at how the earth is spread out
So remind them, for you are but a reminder
You are not in control of them
But whoever turns away and rejects the truth
God will inflict him with the greatest punishment
To Us is their return
Then it is for Us to call them to account
By the daybreak
and by ten nights
by the even and the odd
and by the night as it recedes
is there not in [all] that an oath for a rational person
Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with Aad
with Iram of the pillars
whose like was never created in any land
with Thamud, those who carved the rocks in the valley
And with Pharaoh, of the stakes
All of them committed excesses in the lands
and spread much corruption there
So your Lord poured on them a scourge of punishment
Your Lord is always watchful
As for human being, whenever his Lord tests him, by honoring him, and blessing him, he says, "My Lord has honored me
But when He tries him, and restricts his provision for him, he says, "My Lord has humiliated me
Not at all! It is you who are not generous with the orphans
and you do not urge one another to feed the needy
you who devour the inheritance [of others] with obvious greed
and you who passionately love wealth
No indeed! When the earth is crushed, pounded and crushed
and your Lord comes with the angels, row after row
on that Day, Hell will be brought near. On that Day, the human being will remember, but what good will that be to him then
He will say, "I wish I had provided for this life to come
On that Day, none will punish as He punishes
And none will shackle as severely as He shackles
[To the righteous it will be said], "Tranquil soul
Return to your Lord, well-pleased and pleasing [to Him]
go in among My worshipers
and into My Garden
I swear by this town
and you [Prophet] are free to dwell in this town
And [I swear by] a father and his offspring
We have created human being for a life of hardship
Does he thinks that no one will have power over him
I have wasted much money," he says
Does he think that no one sees him
Have We not given him two eyes
And a tongue and two lips
and have shown him the two ways [of good and evil]
But he did not take the difficult path
And how would you know what is the difficult path
It is to free a slave
or to feed on a day of hunger
an orphaned relative
or a needy person in distress
Then to become one of those who believe and urge one another to endure and to urge each other to be compassionate
Those are the people of righteousness
But those who defy Our revelations are the people of despair
With the fire closing in above them
By the sun and its morning light
and the moon as it follows it
and the day when it reveals it
and the night when it conceals it
and the sky and He who built it
and the earth and He who spread it
and by the soul and He who proportioned it
and inspired it [with knowledge to distinguish] its wickedness and its righteousness
Successful is he who purifies it
and failing is he who corrupts it
In their overwhelming arrogance, the people of Thamud called the Messenger a liar
and allowed their most wicked to lead them
The Messenger of God said to them, "This is the she-camel of God, so let her drink
But they called him a liar, and hamstrung her. So their Lord destroyed them for their crime, and leveled it
He doesn't fear the consequence
By the night as it conceals
and the day when it reveals
and He who created the male and the female
your striving is indeed diverse
As for he who gives and is mindful of God
and believes in goodness
We will smooth his way toward all that is easy
But as for he who is stingy and considers himself self-sufficient
and denies goodness
We will ease him toward hardship
His wealth will not help him the least when he falls
Indeed, it is upon Us to guide you
And indeed, to Us belong the last life and this first life
so, I have warned you of a Blazing Fire
None will burn in it except the most wicked
who had rejected and turned away
But the one who was most mindful of God will be spared
who gives his wealth away to purify himself
not as payment for received favors
but only seeking the pleasure of his Lord, the Most High
He will be well pleased
By the morning light
and the night as it settles
your Lord did not abandon you, nor is He displeased
The life to come is better for you than this first life
And your Lord is sure to give you [so much], and you will be satisfied
Did He not find you orphaned, and shelter you
Did He not find you lost and guide you
Did He not find you impoverished and enrich you
So do not mistreat the orphan
and do not snub the one who asks for help
Instead proclaim the blessings of your Lord
Did We not relieve the tightness in your chest
and lift your burden
that weighed heavily on your back
and raised high your reputation
For truly, with hardship comes ease
Indeed, with hardship comes ease
So, when you are done, get ready for serious devotion
and focus all your attention on your Lord
By the fig and the olive
and [by] Mount Sinai
and [by] this secure city [Mecca]
We have certainly created the human being in the best of stature
Then We return him to the lowest of the low
except for those who believe and do righteous deeds, for they will have an uninterrupted reward
So, do you still deny this faith
Isn't God the most Just of Judges
Recite in the name of your Lord who created
created the human being from a clinging substance
Recite, and your Lord is the most generous
Who taught by the pen
He taught the human being that which he knew not
No! [But] indeed, the human being transgresses
because he sees himself self-sufficient
Indeed, to your Lord is the return
Have you seen the one who forbids
a servant from praying
Have you seen if he is on [the road of] guidance
Or enjoins righteousness
Have you seen if he rejects and turns away
Does he not know that God sees
No! If he doesn't stop, We will surely drag him by the forelock
a lying, sinning forelock
Then let him call his associates
We will call the angels of Hell
No! Do not obey him. But prostrate yourselves and draw near [to God]
We sent this [Qur'an] down during the Night of Decree
But how would you know what is the Night of Decree
The Night of Decree is better than a thousand months
During that Night, the angels and the Spirit descend by their Lord's authority for a variety of matters
There is peace that night until the coming of dawn
The unbelievers from among the people of the Book and the idolaters will continue to deny the truth until clear evidence is sent to them
a Messenger from God, reciting purified texts
containing valuable books
Those who were given the Scripture did not become divided until after they were given clear evidence
They were only asked to worship God alone, making their faith sincerely His, to keep up with prayer, and to pay the purifying alms, for that is the true religion
Those who reject the truth among the People of the Book and the idolaters, will suffer the Fire of Hell, to remain there eternally, forever. They are the worst of creatures
while those who believe and do good deeds are the best of creatures
Their reward is with their Lord: Gardens of Eden, graced with flowing streams, remaining in them timelessly, forever and ever. God is well pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. All this is for whoever stands in awe of his Lord
When the Earth is shaken by its [last] earthquake
and the Earth throws out its burdens
and the human being says: 'What is wrong with it
On that Day, it will impart its news
because your Lord has inspired it
On that Day, people will come forward, separated from one another, to be shown their deeds
So, whoever has done an atom's weight of good deeds will see it
and whoever has done an atom's weight of evil will see it
[I swear] by the charging breathless warhorses
striking sparks with their hooves
raiding at early dawn
raising a cloud of dust
and storming into the center collectively
the human being is ungrateful to his Lord
even though he is a witness to that
And he is fiercely in love with wealth
But does he not know that when what are in the graves are scattered
and the hearts' contents are retrieved
on that Day, their Lord is fully knowledgeable
The striking calamity
What is the striking calamity
And how would you know what is the striking calamity
It is the Day when the human beings will be like dispersed moths
and the mountains will be like fluffed up wool
and then, the one whose scales are heavy [with good deeds]
will have a pleasant life
but the one whose scales are light
his refuge will be an abyss
And what will convey to you what that is
a Raging Fire
Your greed for more has distracted you
until you go down to your graves
No, indeed you will soon know
Certainly you will soon know
Indeed, If you knew the knowledge of certainty
you would see Hell
then you would surely see it with the eye of certainty
And on that Day you will be asked about the pleasures you enjoyed
I swear by the Late Afternoon
the human being is surely, in a state of loss
Except for those who have believed and done good deeds and urged one another to the Truth and urged one another to patience
Woe to every scorning backbiter
who has amassed wealth and diversified it
thinking that his wealth will make him immortal
No! He will surely be thrown into the Crusher
And what will convey to you what is the Crusher
It is the kindled Fire of God
reaching right into the hearts
it will engulf them
in extended columns
Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the army who had Elephants
Did He not utterly bring their perfect planning to nothing
And He sent birds in flocks against them
striking them with stones of hard clay
He made them like eaten straw
So that Quraysh remains secure
They are secure in their Winter and Summer journeys
Let them worship the Lord of this House
who has fed them after hunger, and made then safe after fear
Have you seen the one who denies this faith
For that is the one who drives the orphan away
and does not encourage the feeding of the poor
So woe to those who pray
but, who do not pay attention to their prayer
Those who make a show [of their deeds]
and withhold assistance to others
We have given you all that is good in abundance
so pray to your Lord and sacrifice for Him
Your enemy is the one who is cut off
Say: "You who deny the truth
I do not worship what you worship
and you do not worship what I worship
and I will never worship what you worship
Neither will you worship what I worship
You have your own religion, and I have mine
When God's victory has come, together with His conquest
and you see people embracing God's religion in multitudes
exult your Lord's glory, and praise Him, and ask for His forgiveness; for He is ever-accepting of repentance
Doomed are the hands of Abu Lahab, and he is doomed too
His wealth and all that he gained would not help him
He will burn in a fire strongly glowing
and his wife as well, the carrier of firewood
Around her neck is a rope of palm fiber
Say: "He is God who is Uniquely Singular
Who is Eternal, [the uncaused cause of all that exists]
Who has not given birth nor is He born
and there is no equivalent to Him
Say: "I seek refuge with the lord of the Daybreak
from the evil in that which He has created
and from the evil of the darkness when it settles
and from women who blow on knots
and from the evil of the envious when he envies
Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of people
The King of people
The God of people
From the evil of the insidious whisperer
who whispers [evil] into the hearts of people
from among the jinn or people
{
    "name": "eng-safikaskas",
    "author": "Safi Kaskas",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-safikaskas.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-safikaskas.min.json"
}