In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Prase be to God, the Lord of the worlds
the Compassionate, the Merciful
Master of the Day of Judgement
Thee we worship and from Thee we seek help
Guide us upon the straight path
the path of those who Thou hast blessed, not of those who incur wrath, nor of those who are astray
Alif. Lam. Mim
This is the Book in which there is no doubt, a guidance for the reverent
who believe in the Unseen and perform the prayer and spend from that which We have provided them
and who believe in what was sent down unto thee, and what was sent down before thee, and who are certain of the Hereafter
It is they who act upon guidance from their Lord, and it is they who shall prosper
Truly it is the same for the disbelievers whether thou warnest them or warnest them not; they do not believe
God has sealed their hearts and their hearing. Upon their eyes is a covering, and theirs is a great punishment
Among mankind are those who say, “We believe in God and in the Last Day,” though they do not believe
They would deceive God and the believers; yet they deceive none but themselves, though they are unaware
In their hearts is a disease, and God has increased them in disease. Theirs is a painful punishment for having lied
And when it is said unto them, “Do not work corruption upon the earth,” they say, “We are only working righteousness.”
Nay, it is they who are the workers of corruption, though they are unaware
When it is said unto them, “Believe as the people believe,” they say, “Shall we believe as fools believe?” Nay, it is they who are the fools, though they know not
And when they meet those who believe they say, “We believe,” but when they are alone with their satans they say, “We are with you. We were only mocking.”
God mocks them, and leaves them to wander confused in their rebellion
It is they who have purchased error at the price of guidance. Their commerce has not brought them profit, and they are not rightly guided
Their parable is that of one who kindled a fire, and when it lit up what was around him, God took away their light, and left them in darkness, unseeing
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they return not
Or a cloudburst from the sky, in which there is darkness, thunder, and lightning. They put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps, fearing death. And God encompasses the disbelievers
The lightning all but snatches away their sight. Whenever it shines for them, they walk therein, and when darkness comes over them, they halt. Had God willed, He would have taken away their hearing and their sight. Truly God is Powerful over all things
O mankind! Worship your Lord, Who created you, and those who were before you, that haply you may be reverent
He Who made for you the earth a place of repose and the sky a canopy, and sent water from the sky by which He brought forth fruits for your provision. So do not set up equals unto God, knowingly
If you are in doubt concerning what We have sent down unto Our servant, then bring a surah like it, and call your witnesses apart from God if you are truthful
And if you do not, and you will not, then be mindful of the Fire whose fuel is men and stones, which is prepared for the disbelievers
And give glad tidings to those who believe and perform righteous deeds that theirs are Gardens with rivers running below. Whensoever they are given a fruit therefrom as provision, they say, “This is the provision we received aforetime,” and they were given a likeness of it. Therein they have spouses made pure, and therein they shall abide
Truly God is not ashamed to set forth a parable of a gnat or something smaller. As for those who believe, they know it is the truth from their Lord, and as for those who disbelieve, they say, “What did God mean by this parable?” He misleads many by it, and He guides many by it, and He misleads none but the iniquitous
Those who break God’s Pact after accepting His Covenant, and sever what God has commanded be joined, and work corruption upon the earth, it is they who are the losers
How can you disbelieve in God, seeing that you were dead and He gave you life; then He causes you to die; then He gives you life; then unto Him shall you be returned
He it is Who created for you all that is on the earth. Then He turned to Heaven and fashioned it into seven heavens, and He is Knower of all things
And when thy Lord said to the angels, “I am placing a vicegerent upon the earth,” they said, “Wilt Thou place therein one who will work corruption therein, and shed blood, while we hymn Thy praise and call Thee Holy?” He said, “Truly I know what you know not.”
And He taught Adam the names, all of them. Then He laid them before the angels and said, “Tell me the names of these, if you are truthful.”
They said, “Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge save what Thou hast taught us. Truly Thou art the Knower, the Wise.”
He said, “Adam, tell them their names.” And when he had told them their names He said, “Did I not say to you that I know the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you disclose and what you used to conceal?”
And when We said to the angels, “Prostrate unto Adam,” they prostrated, save Iblis. He refused and waxed arrogant, and was among the disbelievers
We said, “O Adam, dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden and eat freely thereof, wheresoever you will. But approach not this tree, lest you be among the wrongdoers.”
Then Satan made them stumble therefrom, and expelled them from that wherein they were, and We said, “Get you down, each of you an enemy to the other. On the earth a dwelling place shall be yours, and enjoyment for a while.”
Then Adam received words from his Lord, and He relented unto him. Indeed, He is the Relenting, the Merciful
We said, “Get down from it, all of you. If guidance should come to you from Me, then whosoever follows My Guidance, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve.”
But those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, it is they who are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein
O Children of Israel! Remember My Blessing which I bestowed upon you, and fulfill My covenant, and I shall fulfill your covenant, and be in awe of Me
And believe in that which I have sent down, confirming that which you have with you, and be not the first to disbelieve in it. And sell not My signs for a paltry price, and reverence Me
And confound not truth with falsehood, nor knowingly conceal the truth
And perform the prayer, and give the alms, and bow with those who bow
Will you enjoin piety upon mankind, and forget yourselves, while you recite the Book? Do you not understand
Seek help in patience and prayer, and this indeed is difficult except for the humble
who reckon that they shall meet their Lord and that they shall return unto Him
O Children of Israel! Remember My Blessing which I bestowed upon you, and that I favored you above the worlds
And be mindful of a day when no soul will avail another soul in any way, and no intercession shall be accepted from it, nor ransom taken from it; nor shall they be helped
And [remember] when We delivered you from the House of Pharaoh, who inflicted a terrible punishment upon you, slaying your sons and sparing your women. And in that was a great trial from your Lord
And when We parted the sea for you and so delivered you, and drowned the House of Pharaoh as you looked on
And when We appointed forty nights for Moses, and you took up the calf while he was away, while you were wrongdoers
Then We pardoned you after that, that haply you may give thanks
And when We gave unto Moses the Book and the Criterion, that haply you may be guided
And when Moses said to his people, “O my people! You have wronged yourselves by taking up the calf. So repent unto your Maker and slay your own. That is better for you in the sight of your Maker.” Then He relented unto you. Indeed, He is the Relenting, the Merciful
And when you said, “O Moses, we will not believe thee till we see God openly,” and the thunderbolt seized you as you looked on
Then We raised you up after your death, that haply you may give thanks
And We shaded you with clouds, and sent down manna and quails upon you, “Eat of the good things We have provided you.” They wronged Us not, but themselves did they wrong
And when We said, “Enter this town, and eat freely of that which is therein wheresoever you will, and enter the gate prostrating, and say, ‘Remove the burden!’ that We may forgive you your sins. And We shall increase the virtuous.”
But those who did wrong substituted a word other than that which had been said unto them. So We sent down a torment from Heaven upon those who did wrong for the iniquity they committed
And when Moses sought water for his people, We said, “Strike the rock with thy staff.” Then twelve springs gushed forth from it; each people knew their drinking place. “Eat and drink of God’s provision, and behave not wickedly upon the earth, working corruption.”
And when you said, “O Moses, we shall not endure one food, so call upon your Lord for us, that He may bring forth for us some of what the earth grows: its herbs, its cucumbers, its garlic, its lentils, its onions.” He said, “Would you substitute what is lesser for what is better? Go down to a town, and you will have what you ask for.” So they were struck with abasement and poverty, and earned a burden of wrath from God. That is because they disbelieved in the signs of God, and killed the prophets without right. That is because they disobeyed, and were transgressors
Truly those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Christians, and the Sabeans—whosoever believes in God and the Last Day and works righteousness shall have their reward with their Lord. No fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
And when We made a covenant with you, and raised the Mount over you, “Take hold of what We have given you with strength, and remember what is in it, that haply you may be reverent.”
Then you turned away thereafter, and were it not for God’s Bounty upon you, and His Mercy, you would have been among the losers
And you have indeed known those among you who transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath, and so We said to them, “Be you apes, outcast.”
So We made it an exemplary punishment for their time and for times to come, and an admonition for the reverent
And when Moses said to his people, “God commands you to slaughter a cow,” they said, “Do you take us in mockery?” He said, “I seek refuge in God from being among the ignorant.”
They said, “Call upon your Lord for us, that He may clarify for us what she is.” He said, “He says she is a cow neither old nor without calf, middling between them: so do what you are commanded.”
They said, “Call upon your Lord for us, that He may clarify for us what her color is.” He said, “He says she is a yellow cow. Bright is her color, pleasing the onlookers.”
They said, “Pray for us to your Lord, that He may clarify for us what she is. Cows are much alike to us, and if God will we will surely be guided.”
He said, “He says she is a cow not broken to plow the earth or to water the tillage, sound and without blemish.” They said, “Now you have brought the truth.” So they slaughtered her, but they almost did not
And when you slew a soul and cast the blame upon one another regarding it—and God is the discloser of what you were concealing—
We said, “Strike him with part of it.” Thus does God give life to the dead and show you His signs, that haply you may understand
Then your hearts hardened thereafter, being like stones or harder still. For indeed among stones are those from which streams gush forth, and indeed among them are those that split and water issues from them, and indeed among them are those that crash down from the fear of God. And God is not heedless of what you do
Do you hope, then, that they will believe you, seeing that a party of them would hear the Word of God and then distort it after they had understood it, knowingly
And when they meet those who believe they say, “We believe,” and when they are alone with one another they say, “Do you speak to them of what God has unveiled to you, that they may thereby dispute with you before your Lord? Do you not understand?”
Do they not know that God knows what they hide and what they disclose
And among them are the illiterate who know nothing of the Book but hearsay, and they only conjecture
So woe unto those who write the book with their hands, then say, “This is from God,” that they may sell it for a paltry price. So woe unto them for what their hands have written and woe unto them for what they earn
And they say, “The Fire will not touch us save for days numbered.” Say, “Have you made a covenant with God? For God shall not fail to keep His Covenant. Or do you say of God that which you know not?”
Nay, whosoever earns evil and is surrounded by his sins, it is they who are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein to abide
And those who believe and perform righteous deeds, it is they who are the inhabitants of the Garden, therein to abide
And [remember] when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel, “Worship none but God; be virtuous toward parents, kinsfolk, orphans, and the indigent; speak to people in a goodly way; and perform the prayer and give the alms.” Then you turned away, save a few of you, swerving aside
And when We made a covenant with you, “Do not shed the blood of your own, and do not expel your own from your homes.” Then you ratified it, bearing witness
And yet it is you, the very same, who kill your own and expel a party of you from their homes, conspiring against them in sin and enmity. And if they come to you as captives you ransom them, though their expulsion was forbidden to you. Do you, then, believe in part of the Book and disbelieve in part? And what is the recompense of those who do so but disgrace in the life of this world? And on the Day of Resurrection they shall be consigned to the most severe punishment. And God is not heedless of what you do
It is they who have purchased the world at the price of the Hereafter; for them the punishment shall not be lightened, nor will they be helped
And indeed We gave unto Moses the Book and caused a succession of messengers to follow him. And We gave Jesus son of Mary clear proofs, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Is it not so that whenever a messenger brought you something your souls did not desire, you waxed arrogant, and some you denied and some you slew
And they say, “Our hearts are uncircumcised.” Rather, God has cursed them for their disbelief, for little do they believe
And when there came to them a Book from God, confirming that which they had with them—and aforetime they used to ask for victory over those who disbelieve—so when there came to them that which they recognized, they disbelieved in it. So may the curse of God be upon the disbelievers
Evil is that for which they sold their souls, that they should disbelieve in what God sent down, out of envy that God should send down His Grace unto whomsoever He will among His servants. They earn a burden of wrath upon wrath, and the disbelievers shall have a humiliating punishment
And when it is said unto them, “Believe in what God has sent down,” they say, “We believe in what was sent down to us,” and they disbelieve in what is beyond it, although it is the truth, confirming what is with them. Say, “Then why did you slay the prophets of God aforetime, if you were believers?”
And indeed Moses brought you clear proofs, but then you took up the calf while he was away, and you were wrongdoers
And when We made a covenant with you, and raised the Mount over you, “Take hold of what We have given you with strength, and listen!” They said, “We hear, and disobey,” and they were made to drink the calf into their hearts because of their disbelief. Say, “Evil is that which your belief enjoins upon you, if you are believers.”
Say, “If the Abode of the Hereafter with God is yours alone to the exclusion of other people, then long for death, if you are truthful.”
But they will never long for it, because of what their hands have sent forth, and God knows the wrongdoers
You will find them the most covetous of people for life, [even] more than those who are idolaters. Each one of them would wish to live a thousand years, although that would not remove him from the punishment. And God sees whatsoever they do
Whosoever is an enemy of Gabriel: he it is who sent it down upon thy heart by God’s Leave, confirming that which was there before, and as a guidance and glad tiding for the believers
Whosoever is an enemy of God, His angels and His messengers, and Gabriel and Michael: God is indeed the enemy of the disbelievers
We did indeed send down to you clear signs, and only the iniquitous disbelieve in them
Is it not so that, whenever they make a covenant, a group of them cast it aside? Indeed, most of them do not believe
And when there came to them a messenger from God, confirming that which is with them, a group of those who have been given the Book cast the Book of God behind their backs, as if they know not
And they followed what the satans recited against the kingdom of Solomon. Solomon did not disbelieve, but the satans disbelieved, teaching people sorcery and that which was sent down to the two angels at Babylon, Harut and Marut. But they would not teach anyone until they had said, “We are only a trial, so do not disbelieve.” Then they would learn from them that by which they could cause separation between a man and his wife. But they did not harm anyone with it, save by God’s Leave. And they would learn that which harmed them and brought them no benefit, knowing that whosoever purchases it has no share in the Hereafter. Evil is that for which they sold their souls, had they but known
And had they believed and been reverent, a recompense from God would be better, if they but knew
O you who believe! Do not say, “Attend to us,” but say, “Regard us,” and listen! And the disbelievers shall have a painful punishment
Neither the disbelievers among the People of the Book nor the polytheists wish that any good be sent down to you from your Lord, but God singles out for His Mercy whomsoever He will, and God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
No sign do We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, but that We bring that which is better than it or like unto it. Dost thou not know that God is Powerful over all things
Dost thou not know that unto God belongs Sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and that you have neither protector nor helper apart from God
Or do you wish to question your messenger as Moses was questioned aforetime? Whosoever exchanges belief for disbelief has gone astray from the right way
Many of the People of the Book wish to turn you back into disbelievers after your having believed, out of envy in their souls, even after the truth has become clear to them. So pardon and forbear, until God comes with His Command. Truly God is Powerful over all things
And perform the prayer and give the alms. Whatever good you send forth for your souls, you will find it with God. Truly God sees whatsoever you do
And they said, “None will enter the Garden unless he be a Jew or a Christian.” Those are their hopes. Say, “Bring your proof, if you are truthful.”
Nay, whosoever submits his face to God, while being virtuous, shall have his reward with his Lord. No fear shall come upon them; nor shall they grieve
The Jews say, “The Christians stand on nothing,” and the Christians say, “The Jews stand on nothing,” though they recite the Book. Likewise did those who know not speak words like theirs. God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they differed
And who does greater wrong than one who bars [entrance to] the mosques of God, lest His Name be remembered therein, and strives for their ruin? They are those who should not enter them, save in fear. Theirs is disgrace in this world, and theirs is a great punishment in the Hereafter
To God belong the East and the West. Wheresoever you turn, there is the Face of God. God is All-Encompassing, Knowing
And they say, “God has taken a child.” Glory be to Him! Rather, unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth. All are devoutly obedient to Him
the Originator of the heavens and the earth. When He decrees a thing, He only says to it, “Be!” and it is
Those who do not know say, “Why does God not speak to us, nor a sign come to us?” Likewise did those who came before them speak words like theirs. Their hearts are alike. We have made the signs clear for a people who are certain
Indeed, We have sent thee with the truth, as a bearer of glad tidings, and a warner, and thou wilt not be questioned about the inhabitants of Hellfire
Never will the Jews be content with thee, nor the Christians, until thou followest their creed. Say, “Truly the Guidance of God is guidance. And if thou shouldst follow their caprices after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou shalt have against God neither protector nor helper.”
Those unto whom We have given the Book and who recite it as it should be recited are they who believe in it. And whosoever does not believe in it, they are the losers
O Children of Israel! Remember My Blessing which I bestowed upon you, and that I favored you above the worlds
And be mindful of a day when no soul shall recompense another in any way, nor shall ransom be accepted from it, nor shall intercession benefit it; and they will not be helped
And [remember] when his Lord tried Abraham with [certain] words, and he fulfilled them. He said, “I am making you an imam for mankind.” He said, “And of my progeny?” He said, “My covenant does not include the wrongdoers.”
And [remember] when We made the House a place of visitation for mankind, and a sanctuary, “Take the station of Abraham as a place of prayer.” And We made a covenant with Abraham and Ishmael, “Purify My House for those who circumambulate, those who make retreat, and those who bow and prostrate.”
And [remember] when Abraham said, “My Lord, make this a land secure, and provide its people with fruits: those among them who believe in God and the Last Day.” He said, “Whosoever disbelieves, I will grant him enjoyment for a while, then I will compel him toward the punishment of the Fire. What an evil journey’s end!”
And [remember] when Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House, “Our Lord, accept [it] from us. Truly Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing
And, our Lord, make us submit unto Thee, and from our progeny a community submitting unto Thee, and show us our rites, and relent unto us. Truly Thou art the Relenting, the Merciful
Our Lord, raise up in their midst a messenger from among them, who will recite Thy signs to them, and will teach them the Book and Wisdom, and purify them. Truly Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.”
And who shuns the creed of Abraham, but a foolish soul? We chose him in the world and in the Hereafter he shall be among the righteous
And when his Lord said unto him, “Submit!” he said, “I submit to the Lord of the worlds.”
And Abraham enjoined the same upon his children, as did Jacob, “O my children, God has chosen for you the religion, so die not except in submission.”
Or were you witnesses when death came to Jacob, when he said to his children, “What will you worship after I am gone?” They said, “We shall worship thy God and the God of thy fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac: one God, and unto Him we submit.”
That is a community that has passed away. Theirs is what they earned and yours is what you earned, and you will not be questioned about that which they used to do
And they say, “Be Jews or Christians and you shall be rightly guided.” Say, “Rather, [ours is] the creed of Abraham, a ?anif, and he was not of the idolaters.”
Say, “We believe in God, and in that which was sent down unto us, and in that which was sent down unto Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and in what Moses and Jesus were given, and in what the prophets were given from their Lord. We make no distinction among any of them, and unto Him we submit.”
And if they believe in the like of what you believe in, then they shall be rightly guided. And if they turn away, then they are merely in schism and God will suffice you against them, and He is the Hearing, the Knowing
“The baptism of God, and who is better than God in baptism? And we are worshippers of Him.”
Say, “Will you dispute with us concerning God, while He is our Lord and your Lord? Unto us our deeds and unto you your deeds, and we are sincere toward Him.”
Or say you that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, “Do you know better, or does God?” And who does greater wrong than one who conceals a testimony he has from God? God is not heedless of what you do
That is a community that has passed away. Theirs is what they earned, and yours is what you earned, and you will not be questioned about that which they used to do
The fools among the people will say, “What has turned them away from the qiblah they had been following?” Say, “To God belong the East and the West. He guides whomsoever He will unto a straight path.”
Thus did We make you a middle community, that you may be witnesses for mankind and that the Messenger may be a witness for you. And We only appointed the qiblah that you had been following to know those who follow the Messenger from those who turn back on their heels, and it was indeed difficult, save for those whom God guided. But God would not let your belief be in vain. Truly God is Kind and Merciful unto mankind
We have seen the turning of thy face unto Heaven, and indeed We will turn thee toward a qiblah well pleasing to thee. So turn thy face toward the Sacred Mosque, and wheresoever you are, turn your faces toward it. Truly those who have been given the Book know that it is the truth from their Lord. And God is not heedless of what they do
And wert thou to bring every sign to those who were given the Book, they would not follow thy qiblah. Thou art not a follower of their qiblah, nor are they followers of one another’s qiblah. Wert thou to follow their caprices after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou wouldst be one of the wrongdoers
Those unto whom We have given the Book recognize it as they recognize their children, but a group of them knowingly conceal the truth
The truth is from thy Lord; so be thou not among the doubters
Everyone has a direction toward which he turns. So vie with one another in good deeds. Wheresoever you are, God will bring you all together. Truly God is Powerful over all things
And whencesoever thou goest out, turn thy face toward the Sacred Mosque. Indeed, it is the truth from thy Lord. And God is not heedless of what you do
And whencesoever thou goest out, turn thy face toward the Sacred Mosque, and wheresoever you may be, turn your faces toward it, so that the people may have no argument against you—not even those among them who do wrong. Fear them not, but fear Me—and so that I may complete My Blessing upon you, and that haply you may be guided
even as We sent among you a messenger from among you, who recites Our signs to you and purifies you, and teaches you the Book and Wisdom, and teaches you what you knew not
So remember Me, and I shall remember you. Give thanks unto Me, and disbelieve not in Me
O you who believe! Seek help in patience and prayer. Truly God is with the patient
And say not of those who are slain in the way of God, “They are dead.” Nay, they are alive, but you are unaware
And We will indeed test you with something of fear and hunger, and loss of wealth, souls, and fruits; and give glad tidings to the patient—
those who, when affliction befalls them, say, “Truly we are God’s, and unto Him we return.”
They are those upon whom come the blessings from their Lord, and compassion, and they are those who are rightly guided
Truly ?afa and Marwah are among the rituals of God; so whosoever performs the ?ajj to the House, or makes the ?umrah, there is no blame on him in going to and fro between them. And whosoever volunteers good, truly God is Thankful, Knowing
Truly those who conceal what We have sent down of clear proofs and guidance—after We made it clear to mankind in the Book—are those who are cursed by God and cursed by the cursers
save such as repent, and make amends, and make clear. They are those unto whom I relent. And I am the Relenting, the Merciful
Indeed, those who disbelieve, and die disbelievers, upon them shall be the curse of God, the angels, and mankind all together
Therein they shall abide: the punishment shall not be lightened for them, nor shall they be granted respite
Your God is one God, there is no god but He, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth; and the variation of the night and the day; and the ships that run upon the sea with what benefits mankind; and the water God sends down from the sky whereby He revives the earth after its death, scattering all manner of beast therein; and the shifting of the winds; and the clouds subdued between the sky and the earth are surely signs for a people who understand
Among mankind there are some who take up equals apart from God, loving them like loving God. But those who believe are more ardent in their love of God. If those who do wrong could but see, when they see the punishment, that power belongs altogether to God and that God is severe in punishment
when those who were followed disavow those who followed, and they see the punishment, while all recourse will be cut off from them
And those who followed will say, “If we had another turn, we would disavow them as they disavowed us.” Thus does God show them their deeds as a source of regret for them, and they shall not leave the Fire
O mankind! Eat of what is lawful and good on the earth, and follow not the footsteps of Satan. Truly he is a manifest enemy unto you
He only commands you to evil and indecency, and to say of God what you know not
When it is said unto them, “Follow what God has sent down,” they say, “Nay, we follow that which we found our fathers doing.” What! Even though their fathers understood nothing, and were not rightly guided
The parable of those who disbelieve is that of one who cries to that which hears only a call and a shout. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they do not understand
O you who believe! Eat of the good things We have provided you and give thanks to God if it is He Whom you worship
He has forbidden you only carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, and what has been offered to other than God. But whosoever is compelled by necessity—neither coveting nor transgressing—no sin shall be upon him. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Truly those who conceal what God sent down of the Book and sell it for a paltry price are those who eat naught but fire in their bellies. God will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them. Theirs shall be a painful punishment
They are those who have purchased error at the price of guidance, and punishment at the price of forgiveness. How will they endure the Fire
That is because God sent down the Book in truth. Truly those who differ concerning the Book are in extreme schism
It is not piety to turn your faces toward the east and west. Rather, piety is he who believes in God, the Last Day, the angels, the Book, and the prophets; and who gives wealth, despite loving it, to kinsfolk, orphans, the indigent, the traveler, beggars, and for [the ransom of] slaves; and performs the prayer and gives the alms; and those who fulfill their oaths when they pledge them, and those who are patient in misfortune, hardship, and moments of peril. It is they who are the sincere, and it is they who are the reverent
O you who believe! Retribution is prescribed for you in the matter of the slain: freeman for freeman, slave for slave, female for female. But for one who receives any pardon from his brother, let it be observed honorably, and let the restitution be made to him with goodness. That is an alleviation from your Lord, and a mercy. Whosoever transgresses after that shall have a painful punishment
In retribution there is life for you, O possessors of intellect, that haply you may be reverent
It is prescribed for you, when death approaches one of you and he leaves some good, to make a bequest for parents and kinsfolk in an honorable way—an obligation upon the reverent
Then if anyone alters it after hearing it, its sin shall indeed be upon those who alter it. Truly God is Hearing, Knowing
But whosoever fears injustice or sin from the testator, and sets matters aright between them, there is no sin upon him. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you, that haply you may be reverent
for days numbered. But if any one of you be ill or on a journey, it is a number of other days, and for those who can bear it, the ransom of feeding an indigent person. Whosoever volunteers good, that is better for him, and to fast is better for you, if you but knew
The month of Ramadan is that wherein the Quran was sent down as guidance to mankind, as clear proofs of guidance, and as the Criterion. Let him among you who is present fast during that [month]. And whosoever is ill or on a journey, it is a number of other days. God desires ease for you, and He does not desire hardship for you. [It is] so that you may complete the number and magnify God for having guided you, that haply you may give thanks
When My servants ask thee about Me, truly I am near. I answer the call of the caller when he calls Me. So let them respond to Me and believe in Me, that they may be led aright
You are permitted, on the nights of the fast, to go unto your wives. They are a garment for you, and you are a garment for them. God knew that you were betraying yourselves, so He relented unto you and pardoned you. So now lie with them and seek what God has prescribed for you, and eat and drink until the white thread and the black thread of the dawn become clear to you. Then complete the fast until nightfall and do not lie with them while you are in retreat in the mosques. Those are the limits set by God, so approach them not. Thus does God make clear His signs to mankind, that haply they may be reverent
And devour not your property among yourselves falsely, nor proffer it to judges that you may knowingly devour a part of people’s property sinfully
They ask thee about the new moons. Say, “They are markers of time for mankind and for the ?ajj.” It is not piety that you should come to houses from their rear, but piety is he who is reverent and comes into houses by their doors. So reverence God, that haply you may prosper
And fight in the way of God against those who fight against you, but do not transgress. Truly God loves not the transgressors
And slay them wheresoever you come upon them, and expel them whence they expelled you, for strife is worse than slaying. But do not fight with them near the Sacred Mosque until they fight with you there. But if they fight you, then slay them. Such is the recompense of the disbelievers
But if they desist, then truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And fight them until there is no strife, and religion is for God. But if they desist, then there is no enmity save against the wrongdoers
The sacred month for the sacred month, and retribution for forbidden things. So whosoever transgresses against you, transgress against him in like manner as he transgressed against you, and reverence God, and know that God is with the reverent
And spend in the way of God and do not, with your own hands, cast yourselves into ruin. And be virtuous. Truly God loves the virtuous
Complete the ?ajj and ?umrah for God, and if you are hindered, then [make] such offering as is easy. And do not shave your heads until the offering reaches its place of sacrifice. But whosoever among you is ill or has an ailment of his head, then [let there be] a ransom by fasting, charity, or rite. When you are safe, let those who enjoy the ?umrah ahead of the ?ajj [make] such offering as is easy. Whosoever finds not [the means], let him fast three days during the ?ajj, and seven when you return. That is ten altogether. This is for those whose family dwells not near the Sacred Mosque. And reverence God, and know that God is severe in retribution
The ?ajj is during months well known. Whosoever undertakes the ?ajj therein, let there be neither lewdness, nor iniquity, nor quarreling in the ?ajj. Whatsoever good you do, God knows it. And make provision, for indeed the best provision is reverence. And reverence Me, O possessors of intellect
There is no blame upon you in seeking a bounty from your Lord. Then, when you pour out from Arafat, remember God at the sacred ground. And remember Him as He guided you, though formerly you were of those astray
Then surge onward whence the people surge onward, and ask God for forgiveness. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And when you have carried out your rites, remember God as you remember your fathers, or with more ardent remembrance. For among mankind are those who say, “Our Lord, give to us in this world,” but have no share in the Hereafter
But among them are those who say, “Our Lord, give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter, and shield us from the punishment of the Fire!”
It is they who have a portion from what they have earned, and God is swift in reckoning
Remember God in days numbered, but whosoever hastens on after two days, no sin shall be upon him, and whosoever delays, no sin shall be upon him—for the reverent. So reverence God, and know that unto Him shall you be gathered
And among mankind is he whose talk of the life of this world impresses thee, and he calls God as witness to what is in his heart, though he is the fiercest of adversaries
And when he turns away he endeavors on the earth to work corruption therein, and to destroy tillage and offspring, but God loves not corruption
And when it is said to him, “Reverence God,” vainglory seizes him sinfully. Hell suffices him, what an evil resting place
And among mankind is one who sells his soul seeking God’s Good Pleasure, and God is Kind unto His servants
O you who believe! Enter into peace all together, and follow not the footsteps of Satan. Truly he is a manifest enemy unto you
And should you stumble after the clear proofs have come to you, then know that God is Mighty, Wise
Do they wait for naught less than that God should come in the shadows of clouds, with the angels, and that the matter should have been decreed? And unto God are all matters returned
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear proofs We gave them. And whosoever alters the Blessing of God after it has come to him, truly God is severe in retribution
The life of this world is made to seem fair unto those who disbelieve, and they ridicule those who believe. But those who are reverent shall be above them on the Day of Resurrection. And God provides for whomsoever He will without reckoning
Mankind was one community; then God sent the prophets as bearers of glad tidings and as warners. And with them He sent down the Book in truth, to judge among mankind concerning that wherein they differed. And only they who were given it differed concerning it, after clear proofs came to them, out of envy among themselves. Then God guided those who believe to the truth of that wherein they differed, by His Leave. And God guides whomsoever He will unto a straight path
Or did you suppose that you would enter the Garden without there having come to you the like of that which came to those who passed away before you? Misfortune and hardship befell them, and they were so shaken that the Messenger and those who believed with him said, “When will God’s Help come?” Yea, surely God’s Help is near
They ask thee what they should spend. Say, “Let whatever of your wealth you spend be for parents, kinsfolk, orphans, the indigent, and the traveler. Whatever good you do, truly God knows it.”
Fighting has been prescribed for you, though it is hateful to you. But it may be that you hate a thing though it be good for you, and it may be that you love a thing though it be evil for you. God knows, and you know not
They ask thee about the sacred month—about fighting therein. Say, “Fighting therein is grave, but turning [others] from the way of God—and disbelieving in Him—and from the Sacred Mosque, and expelling its people, is graver in the sight of God. Strife is graver than slaying.” And they will not cease to fight you until they make you renounce your religion, if they are able. Whosoever among you renounces his religion and dies as a disbeliever, their deeds have come to naught in this world and the Hereafter, and they are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein
Truly those who believe and those who emigrate and strive in the way of God—it is they who hope for the Mercy of God. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
They ask thee about wine and gambling. Say, “In them there is great sin and [some] benefits for mankind, but their sin is greater than their benefit.” They ask thee what they should spend. Say, “What can be spared.” Thus does God make clear unto you the signs, that haply you may reflect
upon this world and the Hereafter. And they ask thee about orphans. Say, “Setting matters aright for them is best. And if you intermingle with them, they are your brothers. And God knows the one who works corruption from one who sets aright, and had God willed, He would have put you to hardship. Truly God is Mighty, Wise.”
Marry not idolatresses until they believe. Truly a believing slave woman is better than an idolatress, though she be pleasing to you. And marry none to the idolaters until they believe. Truly a believing slave is better than an idolater, though he should impress you. They are those who call unto the Fire, but God calls unto the Garden and forgiveness, by His leave, and makes clear His signs to mankind, that haply they may remember
They ask thee concerning menstruation. Say, “It is a hurt, so keep away from women during menses, and do not approach them until they are purified. And when they are purified, go in unto them in the way God has commanded you.” Truly God loves those who repent, and He loves those who purify themselves
Your women are a tilth to you, so go unto your tilth as you will, but send forth for your souls. And reverence God and know that you shall meet Him, and give glad tidings to the believers
And make not God a hindrance, through your oaths, to being pious and reverent and to making peace between people. And God is Hearing, Knowing
God will not take you to task for carelessness in your oaths. Rather, He will take you to task for what your hearts have earned, and God is Forgiving, Clement
Those who forswear their wives shall wait four months. And if they return, God is Forgiving, Merciful
But if they resolve on divorce, truly God is Hearing, Knowing
Divorced women shall wait by themselves for three courses, and it is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in their wombs, if they believe in God and the Last Day. And their husbands have better right to restore them during that time, if they desire to make peace. [The women] are owed obligations the like of those they owe, in an honorable way. And men have a degree over them, and God is Mighty, Wise
Divorce is twice; then keep [her] honorably, or release [her] virtuously. It is not lawful for you to take aught from what you have given [your wives], except that the two should fear that they would not uphold the limits set by God. So if you fear that they will not uphold the limits set by God, there is no blame upon the two in what she may give in ransom. These are the limits set by God; so transgress not against them. And whosoever transgresses against the limits set by God, it is they who are the wrongdoers
Should he then divorce her, she is no longer lawful for him until she marries a husband other than him. And should he divorce her there is no blame upon the two to return to each other, if they deem that they shall uphold the limits set by God. These are the limits set by God, which He makes clear to a people who know
And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled their term, keep them honorably or release them honorably, and do not keep them so as to cause harm and thus transgress. Whosoever does that surely wrongs himself. And do not take God’s signs in mockery, and remember God’s Blessing upon you, and what He sent down to you of the Book and Wisdom, exhorting you thereby. And reverence God, and know that God is Knower of all things
And when you have divorced women and they have fulfilled their term, do not hinder them from marrying their husbands when they have consented to each other honorably. Therewith are counseled those among you who believe in God and the Last Day. That is more virtuous and purer for you. God knows, and you know not
And let mothers nurse their children two full years, for such as desire to complete the suckling. It falls on the father to provide for them and clothe them honorably. No soul is tasked beyond its capacity. Let no mother be harmed on account of her child, nor father on account of his child. And the like shall fall upon the heir. If the couple desire to wean, by their mutual consent and consultation, there is no blame upon them. And if you wish to have your children wet-nursed, there is no blame upon you if you pay honorably that which you give. And reverence God, and know that God sees whatsoever you do
And those among you who are taken by death and leave behind wives, let them wait by themselves four months and ten days. And when they have fulfilled their term, then there is no blame upon you in what they do concerning themselves in an honorable way. And God is Aware of whatsoever you do
And there is no blame upon you in intimating a proposal to [these] women, or in keeping it within yourselves. God knows that you mean to seek them in marriage, but do not pledge your troth with them secretly save that you speak in an honorable way, and resolve not upon the marriage tie until the term prescribed is fulfilled. And know that God knows what is within your souls; so beware of Him, and know that God is Forgiving, Clement
There is no blame upon you if you divorce women not having touched them or not having designated a bridewealth. But provide for them—the wealthy according to his means, the straitened according to his means—an honorable provision: an obligation upon the virtuous
And if you divorce them before touching them or designating a bridewealth, then [it shall be] half of what you designated, unless they forgo it or he whose hand holds the marriage tie forgoes. And to forgo is nearer to reverence. Forget not bounteousness among yourselves. Truly God sees whatsoever you do
Be mindful of your prayers, and the middlemost prayer, and stand before God in devout obedience
But if you are fearful, then on foot or mounted. Then when you are secure, remember God, as He taught you what you knew not
And those among you who are taken by death and leave behind wives, [let them] bequeath to their wives provision for the year, without turning them out. But if they leave, there is no blame upon you in that which they do concerning themselves honorably. And God is Mighty, Wise
And for divorced women an honorable provision—an obligation upon the reverent
Thus does God make clear unto you His signs, that haply you may understand
Hast thou not seen those who left their homes by the thousands fearing death? Whereupon God said to them, “Die,” then revived them. Truly God is Possessed of Bounty for mankind, but most of mankind do not give thanks
So fight in the way of God, and know that God is Hearing, Knowing
Who shall lend unto God a goodly loan, which He will multiply for him many times over? And God withholds and outstretches, and unto Him shall you be returned
Hast thou not seen the assembly of the Children of Israel, after Moses, when they said to a prophet of theirs, “Raise up a king for us, that we may fight in the way of God.” He said, “Might it be that, were fighting prescribed for you, you would not fight?” They said, “And why should we not fight in the way of God, having been expelled from our homes and [away from] our children?” Then when fighting was prescribed for them they turned back, save a few among them. And God knows well the wrongdoers
And their prophet said to them, “Truly God has raised up Saul for you as king.” They said, “How shall he have sovereignty over us while we have more right to sovereignty than he, and he has not been given abundance of wealth?” He said, “Truly God has chosen him over you, and has increased him amply in knowledge and body.” And God gives His Sovereignty to whomsoever He will, and God is All-Encompassing, Knowing
And their prophet said to them, “Truly the sign of his sovereignty shall be that the ark come to you bearing tranquility from your Lord and a remnant left by the House of Moses and the House of Aaron, borne by the angels. Truly in that is a sign for you, if you are believers.”
And when Saul set out with the hosts he said, “Truly God will try you with a stream. Whosoever drinks from it is not of me, and whosoever tastes not of it is of me—save one who scoops out a handful.” But they drank from it, save a few among them. So when he crossed it, he and those who believed with him, they said, “We have no power today against Goliath and his hosts.” Those who deemed they would meet their Lord said, “How many a small company have overcome a large company by God’s leave! And God is with the patient.”
And when they went forth against Goliath and his hosts they said, “Our Lord, pour patience upon us, make firm our steps, and help us against the disbelieving people.”
And they routed them, by God’s leave, and David slew Goliath, and God gave him sovereignty and wisdom, and taught him of what He wills. And were it not for God’s repelling people, some by means of others, the earth would have been corrupted. But God is Possessed of Bounty for the worlds
These are God’s signs which We recite unto thee in truth, and truly thou art among the messengers
Those are the messengers. We have favored some above others. Among them are those to whom God spoke, and some He raised up in ranks. And We gave Jesus son of Mary clear proofs and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Had God so willed, those who came after them would not have fought one another after the clear proofs had come to them. But they differed: among them were those who believed, and among them were those who disbelieved. And had God so willed, they would not have fought one another. But God does as He wills
O you who believe! Spend from that which We have provided you before a day comes wherein there shall be neither bargaining, nor friendship, nor intercession. And the disbelievers, they are the wrongdoers
God, there is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Subsisting. Neither slumber overtakes Him nor sleep. Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. Who is there who may intercede with Him save by His leave? He knows that which is before them and that which is behind them. And they encompass nothing of His Knowledge, save what He wills. His Pedestal embraces the heavens and the earth. Protecting them tires Him not, and He is the Exalted, the Magnificent
There is no coercion in religion. Sound judgment has become clear from error. So whosoever disavows false deities and believes in God has grasped the most unfailing handhold, which never breaks. And God is Hearing, Knowing
God is the Protector of those who believe. He brings them out of the darkness into the light. As for those who disbelieve, their protectors are the idols, bringing them out of the light into the darkness. They are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein
Hast thou not considered him who disputed with Abraham about his Lord because God had given him sovereignty? When Abraham said, “My Lord gives life and causes death,” he said, “I give life and cause death.” Abraham said, “Truly God brings the sun from the east. Bring it, then, from the west.” Thus was he who disbelieved confounded. And God guides not wrongdoing people
Or [think of] the like of him who passed by a town as it lay fallen upon its roofs. He said, “How shall God give life to this after its death?” So God caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him up. He said, “How long hast thou tarried?” He said, “I tarried a day or part of a day.” He said, “Nay, thou hast tarried a hundred years. Look, then, at thy food and thy drink—they have not spoiled. And look at thy donkey. And [this was done] that We may make thee a sign for mankind. And look at the bones, how We set them up, then clothe them with flesh.” When it became clear to him he said, “I know that God has power over all things.”
And when Abraham said, “My Lord, show me how Thou givest life to the dead,” He said, “Dost thou not believe?” He said, “Yea, indeed, but so that my heart may be at peace.” He said, “Take four birds and make them be drawn to thee. Then place a piece of them on every mountain. Then call them: they will come to thee in haste. And know that God is Mighty, Wise.”
The parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of God is that of a grain that grows seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains. And God multiplies for whomsoever He will, and God is All-Encompassing, Knowing
Those who spend their wealth in the way of God and then follow not what they spent with preening or injury shall have their reward with their Lord, and no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
An honorable word and forgiveness are better than an act of charity followed by injury. And God is Self-Sufficient, Clement
O you who believe! Do not annul your acts of charity through preening and injury, like he who spends his wealth to be seen of men and believes not in God and the Last Day. His parable is that of a smooth rock with dust upon it: a downpour strikes it, and leaves it barren. They have no power over anything of what they earned. And God guides not the disbelieving people
And the parable of those who spend their wealth seeking God’s Good Pleasure, and out of a confirmation in their souls, is that of a garden upon a hill: a downpour strikes it, and brings forth its fruit twofold. And if a downpour strikes it not, then a soft rain. And God sees whatsoever you do
Would any one of you wish to have a garden of date palms and grapevines with rivers running below, partaking therein of every kind of fruit, old age then befalling him while he had weakly progeny, and a whirlwind with fire then befalling it, such that it is consumed? Thus does God make clear unto you the signs, that haply you may reflect
O you who believe! Spend of the good things you have earned and of that which We have brought forth for you from the earth, and seek not the bad, spending of it though you would not take it without shutting your eyes to it. And know that God is Self-Sufficient, Praised
Satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to indecency. And God promises you forgiveness from Him, and bounty. And God is All-Encompassing, Knowing
He grants wisdom to whomsoever He will. And whosoever is granted wisdom has been granted much good. Yet none remember save the possessors of intellect
And whatever sum you spend, or vow you vow, truly God knows it. And the wrongdoers shall have no helpers
If you disclose your acts of charity, that is well. But if you hide them and give to the poor, that is better for you, and will acquit you of some of your evil deeds. And God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Thou art not tasked with their guidance, but God guides whomsoever He will. Whatever good you spend, it is for yourselves, when you spend only seeking the Face of God. And whatever good you spend shall be paid to you in full, and you shall not be wronged
[It is] for the poor who are constrained in the way of God, who are not able to travel the earth. The ignorant one supposes them to be wealthy because of their restraint. Thou knowest them by their mark: they do not ask of people importunately. And whatever good you spend, truly God knows it
Those who spend their wealth by night and by day, secretly and openly, shall have their reward with their Lord. No fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
Those who devour usury shall not rise except as one rises who is felled by the touch of Satan. That is because they say, “Buying and selling are simply like usury,” though God has permitted buying and selling and forbidden usury. One who, after receiving counsel from his Lord, desists shall have what is past and his affair goes to God. And as for those who go back, they are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein
God blights usury and causes acts of charity to grow. And God loves not any sinful ingrate
Truly those who believe, perform righteous deeds, maintain the prayer, and give the alms shall have their reward with their Lord. No fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
O you who believe! Reverence God, and leave what remains of usury, if you are believers
And if you do not, then take notice of a war from God and His Messenger. If you repent, you shall have the principal of your wealth, and you shall neither wrong nor be wronged
And if one is in difficult circumstances, let there be a respite until there is ease, and it is better for you to give [it] as charity, if you but knew
And be mindful of a day when you shall be returned to God. Then every soul will be paid in full for what it earned, and they shall not be wronged
O you who believe! When you contract a debt with one another for a term appointed, write it down. And let a scribe write between you justly, and let not any scribe refuse to write as God taught him. So let him write, and let the debtor dictate, and let him reverence God his Lord, and diminish nothing from it. And if the debtor is feeble-minded or is weak, or is unable to dictate himself, then let his guardian dictate justly. And call to witness two witnesses from among your men, and if there are not two men, then a man and two women from among those whom you approve as witnesses, so that if one of the two errs, the other can remind her. Let not the witnesses refuse when they are called, and be not averse to write it down, small or great, with its term. That is more equitable with God, more sure for the testimony, and more likely to keep you from doubt. Unless it is trade of present goods that you transact between yourselves: then there is no blame upon you not to write it. And take witnesses when you buy and sell between yourselves. And let neither scribe nor witness be harmed. Were you to do that, it would be iniquitous of you. And reverence God. God teaches you, and God is Knower of all things
And if you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then let there be a pledge in hand. And if one of you trusts the other, let him who is trusted deliver his trust, and let him reverence God his Lord. And conceal not the testimony. Whosoever conceals it, truly his heart is sinful. And God knows whatsoever you do
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. And whether you disclose what is in your souls or hide it, God will bring you to account for it. He forgives whomsoever He will, and punishes whomsoever He will, and God is Powerful over all things
The Messenger believes in what was sent down to him from his Lord, as do the believers. Each believes in God, His angels, His Books, and His messengers. “We make no distinction between any of His messengers.” And they say, “We hear and obey. Thy forgiveness, our Lord! And unto Thee is the journey’s end.”
God tasks no soul beyond its capacity. It shall have what it has earned and be subject to what it has perpetrated. “Our Lord, take us not to task if we forget or err! Our Lord, lay not upon us a burden like Thou laid upon those before us. Our Lord, impose not upon us that which we have not the strength to bear! And pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy upon us! Thou art our Master, so help us against the disbelieving people.”
Alif. Lam. Mim
God, there is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Subsisting
He sent down the Book upon thee in truth, confirming what was before it, and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
aforetime, as a guidance to mankind. And He sent down the Criterion. Truly those who disbelieve in the signs of God shall have a severe punishment. And God is Mighty, Possessor of Vengeance
Truly naught is hidden from God on earth or in Heaven
He it is Who forms you in the wombs however He will. There is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise
He it is Who has sent down the Book upon thee; therein are signs determined; they are the Mother of the Book, and others symbolic. As for those whose hearts are given to swerving, they follow that of it which is symbolic, seeking temptation and seeking its interpretation. And none know its interpretation save God and those firmly rooted in knowledge. They say, “We believe in it; all is from our Lord.” And none remember, save those who possess intellect
“Our Lord, make not our hearts swerve after having guided us, and bestow upon us a mercy from Thy Presence. Truly Thou art the Bestower
Our Lord, Thou art the Gatherer of mankind unto a Day about which there is no doubt.” Truly God will not fail the tryst
As for those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against God. And it is they who shall be fuel for the Fire
[It is] like the affair of the House of Pharaoh and those who were before them; they denied Our signs. So God seized them for their sins, and God is severe in retribution
Say to the disbelievers, “You shall be vanquished and gathered unto Hell, an evil resting place!”
There was a sign for you in the two hosts that met, one host fighting in the way of God and the other disbelieving, whom they [the former] saw as twice themselves as the eye sees. And God strengthens by His help whomsoever He will. Truly in that is a lesson for those who possess insight
Made to seem fair unto mankind is the love of passions, among them women, children, hoarded heaps of gold and silver, horses of mark, cattle, and tillage. Those are the enjoyment of the life of this world. And God, with Him is the beautiful return
Say, “Shall I inform you of what is better than that? For those who are reverent, there shall be with their Lord Gardens with rivers running below—they shall abide therein—and spouses made pure, and Contentment from God.” And God sees His servants
who say, “Our Lord, truly we believe, so forgive us our sins, and shield us from the punishment of the Fire,”
the patient, the truthful, the devoutly obedient, those who spend, those who seek forgiveness before dawn
God bears witness that there is no god but He, as do the angels and the possessors of knowledge, upholding justice. There is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise
Truly the religion in the sight of God is submission. Those who were given the Book differed not until after knowledge had come to them, out of envy among themselves. And whosoever disbelieves in God’s signs, truly God is swift in reckoning
So if they dispute with thee, say, “I submit my face to God, and so too those who follow me.” And say to those who were given the Book and to the unlettered ones, “Do you submit?” Then if they submit, they will be rightly guided, but if they turn away, then thine is only to convey. And God sees His servants
Truly those who disbelieve in God’s signs and kill the prophets without right, and kill those who enjoin justice among mankind: give them glad tidings of a painful punishment
They are those whose deeds have come to naught in this world and in the Hereafter, and they shall have no helpers
Hast thou not considered those who were given a portion of the Book, [being] called to the Book of God that it may judge between them. Then a group among them turned away
That is because they say, “The Fire will not touch us save for days numbered.” That which they used to fabricate has deluded them in their religion
How shall it be when We gather them unto a Day in which there is no doubt, and every soul will be paid in full for what it earned, and they shall not be wronged
Say, “O God, Master of Sovereignty. Thou givest sovereignty to whomsoever Thou wilt, and wrestest sovereignty from whomsoever Thou wilt. Thou exaltest whomsoever Thou wilt, and abasest whomsoever Thou wilt. In Thy Hand is the good. Truly Thou art Powerful over everything
Thou makest the night pass into the day, and Thou makest the day pass into the night. Thou bringest forth the living from the dead, and Thou bringest forth the dead from the living. And Thou providest for whomsoever Thou wilt without reckoning.”
Let not the believers take the disbelievers as protectors apart from the believers. Whosoever does that has no bond with God, unless you guard against them out of prudence. And God warns you of Himself, and unto God is the journey’s end
Say, “If you hide what is in your breasts or disclose it, God knows it, and He knows whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth.” And God is Powerful over all things
On the Day when every soul will find presented the good it did, and the evil it did, it will wish that there might be a distant term between it and itself. And God warns you of Himself, and God is Kind unto His servants
Say, “If you love God, follow me, and God will love you and forgive you your sins. And God is Forgiving, Merciful.”
Say, “Obey God and obey the Messenger.” If they turn away, then truly God loves not the disbelievers
Truly God chose Adam, Noah, the House of Abraham, and the House of ?Imran above the worlds
as progeny, one from another. And God is Hearing, Knowing
[Remember] when the wife of ?Imran said, “My Lord, truly I dedicate to Thee what is in my belly, in consecration. So accept it from me. Truly Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing.”
And when she bore her, she said, “My Lord, I have borne a female,” and God knows best what she bore, and the male is not like the female, “and I have named her Mary, and I seek refuge for her in Thee, and for her progeny, from Satan the outcast.”
So her Lord accepted her with a beautiful acceptance, and made her to grow in a beautiful way, and placed her under the care of Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah entered upon her in the sanctuary he found provision with her. He said, “Mary, whence comes this unto thee?” She said, “It is from God. Truly God provides for whomsoever He will without reckoning.”
Then and there, Zachariah called upon his Lord. He said, “My Lord, grant me from Thy Presence a good progeny. Truly Thou hearest all calls!”
Then the angels called to him while he was praying in the sanctuary, “God gives thee glad tidings of John, confirming a word from God, noble and chaste, a prophet, from among the righteous.”
He said, “My Lord, how shall I have a boy when age has overtaken me and my wife is barren?” He said, “Thus does God do whatsoever He will.”
He said, “My Lord, appoint for me a sign.” He said, “Your sign is that you shall not speak to the people for three days, save through signs.” And remember your Lord much, and glorify [Him] at eventide and at dawn
And [remember] when the angels said, “O Mary, truly God has chosen thee and purified thee, and has chosen thee above the women of the worlds
O Mary! Be devoutly obedient to thy Lord, prostrate, and bow with those who bow.”
This is from the tidings of the Unseen, which We reveal unto thee. And thou wast not with them when they cast their lots [to choose] who among them would care for Mary, and thou wast not with them when they were disputing
When the angels said, “O Mary, truly God gives thee glad tidings of a Word from Him, whose name is the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, high honored in this world and the Hereafter, and one of those brought nigh
He will speak to people in the cradle and in maturity, and will be among the righteous.”
She said, “My Lord, how shall I have a child while no human being has touched me?” He said, “Thus does God create whatsoever He will.” When He decrees a thing, He only says to it, “Be!” and it is
And He will teach him the Book, Wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel
And [he will be] a messenger to the Children of Israel, “Truly I have brought you a sign from your Lord. I will create for you out of clay the shape of a bird. Then I will breathe into it, and it will be a bird by God’s Leave. And I will heal the blind and the leper and give life to the dead by God’s Leave. And I will inform you about what you eat and what you store up in your houses. Truly in that is a sign for you, if you are believers
And [I come] confirming that which was before me, the Torah, and to make lawful unto you part of that which was forbidden unto you. And I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. So reverence God and obey me
Truly God is my Lord and your Lord; so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
And when Jesus sensed disbelief in them, he said, “Who are my helpers unto God?” The apostles said, “We are God’s helpers. We believe in God; bear witness that we are submitters
Our Lord, we believe in what Thou hast sent down, and we follow the messenger, so inscribe us among the witnesses.”
And they plotted, and God plotted. And God is the best of plotters
when He said, “O Jesus, I shall take thee and raise thee unto Me, and purify thee of those who disbelieved, and place those who followed thee above those who disbelieved, until the Day of Resurrection. Then unto Me is your return, and I shall judge between you concerning that wherein you used to differ
And as for those who disbelieve, I shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and the Hereafter; and they shall have no helpers
And as for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, He shall pay them their rewards in full. And God loves not the wrongdoers.”
This is what We recite unto thee of the signs and the Wise Reminder
Truly the likeness of Jesus in the sight of God is that of Adam; He created him from dust, then said to him, “Be!” and he was
The truth is from thy Lord; so be not among the doubters
And to whomsoever disputes with thee over it, after the knowledge that has come unto thee, say, “Come! Let us call upon our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves. Then let us pray earnestly, so as to place the curse of God upon those who lie.”
This is indeed the true account; there is no god but God, and truly God is the Mighty, the Wise
And if they turn away, then God knows well the workers of corruption
Say, “O People of the Book! Come to a word common between us and you, that we shall worship none but God, shall not associate aught with Him, and shall not take one another as lords apart from God.” And if they turn away, then say, “Bear witness that we are submitters.” e
People of the Book! Why do you dispute concerning Abraham, as neither the Torah nor the Gospel was sent down until after him? Do you not understand
Behold! You are the very same who dispute concerning that of which you have knowledge; so why do you dispute concerning that of which you have no knowledge? God knows, and you know not
Abraham was neither Jew nor Christian, but rather was a ?anif, a submitter, and he was not one of the idolaters
Truly the people worthiest of Abraham are those who followed him, and this prophet and those who believe. And God is the Protector of the believers
A group among the People of the Book wishes to make you go astray; yet they make none go astray but themselves, though they are unaware
People of the Book! Why do you disbelieve in God’s signs, while you are witness
People of the Book! Why do you confound the truth with falsehood, and knowingly conceal the truth
And a group of the People of the Book say, “Believe in what was sent down unto those who believe at the start of the day, and disbelieve at its end, that haply they may return
And believe none but him who follows your religion. Say, “Truly guidance is God’s Guidance" lest anyone be granted the like of what you were granted or dispute with you before your Lord.” Say, “Truly bounty is in God’s Hand. He grants it to whomsoever He will, and God is All-Encompassing, Knowing.”
He selects for His Mercy whomsoever He will, and God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
Among the People of the Book is one who, were you to entrust to him a quintal, would render it back to you. And among them is one who, were you to entrust to him a dinar, would not render it back to you unless you kept standing over him. That is because they say, “There is nothing to stop us when it comes to the non-Jews.” But they knowingly speak a lie against God
Yea! Whosoever fulfills his pact and is reverent—truly God loves the reverent
Truly those who sell God’s Pact and their oaths for a paltry price, they shall have no share in the Hereafter and God will not speak to them, nor will He look at them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them. And theirs shall be a painful punishment
And there is indeed a group among them who twist their tongues with the Book, that you may suppose it to be from the Book. But it is not from the Book. And they say, “It is from God,” though it is not from God. And they knowingly speak a lie against God
It is not for any human being, God having given him the Book, judgment, and prophethood, to then say to the people, “Be servants of me instead of God.” Rather, “Be sages, from having taught the Book and from having studied.”
And he would not command you to take the angels and the prophets as lords. Would he command you to disbelief after your having been submitters
And [remember] when God made the covenant of the prophets: “By that which I have given you of a Book and Wisdom, should a messenger then come to you confirming that which is with you, you shall surely believe in him and you shall help him.” He said, “Do you agree and take on My burden on these conditions?” They said, “We agree.” He said, “Bear witness, for I am with you among those who bear witness.”
Then whosoever turns away after that, they are the iniquitous
Do they seek other than God’s religion, while whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth submits to Him, willingly or unwillingly, and unto Him they will be returned
Say, “We believe in God and what has been sent down upon us, and in what was sent down upon Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and in what Moses, Jesus, and the prophets were given from their Lord. We make no distinction among any of them, and unto Him we submit.”
Whosoever seeks a religion other than submission, it shall not be accepted of him, and in the Hereafter he shall be among the losers
How shall God guide a people who have disbelieved after having believed, having borne witness that the Messenger is true, and the clear proofs having come to them? And God guides not wrongdoing people
They are those whose recompense is that upon them shall be the curse of God, the angels, and mankind all together
abiding therein; the punishment shall not be lightened for them, nor shall they be granted respite
except those who repent after that, and make amends, for truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Truly those who disbelieve after having believed, then increase in disbelief, their repentance shall not be accepted, and they are the ones who are astray
Truly those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers, an earth full of gold would not be accepted from any one of them, were he to offer it in ransom. For them there shall be a painful punishment, and they shall have no helpers
You will never attain piety till you spend from that which you love. And whatever you spend, truly God knows it
All food was lawful unto the Children of Israel, save what Israel had forbidden for himself, before the Torah was sent down. Say, “Bring the Torah and recite it, if you are truthful.”
So whosoever fabricates a lie against God after that, it is they who are the wrongdoers
Say, “God has spoken true. So follow the creed of Abraham, a ?anif, and he was not of the idolaters.”
Truly the first house established for mankind was that at Bakkah, full of blessing and a guidance for the worlds
Therein are clear signs: the station of Abraham, and whosoever enters it shall be secure. Pilgrimage to the House is a duty upon mankind before God for those who can find a way. For whosoever disbelieves, truly God is beyond need of the worlds
Say, “O People of the Book! Why do you disbelieve in God’s signs, while God is Witness over what you do?”
Say, “O People of the Book! Why do you turn those who believe from the way of God, seeking to make it crooked, while you are witnesses? And God is not heedless of what you do.”
O you who believe! If you obey a group among those who were given the Book, they will render you disbelievers after your having believed
How can you disbelieve, while God’s signs are recited unto you and His Messenger is among you? And whosoever holds fast to God is indeed guided unto a straight path
O you who believe! Reverence God as He should be reverenced, and die not except in submission
And hold fast to the rope of God, all together, and be not divided. Remember the Blessing of God upon you, when you were enemies and He joined your hearts, such that you became brothers by His Blessing. You were on the brink of a pit of fire and He delivered you from it. Thus does God make clear unto you His signs, that haply you may be rightly guided
Let there be among you a community calling to the good, enjoining right, and forbidding wrong. It is they who shall prosper
And be not like those who became divided and differed after the clear proofs had come to them. And it is they who shall have a great punishment
on the Day when faces whiten and faces blacken. As for those whose faces blacken, “Did you disbelieve after having believed? Then taste the punishment for having disbelieved.”
And as for those whose faces whiten, they will be in the Mercy of God, abiding therein
These are God’s signs which We recite unto thee in truth, and God desires no wrong for the worlds
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and unto God are all matters returned
You are the best community brought forth unto mankind, enjoining right, forbidding wrong, and believing in God. And were the People of the Book to believe, that would be better for them. Among them are believers, but most of them are iniquitous
They will not harm you save a [trifling] hurt. And if they fight you, they will turn their backs upon you; then they will not be helped
They shall be struck with abasement wherever they are come upon, save by means of a rope from God and a rope from mankind. And they shall earn a burden of wrath from God, and they shall be struck with indigence. That is because they used to disbelieve in God’s signs and kill the prophets without right. That is for their having disobeyed and transgressed
They are not all alike. Among the People of the Book is an upright community who recite God’s signs in the watches of the night, while they prostrate
They believe in God and the Last Day, enjoin right and forbid wrong, and hasten unto good deeds. And they are among the righteous
Whatsoever good they do, they will not be denied it. And God knows the reverent
Truly those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against God. They are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein
The parable of what they spend in this life of the world is that of a frigid wind that strikes the tillage of a people who have wronged themselves, destroying it. God wrongs them not, but themselves do they wrong
O you who believe! Take not intimates apart from yourselves; they will not stint you in corruption. They wish you to suffer. Hatred has appeared from their mouths; yet what their breasts conceal is greater. We have indeed made clear the signs for you, were you to understand
Lo! You are the ones who love them, while they love you not, though you believe in the Book entire. And when they meet you they say, “We believe,” but when they are alone they bite their fingers at you from rage. Say, “Die in your rage!” Truly God knows what lies within breasts
If good befalls you, it vexes them, and if evil befalls you, they rejoice in it. But if you are patient and reverent, their plot will not harm you in the least. Truly God encompasses what they do
And remember when thou didst leave thy household at daybreak to assign the believers their positions for the battle. And God is Hearing, Knowing
Remember when two companies among you were on the verge of losing heart, though God was their Protector. And in God let the believers trust
God certainly helped you at Badr, when you were lowly. So reverence God, that haply you may give thanks
Remember when thou saidst unto the believers, “Is it not enough for you that your Lord should support you with three thousand angels sent down?”
Yea, if you are patient and reverent, and they come at you immediately, your Lord will support you with five thousand angels bearing marks
God made it not save as a glad tiding for you, and that your hearts may repose thereby—and there is no victory save from God, the Mighty, the Wise—
that He may cut off a faction of those who disbelieve or abase them, so that they be turned back disappointed
Naught is thine in the matter, whether He relent unto them or punish them, for truly they are wrongdoers
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. He forgives whomsoever He will and punishes whomsoever He will, and God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! Devour not usury, doubling and multiplying. And reverence God, that haply you may prosper
And be mindful of the Fire that has been prepared for the disbelievers
And obey God and the Messenger, that haply you may receive mercy
And hasten unto forgiveness from your Lord, and for a garden whose breadth is the heavens and the earth—prepared for the reverent
who spend in ease and hardship, and curb their rage, and pardon others—and God loves the virtuous—
and who, when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves, remember God and then seek forgiveness for their sins—and who forgives sins but God?—and who do not knowingly persist in what they have done
For these, their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein. Blessed indeed is the reward of the workers [of righteousness]
Wonts have passed before you; so journey upon the earth and behold how the deniers fared in the end
This is an exposition for mankind, and a guidance and exhortation for the reverent
Do not falter and do not grieve, for you will be ascendant if you are believers
If a wound afflicts you, a like wound has already afflicted that people. And such days We hand out in turns to mankind. And [this is] so that God may know those who believe, and take witnesses from among you—and God loves not the wrongdoers—
and so that God may assay those who believe and blight the disbelievers
Or did you suppose that you would enter the Garden without God knowing those among you who strived, and without knowing those who were patient
You did indeed long for death before you met it. Now you have seen it, looking on
Muhammad is naught but a messenger; messengers have passed before him. So if he dies or is slain, will you turn back on your heels? Whosoever turns back on his heels will not harm God in the least, and God will reward the thankful
It is not for any soul to die save by God’s Leave—an enjoined term. Yet whosoever desires the reward of this world, We shall give him of it; and whosoever desires the reward of the Hereafter, We shall give him of it. And We shall reward the thankful
How many a prophet had many devoted men fight alongside him! They did not then falter in the face of what befell them in the way of God, nor did they weaken, nor did they demean themselves. And God loves the patient
Their words were but to say, “Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our prodigality in our affairs, and make firm our steps, and help us against the disbelieving people.”
And God gave them the reward of this world and the most beautiful reward of the Hereafter, and God loves the virtuous
O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will turn you back on your heels; then you will be overturned as losers
Rather, God is your Master, and He is the best of helpers
We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve for having ascribed partners unto God, for which He has not sent down any authority. And their refuge shall be the Fire, and evil is the abode of the wrongdoers
And God certainly was true to His Promise to you when you were eradicating them by His Leave, until the moment you lost heart, and quarreled with one another about the matter, and disobeyed, after He had showed you that which you loved. Among you are those who desire this world, and among you are those who desire the Hereafter. Then He turned you from them, to test you, and He certainly pardoned you—God is Possessed of Bounty for the believers—
when you were climbing, casting a glance to no one, while the Messenger was calling you from your rear. So He recompensed you with sorrow upon sorrow, that you may not grieve over what escaped you or what befell you. And God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Then He sent down upon you—after sorrow—security, a sleepiness enveloping a company among you, while a company were anxious over themselves, thinking about God what is not true—the thinking of the Age of Ignorance—saying, “Do we have any decision [in this]?” Say, “The decision belongs entirely to God.” They hide in their souls what they do not disclose to you, saying, “Had we any decision [in this], we would not have been slain here.” Say, “Had you stayed in your houses, those who were destined to be slain would have gone out to their places of rest.” And [this is] so that God may test what is in your breasts and so that He may assay what is in your hearts. And God knows what lies within breasts
Those of you who turned away on the day the two hosts met—Satan alone made them slip because of part of what they committed. And God certainly pardoned them; truly God is Forgiving, Clement
O you who believe! Be not like those who disbelieve and say of their brethren when they travel upon the earth or campaign, “Had they stayed with us, they would not have died and been slain,” that God may make that a source of regret in their hearts. And God gives life and causes death, and God sees whatsoever you do
And indeed if you are slain or die in the way of God, truly forgiveness and mercy from God are better than what they amass
And indeed if you are slain or die, truly unto God shall you be gathered
Then [it was] by a mercy from God that thou wert gentle with them. Hadst thou been severe [and] hard-hearted they would have scattered from about thee. So pardon them, ask forgiveness for them, and consult them in affairs. And when thou art resolved, trust in God; truly God loves those who trust
If God helps you, none shall overcome you. And if He forsakes you, who then can help you thereafter? And in God let the believers trust
It is not for any prophet to defraud. And whosoever defrauds will bring what he obtained by fraud on the Day of Resurrection. Then every soul shall be paid what it has earned in full, and they shall not be wronged
Is he who pursues God’s Contentment like one who earns a burden of anger from God, and whose refuge is Hell? An evil journey’s end
They are ranked in degrees in the sight of God, and God sees whatsoever they do
God certainly favored the believers when He sent them a Messenger from among themselves, who recites His signs unto them, and purifies them, and teaches them the Book and Wisdom, while aforetime they were in manifest error
And when an affliction befell you, though you wrought an affliction twice its like, did you say, “Whence is this?” Say, “It is from yourselves.” Truly God is Powerful over all things
And that which befell you on the day the two hosts met was by God’s Leave, and that He may know the believers
and that He may know the hypocrites. And it was said unto them, “Come, fight in the way of God or defend [yourselves].” They said, “Had we known there would be fighting, we would have followed you.” That day they were closer to disbelief than to belief, saying with their mouths what was not in their hearts. And God knows best what they conceal
Those who said of their brethren, while they were sitting [at home], “Had they obeyed us, they would not have been slain.” Say, “Then ward off death from yourselves, if you are truthful.”
And deem not those slain in the way of God to be dead. Rather, they are alive with their Lord, provided for
exulting in what God has given them from His Bounty, and rejoicing in those who have not yet joined them from among those who remain behind—that no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve—
rejoicing in Blessing and Bounty from God, and that God neglects not the reward of the believers
who responded to God and the Messenger after being afflicted by wounds; for those among them who have been virtuous and reverent there shall be a great reward
to whom the people said, “Truly the people have gathered against you, so fear them.” But it increased them in faith, and they said, “God suffices us, an excellent Guardian is He!”
So they returned with Blessing and Bounty from God, untouched by evil. And they pursued the Contentment of God, and God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
That is only Satan, sowing fear of his friends. So fear them not, but fear Me, if you are believers
And let not those who hasten unto disbelief grieve thee. Truly they will not harm God in the least. God desires to give them no share in the Hereafter, and theirs shall be a great punishment
Truly those who have purchased disbelief at the price of belief will not hurt God in the least, and theirs shall be a painful punishment
And let not those who disbelieve suppose that the respite We grant them is good for them. We only grant them respite that they may increase in sin, and theirs shall be a humiliating punishment
God will not leave the believers as you are till He separates the bad from the good. And God will not apprise you of the Unseen, but God chooses from His messengers whomsoever He will. So believe in God and His messengers. And if you believe and are reverent, you shall have a great reward
And let not those who are miserly with what God has given them from His Bounty suppose that it is good for them; rather, it is evil for them. On the Day of Resurrection they will be collared by that with which they were miserly. And unto God belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth, and God is Aware of whatsoever you do
God has certainly heard the words of those who said, “God is poor, and we are rich.” We shall record what they said, and their slaying of the prophets without right, and We shall say, “Taste the punishment of the burning.”
That is because of what your hands sent forth, and because God wrongs not His servants
[As for] those who say, “Truly God has committed us to not believe in any messenger until he brings us a sacrifice consumed by fire,” say, “Messengers certainly came before me with clear proofs and with that whereof you speak; so why did you slay them, if you are truthful?”
So if they deny thee, they certainly did deny messengers before thee, who came with clear proofs, scriptures, and the luminous Book
Every soul shall taste death, and you will indeed be paid your reward in full on the Day of Resurrection. And whosoever is distanced from the Fire and made to enter the Garden has certainly triumphed. And the life of this world is naught but the enjoyment of delusion
You will surely be tried in your wealth and your souls, and you shall hear much hurt from those who were given the Book before you, and from those who are idolaters. But if you are patient and reverent, then that is indeed a course worthy of resolve
[Remember] when God made the covenant with those who were given the Book, “You shall make it clear to the people, and not conceal it.” Then they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price. Evil indeed is their selling
Do not suppose that those who exult in what they have brought about and love to be praised for what they have not done—do not suppose that they are delivered from the punishment; theirs is a painful punishment
Unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and God is Powerful over all things
Truly in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the variation of the night and the day are signs for the possessors of intellect
who remember God standing, sitting, and lying upon their sides, and reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth, “Our Lord, Thou hast not created this in vain. Glory be to Thee! Shield us from the punishment of the Fire
Our Lord! Whomsoever Thou makest to enter into the Fire, Thou hast surely disgraced him. And the wrongdoers shall have no helpers
Our Lord! Truly we have heard a caller calling to faith, saying ‘Believe in your Lord,’ so we believed. Our Lord, forgive us our sins and absolve us of our evil deeds, and take us unto Thee with the pious
Our Lord! Give us what Thou hast promised us through Thy messengers, and disgrace us not on the Day of Resurrection. Truly Thou wilt not fail the tryst.”
So their Lord answered them, “I shall not let the work of any worker among you, male or female, be in vain; each of you is like the other. So those who emigrated, and were expelled from their homes, and were hurt in My way, and fought and were slain—I shall absolve them of their evil deeds and shall make them enter Gardens with rivers running below, a reward from God. And God, with Him is the most beautiful reward
Let it not delude thee that those who disbelieve are free to come and go in the land
It is a little enjoyment. Then their refuge is Hell, an evil resting place
But [as for] those who reverence their Lord, theirs shall be Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein, as a welcome from God. And that which is with God is better for the pious
And truly among the People of the Book are those who believe in God and that which has been sent down unto you, and that which has been sent down unto them, humble before God, not selling God’s signs for a paltry price. It is they who shall have their reward with their Lord. Truly God is swift in reckoning
O you who believe! Be patient, vie in patience, persevere, and reverence God, that haply you may prosper
O mankind! Reverence your Lord, Who created you from a single soul and from it created its mate, and from the two has spread abroad a multitude of men and women. Reverence God, through Whom you demand your rights of one another, and family relations. Truly God is a Watcher over you
Give orphans their property, and exchange not the bad for the good, nor consume their property with your own. Truly that would be a great sin
If you fear that you will not deal fairly with the orphans, then marry such women as seem good to you, two, three, or four; but if you fear that you will not deal justly, then only one, or those whom your right hands possess. Thus it is more likely that you will not commit injustice
And give the women their bridewealth as a free gift, but if they are pleased to remit unto you any part thereof, then consume it with wholesome enjoyment
And give not the feeble-minded your property, which God has placed in your hands to manage, but provide for them and clothe them from it, and speak unto them in an honorable way
And test the orphans until they reach the age of maturity; then if you perceive in them sound judgment, deliver unto them their property, and consume it not wastefully and in haste before they come of age. Whosoever is rich should abstain, but whosoever is poor should partake thereof in an honorable way. And when you deliver unto them their property, bring witnesses on their behalf, and God suffices as a Reckoner
Unto the men a share of what parents and kinsfolk leave, and unto the women a share of what parents and kinsfolk leave, be it little or much—a share ordained
And when kinsfolk, orphans, and the indigent are present at the division, make provision from it for them and speak unto them in an honorable way
Let those who would dread if they left behind their own helpless progeny have fear; let them reverence God and speak justly
Truly those who consume the property of orphans unjustly only consume fire in their bellies, and they will burn in a blazing flame
God enjoins upon you concerning your children: unto the male a share equal to that of two females; but if there are only daughters, two or more, then unto them is two-thirds of what he leaves; if only one, then unto her a half. And unto his parents—each of the two—a sixth of what he leaves if he has a child; but if he has no child and his parents are his [only] heirs, then unto his mother a third; and if he has brothers, then unto his mother a sixth, after paying any bequest he may have bequeathed or any debt. Your parents or your children—you know not which of them are nearer to you in benefit. [This is] an obligation ordained by God. Truly God is Knowing, Wise
And unto you a half of what your wives leave, if they have no child, but if they have a child, then unto you a fourth of what they leave, after paying any bequest they may have bequeathed or any debt. And unto them a fourth of what you leave if you have no child, but if you have a child, then unto them an eighth of what you leave, after paying any bequest you may have bequeathed or any debt. If a man or woman leaves no direct heir, but has a brother or sister, then unto each of the two a sixth; but if they are more than two, they share equally a third, after paying any bequest he may have bequeathed or any debt, without harm to anyone—a duty ordained by God, and God is Knowing, Clement
Those are the limits set by God: whosoever obeys God and His Messenger, He will cause him to enter Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein. And that is the great triumph
But whosoever disobeys God and His Messenger, and transgresses His limits, He will cause him to enter a Fire, abiding therein, and he shall have a humiliating punishment
As for those of your women who commit an indecency, call four witnesses among you to bear witness against them. And if they bear witness, then confine them to their houses until death takes them, or until God appoints for them another way
And if two of those among you are guilty thereof, punish them both; but if they repent and make amends, then let them be. Truly God is Relenting, Merciful
God only accepts the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and then turn quickly in repentance: these are the ones unto whom God relents, and God is Knowing, Wise
And repentance is not accepted from those who do evil deeds till, when death confronts one of them, he says, “Truly now I repent,” nor from those who die as disbelievers. For those We have prepared a painful punishment
O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women through coercion, nor to prevent them from marrying [again], that you may take away some of what you have given them, unless they commit a flagrant indecency. And consort with them in a kind and honorable way; for if you dislike them, it may be that you dislike a thing in which God has placed much good
If you desire to take one wife in place of another, even if you have given to one of them a great sum, take back nothing from it. Would you take it by way of calumny and manifest sin
And how can you take it back, when you have lain with one another and they have made with you a solemn covenant
And marry not those women whom your fathers married, save for what is past. Truly it was indecent and loathsome, an evil way
Forbidden unto you [as wives] are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your fathers’ sisters, your mothers’ sisters, your brothers’ daughters, your sisters’ daughters, your milk-mothers and milk-sisters, the mothers of your wives, the stepdaughters in your care—born of your wives with whom you have consummated marriage, but if you have not consummated the marriage with them, then there is no blame on you—and the wives of your sons who are from your loins, and two sisters together, save for what is past. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And married women [are forbidden unto you] save those whom your right hands possess; thus has God prescribed for you. Lawful unto you are all others whom you would seek in marriage with gifts from your property, in honest wedlock and not in fornication. And those women whom you enjoy thereby, give unto them their bridewealth, as an obligation; but there is no blame on you for what you agree to after the obligation. God is Knowing, Wise
And whosoever among you has not the means to marry free, believing women, then [marry] the believing young women among those whom your right hands possess; God knows best your faith, the one of you is as the other, so wed them by the permission of their people, and give unto them their proper bridewealth, as married women, not as fornicators or paramours. And when they are married, should they commit an indecency, they shall be liable to half the punishment of free women. This is for the one among you who fears he will sin, but it is better for you to be patient. God is Forgiving, Merciful
God desires to make [this] clear unto you, and to guide you to the traditions of those who went before you, and to relent unto you. And God is Knowing, Wise
God desires to relent unto you, but those who follow lusts desire that you go tremendously astray
God desires to lighten [your burden] for you, for man was created weak
O you who believe! Consume not each other’s wealth falsely, but trade by mutual consent, and slay not yourselves. Truly God is Merciful unto you
And whosoever does that in enmity and injustice, We shall cause him to burn in a Fire; and that is easy for God
If you shun the grave sins that you are forbidden, We shall absolve you of your evil deeds and cause you to enter at a noble gate
And covet not that by which God has favored some of you above others—unto men a share of what they have earned, and unto women a share of what they have earned—but ask God for His Bounty. Truly God is the Knower of all things
To each We have appointed heirs for what parents and kinsfolk leave. Those to whom you have given your oath, give them their share. Truly God is Witness over all things
Men are the upholders and maintainers of women by virtue of that in which God has favored some of them above others and by virtue of their spending from their wealth. Therefore the righteous women are devoutly obedient, guarding in [their husbands’] absence what God has guarded. As for those from whom you fear discord and animosity, admonish them, then leave them in their beds, then strike them. Then if they obey you, seek not a way against them. Truly God is Exalted, Great
And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people. If they desire reconciliation, God will bring about agreement between them. Truly God is Knowing, Aware
Worship God, and ascribe not partners unto Him. And be virtuous toward parents and kinsfolk, toward orphans and the indigent, toward the neighbor who is of kin and the neighbor who is not of kin, toward the companion at your side and the traveler, and toward those whom your right hands possess. Truly God loves not one who is a vainglorious boaster
those who are miserly and enjoin people to be miserly, concealing what God has given them from His Bounty. We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment
And those who spend their wealth to be seen of men, and believe not in God or the Last Day. Whosoever has Satan for a companion has an evil companion indeed
What harm would it have done them were they to believe in God and the Last Day, and spend of that which God has provided them. God knows them well
Truly God commits not so much as a mote’s weight of wrong: if there is a good deed, He will multiply it and grant from His Presence a great reward
How will it be when We bring forth a witness from every community, and We bring thee as a witness against these
On that Day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger will wish that they were level with the earth, and they will conceal no account from God
O you who believe! Draw not near unto prayer when you are drunken until you know what you are uttering, nor in a state of ritual impurity—unless you are passing through—until you have washed. But if you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you has come from satisfying a call of nature, or you have touched women, and you find no water, then resort to clean earth, and wipe your faces and your hands. Truly God is Pardoning, Forgiving
Hast thou not considered those who were given a portion of the Book, who purchase error, and wish that you too should stray from the path
God knows best your enemies. God suffices as a Protector, and God suffices as a Helper
Among those who are Jews are those who distort the meaning of the word, and say, “We hear and disobey,” and “Hear, as one who hears not!” and “Attend to us!” twisting their tongues and disparaging religion. And had they said, “We hear and obey” and “Listen” and “Regard us,” it would have been better for them and more proper. But God cursed them for their disbelief, so they believe not, save a few
O you unto whom the Book has been given! Believe in what We have sent down, confirming that which is with you, before We blot out faces and turn them backwards, or curse them as We cursed those [who broke] the Sabbath. And the Command of God shall be fulfilled
Truly God forgives not that any partner be ascribed unto Him, but He forgives what is less than that for whomsoever He will, for whosoever ascribes partners unto God has surely fabricated a tremendous sin
Hast thou not seen those who deem themselves pure? Rather, it is God Who purifies whomsoever He will, and they shall not be wronged so much as the thread of a date stone
See how they fabricate lies against God! That suffices as a manifest sin
Hast thou not considered those who were given a portion of the Book, who believe in idols and false deities, and say of those who disbelieve, “These are guided more rightly than those who believe.”
They are those whom God has cursed, and whomsoever God curses, thou wilt not find for him any helper
Or have they a share in sovereignty? If they did, they would not give men so much as the speck on a date stone
Or do they envy men on account of what God has given them of His Bounty? We gave the House of Abraham the Book and Wisdom, and We granted them a mighty sovereignty
Among them are those who believe in him, and among them are those who turn away from him. And Hell suffices as a blazing flame
Those who disbelieve in Our signs, We shall surely cause them to burn in a Fire. As often as their skins are consumed, We shall replace them with other skins, that they may taste the punishment. Truly God is Mighty, Wise
But for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, We shall cause them to enter Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein forever. There they shall have spouses made pure, and We shall cause them to enter plenteous shade
God commands you to return trusts to their rightful owners and, if you judge between men, to do so with justice. Excellent indeed is the instruction God gives you. Truly God is Hearing, Seeing
O you who believe! Obey God and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. And if you differ among yourselves concerning any matter, refer it to God and the Messenger, if you believe in God and the Last Day. That is better, and fairer in outcome
Hast thou not seen those who claim that they believe in that which was sent down unto thee and in that which was sent down before thee, desiring to seek judgment from false deities, although they were commanded not to believe in them? But Satan desires to lead them far astray
And when it is said unto them, “Come to what God has sent down and to the Messenger,” thou seest the hypocrites turn from thee with aversion
How will it be when misfortune befalls them because of what their hands have sent forth? Then they will come to thee, swearing by God, “We sought naught but virtue and harmony.”
They are those whom God knows what is in their hearts. So turn away from them, and admonish them and speak to them about their souls with penetrating words
We sent no messenger, save that he should be obeyed by God’s Leave. If, when they had wronged themselves, they had but come to thee and sought forgiveness of God, and the Messenger had sought forgiveness for them, they would surely have found God Relenting, Merciful
But no, by thy Lord, they will not believe until they have made thee the judge between them in their disputes, and find no resistance in their souls to what thou hast decreed, and surrender with full submission
And had We prescribed for them, “Lay down your lives” or “Leave your homes,” they would not have done so, save a few. And had they done what they were exhorted to do, it would have been better for them, and a stronger confirmation
Then We would surely have granted them, from Our Presence, a great reward
and We would surely have guided them unto a straight path
Whosoever obeys God and the Messenger, they are with those whom God has blessed, the prophets, the truthful ones, the witnesses, and the righteous. What beautiful companions they are
Such is the Bounty from God, and God suffices as Knower. q
you who believe! Take your precautions; then go forth in companies or go forth all together
Among you indeed is one who would tarry; then, if misfortune should befall you, he would say, “God has blessed me, in that I did not accompany them.”
But should a bounty come to you from God, he would surely say—as if there had been no affection between you and him—“Oh, would that I had been with them, so that I had attained a great triumph!”
Let them fight in the way of God, those who would sell the life of this world for the Hereafter. And whosoever fights in the way of God—whether he is slain or victorious—We shall grant him a great reward
And what ails you that you fight not in the way of God, and for the weak and oppressed—men, women, and children—who cry out, “Our Lord! Bring us forth from this town whose people are oppressors, and appoint for us from Thee a protector, and appoint for us from Thee a helper.”
Those who believe fight in the way of God, and those who disbelieve fight in the way of false deities. Fight, therefore, against the allies of Satan. Surely the scheme of Satan is ever feeble
Hast thou not seen those unto whom it was said, “Restrain your hands, and perform the prayer, and give the alms.” But when fighting was prescribed for them, behold, a party of them feared men, even as they should have feared God, or with greater fear, and they said, “Our Lord! Why hast Thou prescribed fighting for us? If only Thou wouldst grant us reprieve for a term nigh.” Say, “Scant is the enjoyment of this world, and the Hereafter is better for those who are reverent, and you shall not be wronged so much as the thread of a date stone.”
Wheresoever you may be, death will overtake you, though you should be in towers raised high. And if good befalls them, they say, “This is from God,” but if evil befalls them, they say, “This is from thee.” Say, “All is from God.” What is with these people that they scarcely understand any tiding
Whatever good befalls thee, it is from God, and whatever evil befalls thee, it is from thyself. We sent thee as a messenger unto mankind, and God suffices as a Witness
Whosoever obeys the Messenger obeys God, and as for those who turn away, We have not sent thee as their keeper
They profess obedience, but when they leave thee, a party of them conspire by night [to do] other than what thou sayest. But God records what they conspire by night. So turn away from them and trust in God. God suffices as a Guardian
Do they not contemplate the Quran? Had it been from other than God, they would surely have found much discrepancy therein
And whenever tidings come unto them, whether of security or fear, they spread it about, whereas had they referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority among them, those of them whose task it is to investigate would have known it. Were it not for God’s Bounty toward you, and His Mercy, you would surely have followed Satan, save a few
So fight in the way of God. Thou art accountable only for thyself, and urge on the believers. It may be that God will restrain the might of the disbelievers, for God is stronger in might and more severe in punishment
Whosoever intercedes for a good cause shall receive a share of it; and whosoever intercedes for an evil cause shall share in its burden; and God is Sustainer of all things
And when you are offered a greeting, respond with a greeting that is better, or return it; surely God takes account of all things
God, there is no god but He. He will surely gather you all unto the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. And who is truer than God in speech
What is with you that you are [divided into] two groups concerning the hypocrites, when God Himself has cast them back for that which they have earned? Do you seek to guide those whom God has led astray? Whomsoever God leads astray, thou wilt not find a way for him
They wish that you should disbelieve, even as they disbelieve, that you may be on a level with them. So take them not as protectors till they migrate in the way of God. But if they turn their backs, then seize them and slay them wherever you find them, and take no protector or helper from among them
save those who seek refuge with a people with whom you have a covenant, or those who come to you with hearts reluctant to fight you, or to fight their own people. Had God willed, He could have given them authority over you, and then surely they would have fought you. So if they withdraw from you, and do not fight you, and offer peace, God allows you no way against them
You will find others who desire to be secure from you, and secure from their own people, yet whenever they are tempted back to hostility, they are plunged back into it. So if they withdraw not from you, nor offer you peace, nor restrain their hands, then seize them and slay them wheresoever you come upon them. Against these We have given you clear warrant
It is not for a believer to slay a believer, unless it be in error. Whosoever has slain a believer in error, let him set free a believing slave and pay compensation to the victim’s family, unless they remit it in charity. If he belonged to a people at war with you, but was a believer, then a believing slave is to be set free. And if he belonged to a people with whom you have a covenant, let him pay compensation to the victim’s family, and let him set free a believing slave. Whosoever finds not [the means], let him fast two consecutive months as a penance from God. God is Knowing, Wise
Whosoever slays a believer willfully, his recompense is Hell, abiding therein. God is wroth with him, and curses him, and prepares for him a mighty punishment
O you who believe! When you go forth in the way of God, be discerning, and say not unto him who offers you peace, “You are not a believer,” seeking the ephemeralities of the life of this world, for with God are abundant spoils. Thus were you yourselves beforehand, but God has been gracious to you. Therefore be discerning. Truly God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Those who stay behind among the believers—except for the disadvantaged—and those who strive in the way of God with their goods and lives are not equal. God favors those who strive with their goods and their lives a degree above those who stay behind. Unto both God has promised that which is most beautiful. But He favors those who strive with a great reward above those who stay behind
degrees conferred by Him, and forgiveness and mercy. Surely God is Forgiving, Merciful
When the angels take the souls of those who were wronging themselves, [the angels] say, “In what state were you?” They say, “We were weak and oppressed in the land.” [The angels] will say, “Was not God’s earth vast enough that you might have migrated therein?” These shall have their refuge in Hell—what an evil journey’s end
But not so the [truly] weak and oppressed among the men, women, and children, who neither have access to any means nor are guided to any way
As for such, it may be that God will pardon them, for God is Pardoning, Forgiving
Whosoever migrates in the way of God will find upon the earth many a refuge and abundance, and whosoever forsakes his home, emigrating unto God and His Messenger, and death overtakes him, his reward will fall upon God, and God is Forgiving, Merciful
When you travel upon the earth, there is no blame upon you for shortening your prayers if you fear that the disbelievers may attack you; verily the disbelievers are your manifest enemy
When thou art with them and leadest them in prayer, let one group of them stand with thee in prayer, taking their arms with them. When they have performed their prostrations, let them withdraw to the rear, and let another group come that has not prayed and let them pray with thee, taking precaution and their arms. The disbelievers wish you to be heedless of your arms and your baggage that they might assault you all at once. There is no blame on you if you lay aside your arms when you are troubled by heavy rain or illness. But take your precaution. Surely God has prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment
When you have completed the prayer, remember [and invoke] God, standing, sitting, or lying on your sides. Then when you are secure, observe proper prayer, for prayer at fixed hours is prescribed for the believers
Slacken not in the pursuit of these people. If you are suffering, verily they suffer even as you suffer, while you hope from God that for which they do not hope. Surely God is Knowing, Wise
Verily We have sent down unto thee the Book in truth, that thou mightest judge between men according to what God has shown thee. So be not an advocate for those who betray their trust
And seek forgiveness of God; surely God is Forgiving, Merciful
And plead not on behalf of those who betray their own selves. Surely God loves not the one given to treachery and sin
They seek to hide themselves from men, but they cannot hide from God. He is with them when they conspire by night with words displeasing to Him, and God encompasses whatsoever they do
There you are, pleading on their behalf concerning the life of this world! But who will plead with God on their behalf on the Day of Resurrection, or be a guardian for them
Whosoever does evil or wrongs himself, and then seeks forgiveness of God, he will find God Forgiving, Merciful
And whosoever commits a sin, commits it only against his own soul, and God is Knowing, Wise
And whosoever commits an offense or a sin, and then casts it upon one who is innocent, bears the burden of calumny and a manifest sin
Were it not for God’s Bounty toward thee, and His Mercy, a party of them would have plotted to lead thee astray, but they lead astray only their own souls, and they can do thee no harm in the least. God has sent down unto thee the Book and Wisdom, and has taught thee what thou knewest not; God’s Bounty toward thee is great indeed
There is no good in most of their secret converse, save for him who enjoins charity or kindness or reconciliation between men. And whosoever does that, seeking God’s Good Pleasure, We shall grant him a great reward
But whosoever opposes the Messenger, after guidance has been made clear to him, and follows a way other than that of the believers, We shall leave him on [the path] he has taken, and We shall cause him to burn in Hell—what an evil journey’s end
Truly God forgives not that any partner be ascribed unto Him, but He forgives what is less than that for whomsoever He will. Whosoever ascribes partners unto God has surely gone far astray
They call upon only females in His stead; they call upon none but a defiant Satan
whom God has cursed, who said, “Assuredly I shall take of Thy servants an appointed share
and surely I shall lead them astray, and arouse desires in them. I shall command them and they will slit the ears of cattle; I shall command them and they will alter God’s creation.” Whosoever takes Satan as a protector apart from God has surely suffered a manifest loss
He makes them promises and stirs in them desires, but Satan promises naught but delusion
Such will have their refuge in Hell, and will find no refuge therefrom
But for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, We shall cause them to enter Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein forever. God’s Promise is true, and who is truer in speech than God
It will not be in accordance with your desires nor the desires of the People of the Book. Whosoever does evil shall be requited for it, and he will find no protector or helper for himself apart from God
And whosoever performs righteous deeds, whether male or female, and is a believer, such shall enter the Garden, and they shall not be wronged so much as the speck on a date stone
And who is better in religion than the one who submits his face to God, and is virtuous, and follows the creed of Abraham, as a ?anif? And God did take Abraham for a friend
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and God encompasses all things
They seek a ruling from thee concerning women. Say, “God gives you a ruling concerning them, and that which has been recited to you in the Book concerning the orphan girls—to whom you give not what is prescribed for them though you desire to marry them—and also the helpless among the children: that you should uphold justice for the orphans. Whatever good you do, surely God knows it well.”
If a wife fears animosity or desertion from her husband, there is no blame upon them should they come to an accord, for an accord is better. Souls are prone to avarice, but if you are virtuous and reverent, surely God is Aware of whatsoever you do
You will not be able to deal fairly between women, even if it is your ardent desire, but do not turn away from one altogether, so that you leave her as if suspended. If you come to an accord and are reverent, truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
If the two separate, God will enrich both out of His Abundance, and God is All-Encompassing, Wise
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. We have enjoined those who were given the Book before you, and We enjoin you to reverence God. But if you disbelieve, [know that] unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and God is Self-Sufficient, Praised
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and God suffices as a Guardian
If He so wills, He can remove you, O mankind, and bring others [in your stead], and God has full power to do so
Whosoever desires the reward of this world, with God is the reward of this world and the Hereafter. God is Hearing, Seeing
O you who believe! Be steadfast maintainers of justice, witnesses for God, though it be against yourselves, or your parents and kinsfolk, and whether it be someone rich or poor, for God is nearer unto both. So follow not your caprice, that you may act justly. If you distort or turn away, truly God is Aware of whatsoever you do
O you who believe! Believe in God and His Messenger, and the Book He sent down upon His Messenger, and the Book He sent down before. Whosoever does not believe in God and His angels and His Books and His messengers and the Last Day has wandered far astray
Those who believe and then disbelieve, and then believe and then disbelieve, and then increase in disbelief, God will not forgive them nor guide them unto any way
Give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them awaits a painful punishment
Those who take disbelievers as protectors instead of believers—do they seek might through them? Truly might belongs to God altogether
He has already sent down upon you in the Book that when you hear the signs of God being rejected and mocked, do not sit with them till they engage in some other discourse, or else you will surely be like them. Truly God will gather the hypocrites and the disbelievers in Hell all together—
those who wait upon you, and if a victory comes to you from God, they say, “Were we not with you?” But if the disbelievers have some success, they say, “Did we not overwhelm you, and did we not protect you from the believers?” God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection, and God will not grant the disbelievers a way over the believers
Verily the hypocrites seek to deceive God, but it is God Who deceives them. When they perform the prayer, they perform it idly and to be seen of men, and they remember God but little—
wavering between this [and that], being neither for one group nor for the other. Whomsoever God leads astray, thou wilt not find a way for him
O you who believe! Do not take the disbelievers as protectors instead of the believers. Do you wish to give God a clear warrant against you
Surely the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire, and thou wilt not find for them any helper
save those who repent and make amends, and hold fast to God, and devote their religion entirely to God. Those are with the believers, and God will grant the believers a great reward
Why should God punish you if you give thanks and believe? God is Thankful, Knowing
God loves not that evil should be spoken of openly, save by one who has been wronged. God is Hearing, Knowing
Whether you display a good deed openly or conceal it, or pardon an evil, truly God is Pardoning, Powerful
Truly those who disbelieve in God and His messengers, and seek to make a distinction between God and His messengers, and say, “We believe in some and disbelieve in others,” and seek to take a way between—
it is they who are truly disbelievers, and We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment
But those who believe in God and His messengers and make no distinction between any of them—unto them He will give their rewards. God is Forgiving, Merciful
The People of the Book ask thee to bring a book down upon them from Heaven; indeed, they asked a greater thing of Moses, for they said, “Show us God openly,” whereupon the thunderbolt seized them for their wrongdoing. Then they took up the calf, even after clear proofs had come to them. Yet, We pardoned this and We gave Moses a manifest authority
And We raised the Mount over them, at [the making of] their covenant, and We said to them, “Enter the gate, prostrating,” and We said to them, “Do not transgress the Sabbath.” And We made with them a solemn covenant
Then for their breaking of their covenant, and their disbelieving in the signs of God, and their slaying of the prophets without right, and their saying, “Our hearts are uncircumcised,”—Nay! Rather, God has set a seal upon them for their disbelief, so they believe not, save a few—
and for their disbelief, and their uttering against Mary a tremendous calumny
and for their saying, “We slew the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, the messenger of God”—though they did not slay him; nor did they crucify him, but it appeared so unto them. Those who differ concerning him are in doubt thereof. They have no knowledge of it, but follow only conjecture; they slew him not for certain
But God raised him up unto Himself, and God is Mighty, Wise
There is not one of the People of the Book, but will surely believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness against them
And for the wrongdoing among those who are Jews, We forbade them certain good things that had been made lawful unto them, and for their turning many from the way of God
and for their taking usury, though they had been forbidden it, and for their consuming men’s wealth falsely. And We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment
But those among them who are firmly rooted in knowledge, and the believers, believing in that which was sent down unto thee and in that which was sent down before thee, those who perform the prayer and give the alms and believe in God and the Last Day—unto them shall We grant a great reward
Verily We have revealed unto thee, as We revealed unto Noah and the prophets after him, and as We revealed unto Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes, and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and unto David We gave the Psalms
and messengers We have recounted unto thee before, and messengers We have not recounted unto thee; and unto Moses God spoke directly
messengers as bearers of glad tidings and as warners, that mankind might have no argument against God after the messengers. And God is Mighty, Wise
But God Himself bears witness to that which He has sent down unto thee—He sent it down with His Knowledge—and the angels bear witness. And God suffices as a Witness
Verily those who disbelieve and who turn from the way of God have certainly wandered far astray
Verily those who disbelieve and do wrong, God will not forgive them, nor will He guide them to any path
save the path of Hell, to abide therein forever; and that is easy for God
O mankind! The Messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord; so believe! It is better for you. But if you disbelieve, unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and God is Knowing, Wise
O People of the Book! Do not exaggerate in your religion, nor utter anything concerning God save the truth. Verily the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only a messenger of God, and His Word, which He committed to Mary, and a Spirit from Him. So believe in God and His messengers, and say not “Three.” Refrain! It is better for you. God is only one God; Glory be to Him that He should have a child. Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and God suffices as a Guardian
The Messiah would never disdain to be a servant of God; nor would the angels brought nigh. Whosoever disdains His service, and is arrogant, He will gather them unto Himself all together
As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, He shall pay them their rewards in full, and will increase them from His Bounty. But as for those who are disdainful and arrogant, He will punish them with a painful punishment, and they will find no protector or helper for themselves apart from God
O mankind! Verily there has come unto you a proof from your Lord. And We have sent down unto you a clear light
As for those who believe in God and hold fast to Him, He will cause them to enter into His Mercy and Bounty, and will guide them unto Himself upon a straight path
They seek a ruling from thee. Say, “God gives you a ruling concerning the one without a direct heir. If a man dies having no child, but he has a sister, then unto her belongs half of what he leaves, and he will inherit from her if she has no child. If there be two sisters, then unto them belongs two-thirds of what he leaves. If there be brothers and sisters, then unto the male a share equal to that of two females.” Thus does God make [this] clear unto you, lest you should go astray. And God is Knower of all things
O you who believe! Fulfill your pacts. Lawful unto you are grazing cattle, save that which is recited unto you, hunted game being unlawful when you are in the state of pilgrim sanctity. Truly God decrees whatsoever He desires
O you who believe! Do not violate the sanctity of the rituals of God, nor the sacred month, nor the offerings, nor the garlands, nor those bound for the Sacred House, seeking the Bounty of their Lord, and [His] Contentment. But when you have left the state of pilgrim sanctity, then hunt for game. And let not hatred for a people who once turned you away from the Sacred Mosque lead you to transgress. Help one another toward piety and reverence; do not help one another toward sin and enmity. And reverence God. Truly God is severe in retribution
Forbidden unto you are carrion and blood, the flesh of swine and that which has been offered to other than God, that which has been strangled or beaten to death, that which has been killed by falling or has been gored to death, that which has been mangled by beasts of prey—save that which you may purify—and that which is sacrificed on stone altars, and that which you allot with divining arrows; that is iniquity. This day those who disbelieve have despaired of your religion. So fear them not, but fear Me! This day I have perfected for you your religion, and completed My Blessing upon you, and have approved for you as religion, Submission (Islam). But whosoever is compelled by hunger, without inclining toward sin, then surely God is Forgiving, Merciful
They ask thee what is lawful unto them. Say, “Lawful unto you are all good things.” And as for the hunting animals you have taught, teaching them from that which God has taught you, eat of what they catch for you, and mention the Name of God over it. And reverence God; truly God is swift in reckoning
This day, all good things are made lawful unto you. The food of those who have been given the Book is lawful unto you, and your food is lawful unto them. And likewise the chaste women of the believers, and the chaste women of those who were given the Book before you, when you have given them their bridewealth as married women, not as fornicators, nor as paramours. And whosoever rejects belief, his deeds have come to naught, and in the Hereafter he shall be among the losers. j
you who believe! When you rise to perform the prayer, wash your faces, and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet up to the ankles. If you are in a state of major ritual impurity, then purify yourselves. But if you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you has come from satisfying a call of nature, or you have touched women, and you find no water, then resort to clean earth, and wipe therewith your faces and your hands. God desires not to place a burden upon you, but He desires to purify you, and to complete His Blessing upon you, that haply you may give thanks
And remember God’s Blessing upon you, and His covenant by which He bound you, when you said, “We hear and we obey.” And reverence God. Truly God knows what lies within breasts
O you who believe! Be steadfast for God, bearing witness to justice, and let not hatred for a people lead you to be unjust. Be just; that is nearer to reverence. And reverence God. Surely God is Aware of whatsoever you do
To those who believe and perform righteous deeds, God has promised forgiveness and a great reward
And those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, they shall be the inhabitants of Hellfire
O you who believe! Remember God’s Blessing upon you, when a people were prepared to stretch forth their hands against you, but He withheld their hands from you. Reverence God, and in God let the believers trust
God had made a covenant with the Children of Israel, and We raised among them twelve chieftains. And God said, “I am with you!” Surely, if you perform the prayer, and give alms, and believe in My messengers and support them, and lend unto God a goodly loan, I shall surely absolve you of your evil deeds, and shall cause you to enter Gardens with rivers running below. But whosoever among you disbelieves thereafter, surely he has strayed from the right way
Then for their breaking of their covenant, We cursed them and hardened their hearts. They distort the meaning of the Word, and have forgotten part of that whereof they were reminded. Thou wilt not cease to discover their treachery, from all save a few of them. So pardon them, and forbear. Truly God loves the virtuous
And with those who say, “We are Christians,” We made a covenant. Then they forgot part of that whereof they were reminded. So We stirred up enmity and hatred among them, till the Day of Resurrection. God will inform them of what they used to do
O People of the Book! Our Messenger has come unto you, making clear to you much of what you once hid of the Book, and pardoning much. There has come unto you, from God, a light and a clear Book
whereby God guides whosoever seeks His Contentment unto the ways of peace, and brings them out of darkness into light, by His Leave, and guides them unto a straight path
They indeed have disbelieved who say, “God is the Messiah, son of Mary.” Say, “Who would have any power over God if He desired to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and those on earth all together?” Unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them. He creates whatsoever He will, and God is Powerful over all things
And the Jews and the Christians say, “We are the children of God, and His beloved ones.” Say, “Why then does He punish you for your sins?” Nay, but you are mortals of His creating. He forgives whomsoever He will, and He punishes whomsoever He will, and unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, and unto Him is the journey’s end
O People of the Book! Our Messenger has come unto you, making things clear to you, after an interval in [the series] of messengers, lest you should say, “There came unto us no bearer of glad tidings, nor any warner.” But there has come unto you a bearer of glad tidings and a warner. And God is Powerful over all things
And when Moses said unto his people, “O my people! Remember God’s Blessing upon you, when He appointed prophets among you, and appointed you kings, and gave you that which He gave unto no other in all the worlds
O my people! Enter the Holy Land, which God has prescribed for you, and do not turn back, or you shall become losers.”
They said, “O Moses! In this land are a domineering people. We shall not enter it till they leave it. But if they leave it, we shall enter.”
Two men whom God had blessed among those who feared [Him] said, “Enter upon them by the gate, for once you have entered it, you will be victors. And trust in God, if you are believers.”
They said, “O Moses! We shall never enter it, so long as they remain therein. So go forth, thou and thy Lord, and fight! We shall sit here.”
He said, “My Lord! I have no power over anyone save myself and my brother; so separate us from the iniquitous people!”
He said, “Then verily it shall be forbidden them for forty years, while they shall wander on the earth. So grieve not for the iniquitous people.”
And recite unto them, with truth, the account of Adam’s two sons, when they each offered a sacrifice, and it was accepted from one of them, though not accepted from the other. One said, “I will surely slay you!” [The other] said, “God accepts only from the reverent
Even if you stretch forth your hand against me to slay me, I shall not stretch forth my hand against you to slay you. Truly I fear God, Lord of the worlds
I desire that you should be burdened with my sin and your sin and so become one of the inhabitants of the Fire. Such is the recompense of the wrongdoers.”
Then his soul prompted him to slay his brother, and he slew him, and thus came to be among the losers
Then God sent a crow, scratching the earth, to show him how he might conceal his brother’s nakedness. He said, “Oh, woe unto me! Am I not able to be even as this crow and conceal my brother’s nakedness?” And he came to be among the remorseful
For this reason, We prescribed for the Children of Israel that whosoever slays a soul—unless it be for another soul or working corruption upon the earth—it is as though he slew mankind altogether, and whosoever saves the life of one, it is as though he saved the life of mankind altogether. Our messengers have certainly come unto them with clear proofs. Yet even after that, many of them are prodigal on the earth
Verily the recompense of those who wage war against God and His Messenger, and endeavor to work corruption upon the earth is that they be killed or crucified, or have their hands and feet cut off from opposite sides, or be banished from the land. That is their disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter theirs shall be a great punishment
save those who repent before you overpower them. And know that God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! Reverence God, and seek the means to approach Him, and strive in His way, that haply you may prosper
Truly those who disbelieve, were they to possess all that is on the earth and the like of it besides with which to ransom themselves from the punishment of the Day of Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them. And theirs shall be a painful punishment
They will wish to come forth from the Fire, but they shall not come forth from it. And theirs shall be a lasting punishment
As for the male thief and the female thief, cut off their hands as a recompense for what they have earned, as an exemplary punishment from God. Truly God is Mighty, Wise
But whosoever repents after his wrongdoing, and makes amends, God will relent unto him. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Dost thou not know that unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth? He punishes whomsoever He will, and He forgives whomsoever He will. And God is Powerful over all things. A
Messenger! Let them not grieve thee, those who hasten unto disbelief, those who say, “We believe” with their mouths, while their hearts believe not, and those who are Jews, who listen to lies and to others who have not come to thee. They distort the meaning of the word, saying, “If you are given this, then take it, but if you are not given this, then beware!” For whomsoever God desires that he be tried, thou hast no power to avail him aught against God. They are those whose hearts God desired not to purify. Theirs is disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter they shall have a great punishment
Those who listen to lies, and consume what is unlawful—if they come to thee, then judge between them, or turn away from them. If thou turnest away from them, they will not harm thee in the least. But if thou judgest, judge between them with justice. Truly God loves the just
And how is it that they come to thee for judgment, when they have the Torah, wherein is God’s Judgment? Yet even after that, they turn their backs, and they are not believers
Truly We sent down the Torah, wherein is a guidance and a light, by which the prophets who submitted [unto God] judged those who are Jews, as did the sages and the rabbis, in accordance with such of God’s Book as they were bidden to preserve and to which they were witnesses. So fear not mankind, but fear Me! And sell not My signs for a paltry price. Whosoever judges not by that which God has sent down—it is they who are disbelievers
And therein We prescribed for them: a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and for wounds, retribution. But whosoever forgoes it out of charity, it shall be an expiation for him. Whosoever judges not by that which God has sent down—it is they who are wrongdoers
And in their footsteps, We sent Jesus son of Mary, confirming the Torah that had come before him, and We gave him the Gospel, wherein is a guidance and a light, confirming the Torah that had come before him, as a guidance and an exhortation to the reverent
Let the people of the Gospel judge by what God has sent down therein. Whosoever judges not by that which God has sent down—it is they who are iniquitous
And We have sent down unto thee the Book in truth, confirming the Book that came before it, and as a protector over it. So judge between them in accordance with what God has sent down, and follow not their caprices away from the truth that has come unto thee. For each among you We have appointed a law and a way. And had God willed, He would have made you one community, but [He willed otherwise], that He might try you in that which He has given you. So vie with one another in good deeds. Unto God shall be your return all together, and He will inform you of that wherein you differ
And judge between them in accordance with what God has sent down, and follow not their caprices. And beware of them, lest they tempt thee away from some part of that which God has sent down unto thee. And if they turn away, know that God desires to smite them for some sin of theirs, and surely many among mankind are iniquitous
Is it the judgment of the Age of Ignorance that they seek? And who is fairer in judgment than God, for a people who are certain
O you who believe! Take not Jews and Christians as protectors. They are the protectors of one another. And whosoever takes them as protectors, surely he is of them. Truly God guides not wrongdoing people
Yet thou seest those in whose hearts is a disease hastening to them, saying, “We fear lest a change of fortune should befall us.” It may be that God will grant victory, or a command from Him. And then they shall be remorseful for that which they secretly harbored in their souls
And those who believe will say, “Are these the ones who swore by God with their most solemn oaths that they were with you?” Their deeds have come to naught, and they have become losers
O you who believe! Whosoever among you should renounce his religion, God will bring a people whom He loves and who love Him, humble toward the believers, stern toward the disbelievers, striving in the way of God, and fearing not the blame of any blamer. That is the Bounty of God, which He gives to whomsoever He will. And God is All-Encompassing, Knowing
Your protector is only God, and His Messenger, and those who believe, who perform the prayer and give alms while bowing down
And whosoever takes as his protector God, and His Messenger, and those who believe—the party of God, they are the victorious
O you who believe! Take not as protectors those who take your religion in mockery and as play, from among those who were given the Book before you, or the disbelievers, and reverence God, if you are believers
And when you call to prayer, they take it in mockery and as play. That is because they are a people who do not understand
Say, “O People of the Book! Are you vengeful toward us for no other reason than that we believe in God and in that which has been sent down unto us and in that which was sent down before, and because most of you are iniquitous?”
Say, “Shall I inform you of something worse than that by way of recompense from God? Whomsoever God has cursed and upon whom is His Wrath, and among whom He has made some to be apes and swine, and who worship false deities, such are in a worse situation, and further astray from the right way.”
When they come to you, they say, “We believe.” But they certainly entered with disbelief and they have certainly left with it, and God knows best what they were concealing
Thou seest many of them hastening to sin and enmity, and consuming what is forbidden. Evil indeed is that which they were doing
Why do the sages and the rabbis not forbid them from their sinful speech and their consuming what is forbidden? Evil indeed is that which they were working
The Jews say, “God’s Hand is shackled.” Shackled are their hands, and they are cursed for what they say. Nay, but His two Hands are outstretched, He bestows as He wills. Surely that which has been sent down unto thee from thy Lord will increase many of them in rebellion and disbelief. And We have cast enmity and hatred among them till the Day of Resurrection. As often as they ignite a flame for war, God extinguishes it. They endeavor to work corruption upon the earth. And God loves not the workers of corruption
Had the People of the Book believed and been reverent, We would surely have absolved them of their evil deeds, and caused them to enter Gardens of bliss
Had they observed the Torah and the Gospel and that which was sent down unto them from their Lord, they would surely have received nourishment from above them and from beneath their feet. There is a moderate community among them; but as for many of them, evil is that which they do! g
Messenger! Convey that which has been sent down unto thee from thy Lord, and if thou dost not, thou wilt not have conveyed His message. And God will protect thee from mankind. Surely God guides not disbelieving people
Say, “O People of the Book! You stand on naught till you observe the Torah and the Gospel, and that which has been sent down unto you from your Lord.” Surely that which has been sent down unto thee from thy Lord will increase many of them in rebellion and disbelief. So grieve not for disbelieving people
Truly those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Sabeans, and the Christians—whosoever believes in God and the Last Day and works righteousness, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
We indeed made a covenant with the Children of Israel, and sent messengers unto them. Whensoever a messenger brought them what their souls did not desire, some they would deny and some they would slay
And they supposed that there would be no trial, and so became blind and deaf. Then God relented unto them; then [again] many of them became blind and deaf. And God sees whatsoever they do
They certainly disbelieve, those who say, “Truly God is the Messiah, son of Mary.” But the Messiah said, “O Children of Israel! Worship God, my Lord and your Lord.” Surely whosoever ascribes partners unto God, God has forbidden him the Garden, and his refuge shall be the Fire. And the wrongdoers shall have no helpers
They certainly disbelieve, those who say, “Truly God is the third of three,” while there is no god save the one God. If they refrain not from what they say, a painful punishment will befall those among them who disbelieved
Will they not turn to God in repentance and seek His forgiveness? And God is Forgiving, Merciful
The Messiah, son of Mary, was naught but a messenger—messengers have passed away before him. And his mother was truthful. Both of them ate food. Behold how We make the signs clear unto them; yet behold how they are perverted
Say, “Do you worship, apart from God, that which has no power to benefit or harm you, when it is God Who is the Hearing, the Knowing?”
Say, “O People of the Book! Do not exaggerate in your religion beyond the truth, and follow not the caprices of a people who went astray before, and led many astray, and strayed from the right way.”
Those who disbelieved among the Children of Israel were cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus son of Mary. That was because they disobeyed and used to transgress
They would not forbid one another from the wrong they committed. Evil indeed is that which they used to do
Thou seest many of them allying with those who have disbelieved. Evil indeed is that which they have sent forth for their souls: the anger of God is upon them, and in punishment shall they abide
And had they believed in God and the Prophet, and that which was sent down unto him, they would not have taken them as protectors, but many of them are iniquitous
Thou wilt surely find the most hostile of men toward those who believe to be the Jews and those who ascribe partners unto God. And thou wilt find the nearest of them in affection toward those who believe to be those who say, “We are Christians.” That is because among them are priests and monks, and because they are not arrogant
And when they hear that which was sent down unto the Messenger, thou seest their eyes overflow with tears because of the truth they recognize. They say, “Our Lord, we believe, so inscribe us among the witnesses
And how should we not believe in God and the truth that has come unto us, when we desire that our Lord should cause us to enter among the righteous people?”
So God rewarded them for what they said with Gardens that have rivers running below, to abide therein, and that is the recompense of the virtuous
As for those who disbelieved and denied Our signs—such shall be the inhabitants of Hellfire
O you who believe! Do not forbid the good things that God has made lawful unto you, and do not transgress. Surely God loves not transgressors
Eat of that which God has provided you that is lawful and good, and reverence God, in Whom you are believers
God will not take you to task for that which is frivolous in your oaths, but He will take you to task for the oaths you have pledged in earnest. The expiation thereof is the feeding of ten indigent people with the equivalent of that which you feed your own family, or clothing them, or freeing a slave. And whosoever finds not [the means], let him fast for three days. That is the expiation for your oaths when you have sworn [them]. But keep your oaths. Thus does God make clear unto you His signs, that haply you may give thanks
O you who believe! Wine, and gambling, and idols, and divining arrows are but a means of defilement, of Satan’s doing. So avoid it, that haply you may prosper
Satan desires only to sow enmity and hatred among you through wine and gambling, and to turn you away from the remembrance of God, and from prayer. Will you, then, refrain
Obey God and obey the Messenger, and be wary. But if you turn away, then know that only the clear proclamation is incumbent upon Our Messenger
There is no blame upon those who believe and perform righteous deeds for that which they have eaten, so long as they are reverent, and believe, and perform righteous deeds, then are reverent and believe, and then are reverent and virtuous. And God loves the virtuous
O you who believe! God will surely try you with something of the game you obtain with your hands and your spears, so that God may know the one who fears Him unseen. So whosoever transgresses after that, his shall be a painful punishment
O you who believe! Slaughter not any game while you are in a state of pilgrim sanctity. And [for] the one among you who slaughters it intentionally, a recompense of cattle, the like of that which he slaughtered, as judged by two just men among you, as an offering brought to the Ka?bah, or the expiation of feeding the indigent, or the equivalent of this in fasting, that he may taste the evil consequences of his affair. God has forgiven that which is past, but whosever relapses, God will take vengeance upon him, and God is Mighty, Possessor of Vengeance
The game of the sea and the food thereof is made lawful unto you—an enjoyment for you and for the travelers—but the game of the land is forbidden unto you so long as you remain in a state of pilgrim sanctity. And reverence God, unto Whom you shall be gathered
God has made the Ka?bah, the Sacred House, a support for mankind, and the sacred month, and the offerings, and the garlands, this that you might know that God knows whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and that God is Knower of all things
Know that God is severe in retribution, and that God is Forgiving, Merciful
Only the proclamation is incumbent upon the Messenger. And God knows what you disclose and what you conceal
Say, “The good and the wicked are not equal, though the abundance of the wicked may impress you.” So reverence God, O possessors of intellect, that you may prosper
O you who believe! Ask not about things which, if they were disclosed to you, would trouble you. And if you ask about them while the Quran is being sent down, they will be disclosed to you. God has pardoned this, and God is Forgiving, Clement
A people before you asked about these things, then came to be disbelievers therein
God has not established ba?irah, or sa?ibah, or wa?ilah, or ?am. But those who disbelieve fabricate lies against God, and most of them do not understand
And when it is said unto them, “Come unto that which God has sent down, and unto the Messenger,” they say, “Sufficient for us is that which we have found our fathers practicing.” What! Even if their fathers knew naught and were not rightly guided
O you who believe! You have charge of your own souls. He who is astray cannot harm you if you are rightly guided. Unto God shall be your return all together, and He shall inform you of what you used to do
O you who believe! The witness between you, when death approaches one of you, at the time of the bequest, shall be two just men among you, or two from among other than yourselves if you are traveling upon the earth when death befalls you. Detain the two of them after the prayer, and let them both swear by God, if you doubt [them], “We will not sell it for any price, though he were a kinsman, nor will we conceal the witness of God, for then we would surely be among the sinners.”
But if it is discovered that the two of them are guilty of sin, then two others shall stand in their place, from those most entitled as claimants, and swear by God, “Indeed, our witness is truer than their witness, and we have not transgressed, for then we would surely be among the wrongdoers.”
Thus it is more likely that they will bear true witness, or fear that their oaths will be countered by oaths thereafter. And reverence God and listen. God guides not iniquitous people
The day when God will gather the messengers and say, “What response did you receive?” they will say, “We have no knowledge. Truly it is Thou Who knowest best the things unseen.”
Then God will say, “O Jesus son of Mary! Remember My Blessing upon thee, and upon thy mother, when I strengthened thee with the Holy Spirit, that thou mightest speak to people in the cradle and in maturity; and when I taught thee the Book, Wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel; and how thou wouldst create out of clay the shape of a bird, by My Leave, and thou wouldst breathe into it, and it would become a bird, by My Leave; and thou wouldst heal the blind and the leper, by My Leave; and thou wouldst bring forth the dead, by My Leave; and how I restrained the Children of Israel from thee, when thou didst bring them clear proofs, and those who disbelieved among them said, ‘This is naught but manifest sorcery.’
And when I inspired the apostles to believe in Me and in My messenger, they said, ‘We believe. Bear witness that we are submitters.’”
When the apostles said, “O Jesus son of Mary! Is thy Lord able to send down to us from Heaven a table spread with food?” He said, “Reverence God, if you are believers.”
They said, “We desire to eat from it, so that our hearts may be at peace, and we may know that thou hast spoken truthfully unto us, and we may be among the witnesses thereto.”
Jesus son of Mary said, “O God, our Lord! Send down unto us a table from Heaven spread with food, to be a feast for us—for the first of us and the last of us—and a sign from Thee, and provide for us, for Thou art the best of providers.”
God said, “I shall indeed send it down unto you. But whosoever among you disbelieves thereafter, I shall surely punish him with a punishment wherewith I have not punished any other in all the worlds.”
And when God said, “O Jesus son of Mary! Didst thou say unto mankind, ‘Take me and my mother as gods apart from God?’” He said, “Glory be to Thee! It is not for me to utter that to which I have no right. Had I said it, Thou wouldst surely have known it. Thou knowest what is in my self and I know not what is in Thy Self. Truly it is Thou Who knowest best the things unseen
I said naught to them save that which Thou commanded me: ‘Worship God, my Lord and your Lord.’ And I was a witness over them, so long as I remained among them. But when Thou didst take me [to Thyself], it was Thou Who wast the Watcher over them. And Thou art Witness over all things
If Thou punisheth them, they are indeed Thy servants, but if Thou forgiveth them, then indeed Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.”
God said, “This is the Day wherein the truthful shall benefit from their truthfulness. For them shall be Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein forever. God is content with them, and they are content with Him. That is the great triumph.”
Unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is therein, and He is Powerful over all things
Praise be to God, Who created the heavens and the earth, and made darkness and light. Yet those who do not believe ascribe equals to their Lord
He it is Who created you from clay, then decreed a term. A term is appointed with Him—yet still you doubt
He is God in the heavens and on the earth: He knows your secret and that which you make public, and He knows that which you earn
Never did a sign from among the signs of their Lord come unto them, but that they turned away from it
They indeed denied the truth when it came unto them, but tidings will soon come to them of that which they used to mock
Have they not considered how many a generation We destroyed before them? We had established them on the earth more firmly than We have established you, and We sent the sky upon them with abundant rains, and made rivers flow beneath them. Then We destroyed them for their sins, and brought into being after them another generation
Had We sent down unto thee a Book inscribed on parchment, such that they could touch it with their hands, those who do not believe would have said, “This is naught but manifest sorcery.”
And they would say, “Why has not an angel been sent down unto him?” Had We sent down an angel, then the matter would be decreed, and they would be granted no respite
Had We made him an angel, We would have sent him as a man, thus obscuring for them that which they themselves obscure
Messengers have surely been mocked before thee. Then those who scoffed at them were beset by that which they used to mock
Say, “Journey upon the earth and behold how the deniers fared in the end.”
Say, “Unto whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth?” Say, “Unto God. He has prescribed Mercy for Himself. He will surely gather you on the Day of Resurrection, in which there is no doubt. Those who have lost their souls, they do not believe
Unto Him belongs all that dwells in the night and in the day, and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.”
Say, “Shall I take as a protector anyone other than God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, who feeds and is not fed?” Say, “I was commanded to be the first of those who submit.” And be not among the idolaters
Say, “Truly I fear the punishment of a tremendous Day should I disobey my Lord.”
Whosoever is spared on that Day, He has certainly been merciful unto him, and that is the manifest triumph
If God should touch thee with affliction, none can remove it save He, and should He touch thee with goodness, then He is Powerful over all things
He is Dominant over His servants; and He is the Wise, the Aware
Say, “What thing is greatest as testimony?” Say, “God is Witness between you and me. And this Quran has been revealed unto me, that thereby I may warn you and whomsoever it may reach. Do you truly bear witness that there are other gods beside God?” Say, “I bear no such witness.” Say, “He is only One God, and truly I am quit of that which you ascribe as partners unto Him.”
Those unto whom We gave the Book recognize it as they recognize their own children. Those who have lost their souls, they do not believe
Who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God or denies His signs? Surely the wrongdoers will not prosper
And on the Day when We shall gather them all together, We shall say unto those who ascribed partners unto God, “Where are those partners whom you claimed?”
Then their contention will be but to say, “By God, our Lord, we were not idolaters.”
Behold how they lie against themselves, but that which they used to fabricate has forsaken them
Among them are those who listen to thee, but We have placed coverings over their hearts, such that they understand it not, and in their ears a deafness. Were they to see every sign, they would not believe in it, so that when they come to thee, they dispute with thee. Those who disbelieve say, “This is naught but fables of those of old.”
And they forbid it, and keep away from it, and they destroy none but themselves, though they are unaware
If thou couldst see when they are arraigned before the Fire, whereupon they will say, “Would that we were sent back! Then we would not deny the signs of our Lord, but we would be among the believers!”
Nay, but it has now become clear to them what they used to hide. And even if they were sent back, they would return to the very thing they had been forbidden. Truly they are liars
They say, “There is naught but our life in this world, and we shall not be resurrected.”
If thou couldst see when they are arraigned before their Lord, He will say, “Is this not the truth?” They will say, “Yea, indeed, by our Lord!” He will say, “Then taste the punishment for having disbelieved.”
Lost indeed are those who deny the meeting with God till, when the Hour comes upon them suddenly, they say, “Alas for us, that we neglected it!” They will bear their burdens upon their backs. Behold! Evil is that which they bear
The life of this world is naught but play and diversion. Better indeed is the Abode of the Hereafter for those who are reverent. Do you not understand
We know well that what they say grieves thee. Yet, it is not thee that they deny. Rather, it is the signs of God that the wrongdoers reject
Surely messengers were denied before thee, and they bore patiently their being denied and persecuted till Our help came to them. None alters the Words of God, and there has already come unto thee some tidings of the messengers
And if their turning away is distressing to thee, then seekest, if thou canst, a tunnel into the earth, or a ladder unto the sky, that thou mightest bring them a sign. Had God willed, He would have gathered them all to guidance—so be not among the ignorant
Only those who hear will respond. As for the dead, God will resurrect them, and unto Him they shall be returned
They say, “Why has no sign been sent down unto him from his Lord?” Say, “Surely God has the power to send down a sign.” But most of them know not
There is no creature that crawls upon the earth, nor bird that flies upon its wings, but that they are communities like yourselves—We have neglected nothing in the Book—and they shall be gathered unto their Lord in the end
Those who deny Our signs are deaf and dumb, in darkness. Whomsoever God will, He leads astray, and whomsoever He will, He places him upon a straight path
Say, “Think to yourselves: were the Punishment of God to come upon you, or were the Hour to come upon you, would you call upon anyone other than God, if you are truthful?”
Nay, but it is upon Him that you would call, and He would remove that which had caused you to call upon Him, if it be His Will, and you would forget whatever partners you had ascribed unto Him
We have indeed sent messengers unto communities before thee, and We seized them with misfortune and hardship, that they might humble themselves
If only, when Our Might came upon them, they had humbled themselves. But rather their hearts hardened, and Satan made all they used to do seem fair unto them
So when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We opened unto them the gates of all things, till, as they exulted in what they were given, We seized them suddenly, whereupon they came to despair
Thus was cut off the last remnant of the people who did wrong. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Say, “Think to yourselves: were God to take away your hearing and your sight and seal your hearts, what god other than God would restore them unto you?” Behold how We vary the signs; yet still they turn away
Say, “Think to yourselves: were the Punishment of God to come upon you suddenly or openly, would any be destroyed save the wrongdoing people?”
We do not send the messengers save as bearers of glad tidings and as warners. Thus whosoever believes and makes amends, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
But as for those who deny Our signs, the punishment shall befall them for the iniquity they committed
Say, “I do not say unto you that with me are the treasuries of God; nor do I know the unseen; nor do I say unto you that I am an angel. I follow only that which is revealed unto me.” Say, “Are the blind and the seer equal? Will you not, then, reflect?”
Warn hereby those who fear that they will be gathered unto their Lord—they have, apart from Him, no protector and no intercessor—that they might be reverent
And drive not away those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, desiring His Face. Naught of their reckoning falls upon thee and naught of thy reckoning falls upon them, such that thou shouldst drive them away and thus become one of the wrongdoers
Thus did We try some of them by means of others, that they might say, “Are these the ones whom God has graced among us?” Does God not know best those who are thankful
When those who believe in Our signs come to thee, say, “Peace be upon you! Your Lord has prescribed Mercy for Himself, that whosoever among you does evil in ignorance and thereafter repents and makes amends, He is truly Forgiving, Merciful.”
Thus do We expound the signs, that the way of the guilty may be made clear
Say, “I am forbidden to worship those whom you call upon apart from God.” Say, “I will not follow your caprices, for then I would have gone astray, and I would not be among the rightly guided.”
Say, “Truly I stand upon a clear proof from my Lord, and you have denied Him. That which you seek to hasten is not within my power. Judgment belongs to God alone, He relates the Truth, and He is the best of deciders.”
Say, “If that which you seek to hasten were within my power, then the matter would be decreed between you and me, and God knows best the wrongdoers.”
And with Him are the keys of the Unseen. None knows them but He; and He knows what is on land and sea; no leaf falls but that He knows it, nor any seed in the dark recesses of the earth, nor anything moist or dry, but that it is in a clear Book
He it is Who takes your souls by night, and He knows what you commit by day. Then by day He resurrects you, that a term appointed may be fulfilled. Then unto Him shall be your return, and He shall inform you of that which you used to do
And He is Dominant over His servants. He sends guardians over you, till, when death comes unto one of you, Our messengers take him, and they neglect not their duty
Then they are returned unto God, their true Master. Surely judgment belongs to Him, and He is the swiftest of reckoners
Say, “Who saves you from the darkness of land and sea, when you call upon Him humbly and in secret [saying], ‘If only He saves us from this, we shall surely be among the thankful’?”
Say, “God saves you from this and from every distress; yet you ascribe partners unto Him!”
Say, “He is the One Who has power to send a punishment upon you from above you or from beneath your feet, or to confound you as discordant factions and make you taste the might of one another.” Behold how We vary the signs, that they may understand
Thy people have denied it, though it is the truth. Say, “I am not a guardian over you
For every tiding there is a fixed setting, and soon you shall know.”
And when thou seest those who engage in vain discussion about Our signs, turn away from them till they engage in other discourse. And if Satan should cause thee to forget, then once thou hast remembered, sit not in the company of wrongdoing people
Their reckoning falls not upon those who are reverent, but [upon them is] a reminder, that they might be reverent
Leave those who take their religion to be play and diversion, and who are deluded by the life of this world, but remind them with it, lest any soul be delivered to ruin because of what it has earned—it has no protector apart from God, nor any intercessor, and though it should offer every kind of ransom, it shall not be accepted from it. Those are the ones delivered to ruin for that which they have earned. Theirs shall be a drink of boiling liquid and a painful punishment for having disbelieved
Say, “Apart from God, shall we call upon that which neither benefits nor harms us, and be turned back on our heels after God has guided us, like one bewildered, seduced by satans on the earth, though he has companions who call him to guidance, ‘Come to us!’?” Say, “Indeed, the Guidance of God is the true guidance, and we are commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds
and to perform the prayer and to reverence Him; it is unto Him that you shall be gathered.”
He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in truth; and on the day He says “Be!” and it is, His Word is the Truth. And sovereignty is His on the Day when the trumpet is blown, Knower of the Unseen and the seen; and He is the Wise, the Aware
And when Abraham said unto his father, Azar, “Do you take idols for gods? Truly I see you and your people in manifest error.”
Thus did We show Abraham the dominion of the heavens and the earth, that he might be among those possessing certainty
When the night grew dark upon him, he saw a star. He said, “This is my Lord!” But when it set, he said, “I love not things that set.”
Then when he saw the moon rising he said, “This is my Lord!” But when it set, he said, “If my Lord does not guide me, I shall surely be among the people who are astray.”
Then when he saw the sun rising he said, “This is my Lord! This is greater!” But when it set, he said, “O my people! Truly I am quit of the partners you ascribe
Truly, as a ?anif, I have turned my face toward Him Who created the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the idolaters.”
His people disputed with him. He said, “Do you dispute with me concerning God, when He has guided me? I fear not the partners you ascribe unto Him, save as my Lord wills. My Lord encompasses all things in Knowledge. Will you not, then, remember
How should I fear the partners you ascribe, when you do not fear ascribing partners unto God for which He has sent down to you no authority? So which of the two parties has greater right to security, if you know
Those who believe and who do not obscure their belief through wrongdoing, it is they who have security, and they are rightly guided.”
That was Our argument, which We gave unto Abraham against his people. We raise in degrees whomsoever We will. Truly thy Lord is Wise, Knowing
And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob, each We guided. And We guided Noah before, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron—thus do We recompense the virtuous
And Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias—each was among the righteous
And Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot—each We favored above the worlds
And from among their fathers, and their progeny, and their brethren, We chose them and guided them unto a straight path
That is the Guidance of God, with which He guides whomsoever He will among His servants. But were they to ascribe partners unto God, all that they were doing would have come to naught
They are those to whom We have given the Book, judgment, and prophethood. So if they do not believe in them, We have entrusted them to a people who will not disbelieve in them
They are those whom God has guided, so follow their guidance. Say, “I ask not of you any reward for it. It is naught but a reminder for the worlds.”
They did not measure God with His true measure when they said, “God has not sent down aught to any human being.” Say, “Who sent down the Book that Moses brought as a light and a guidance for mankind, which you make into parchments that you display, while hiding much? And you were taught that which you knew not, neither you nor your fathers.” Say, “Allah,” then leave them to play at their vain discourse
And this is a blessed Book that We have sent down, confirming that which came before it, that thou mayest warn the Mother of Cities and those around her. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in it, and they are mindful of their prayers
Who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God, or says, “It has been revealed unto me,” though naught has been revealed unto him, and one who says, “I will send down the like of what God has sent down”? If thou couldst see when the wrongdoers are in the throes of death, and the angels stretch forth their hands, “Yield up your souls! This day shall you be recompensed with the punishment of humiliation for having spoken untruth against God, and for waxing arrogant against His signs.”
And [God will say], “Now you have come unto Us alone, just as We created you the first time, and you have left behind that which We had bestowed upon you. We see not with you your intercessors—those whom you claimed were partners [unto God]. Now the bond between you has been severed, and that which you once claimed has forsaken you.”
Truly God is the Cleaver of the grain and the fruit stone. He brings forth the living from the dead, and He is the One Who brings forth the dead from the living. That is God—how, then, are you perverted—
Cleaver of the dawn. He has made the night for repose, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. Such is the decree of the Mighty, the Knowing
He it is Who has made for you the stars, that you might be guided by them amid the darkness of land and sea. We have expounded the signs for a people who know
And He it is Who brought you into being from a single soul, and then [has given you] a dwelling place and a repository. We have expounded the signs for a people who understand
And He it is Who sends down water from the sky. Thereby We bring forth the shoot of every plant, and from it We bring forth vegetation, from which We bring forth grain in closely packed rows; and from the date palm and from its sheaths, [We bring forth] clusters of dates hanging low, and gardens of grapes, olives, and pomegranates, like unto one another and yet not alike. Look upon their fruits, as they grow and ripen! Truly in that are signs for a people who believe
They make the jinn partners unto God, though He created them, and falsely attribute sons and daughters to Him, without any knowledge. Glory be to Him! Exalted is He above that which they ascribe
The Unique Originator of the heavens and the earth! How should He have a child when He has no consort, and He created all things, and He is Knower of all things
That is God, your Lord, there is no god but He, Creator of all things. So worship Him. And He is Guardian over all things
Sight comprehends Him not, but He comprehends all sight. And He is the Subtle, the Aware
Insight has come to you from your Lord. So whosoever sees clearly, it is to the benefit of his own soul. And whosoever is blind, it is to its detriment, and I am not a keeper over you
Thus do We vary the signs, lest they should say, “You have studied,” and that We might make it clear for a people who know
Follow that which has been revealed unto thee from thy Lord—there is no god but He—and turn away from the idolaters
Had God willed, they would not have ascribed partners unto God. We have not made thee a keeper over them, nor art thou their guardian
Do not revile those whom they call upon apart from God, lest they should revile God out of enmity, without any knowledge. Thus have We made the deeds of every community seem fair unto them. Then unto their Lord shall be their return, and He will inform them of that which they used to do
They swear by God with their most solemn oaths that were a sign to come unto them, they would surely believe in it. Say, “Signs are with God alone.” What will make you realize that, even if they were to come, they would still not believe
We shall cause their hearts and their sight to waver, as they did not believe in it the first time, and We shall leave them to wander confused in their rebellion
Even if We were to send down angels unto them, and the dead were to speak to them, and We were to gather all things in front of them, they would still not believe, unless God wills. But most of them are ignorant
Thus have We made for every prophet an enemy—satans from among mankind and jinn, who inspire each other with flowery discourse in order to deceive. Had thy Lord willed, they would not have done so. So leave them and that which they fabricate
so that the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter may incline toward it, and be content with it, and so commit that which they commit
[Say,] “Shall I seek a judge apart from God, when it is He Who has sent down unto you the Book, expounded?” Those unto whom We have given the Book know that it has been sent down from thy Lord in truth; so be not among the doubters
The Word of thy Lord is fulfilled in truth and justice. None alters His Words, and He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Wert thou to obey most of those on earth, they would lead thee astray from the way of God; they follow naught but conjecture, and they do but surmise
Surely thy Lord knows best those who stray from His way, and He knows best the rightly guided
So eat of that over which the Name of God has been invoked, if you are believers in His signs
What ails you that you eat not that over which the Name of God has been invoked, when He has expounded for you that which He has forbidden you, unless you are compelled thereto? Indeed, many lead astray through their own caprices, without any knowledge. Surely thy Lord is He Who knows best the transgressors
Forsake sin, both outward and inward. Surely those who commit sin shall be recompensed for that which they used to do
And eat not of that over which the Name of God has not been invoked; truly it is iniquity. Indeed, the satans inspire their friends to dispute with you, and if you obey them, you are surely idolaters
Is he who was dead, and to whom We give life, making for him a light by which to walk among mankind, like unto one who is in darkness from which he does not emerge? Thus for the disbelievers, what they used to do was made to seem fair unto them
And thus have We made great ones among the guilty in every town, that they may plot therein. But they only plot against themselves, though they are unaware
And when a sign comes unto them, they say, “We will not believe till we are given the like of that which was given to the messengers of God.” God knows best where to place His message. Humiliation before God and a severe punishment shall soon befall the guilty for that which they used to plot
Whomsoever God wishes to guide, He expands his breast for submission. And whomsoever He wishes to lead astray, He makes his breast narrow and constricted, as if he were climbing to the sky. Thus does God heap defilement upon those who do not believe
This is the path of thy Lord, made straight. We have expounded the signs for a people who take heed
Theirs shall be the Abode of Peace with their Lord, and He shall be their Protector, because of that which they used to do
On the Day when He shall gather them all together [He shall say], “O company of jinn! Many among mankind have you claimed.” And their friends among mankind will say, “Our Lord! We have profited from each other, but now we have reached our term which Thou hadst appointed for us.” He will say, “The Fire is your abode, to abide therein, except as God wills. Truly thy Lord is Wise, Knowing.”
Thus do We make the wrongdoers allies of one another because of that which they used to earn
“O company of jinn and human beings! Did not messengers come unto you from among yourselves, recounting unto you My signs, and warning you of the meeting with this your Day?” They will say, “We bear witness against ourselves.” The life of this world deluded them, and they bear witness against themselves that they were disbelievers
That is because thy Lord would never destroy towns for their wrongdoing while their people were heedless
Unto each are degrees in accordance with that which they have done, and thy Lord is not heedless of that which they do
Thy Lord is Self-Sufficient, Possessed of Mercy. If He will, He can remove you, and in your place appoint whomsoever He will to succeed you, just as He brought you into being from the progeny of another people
Indeed, that which you are promised shall come to pass, and you cannot thwart [it]
Say, “O my people! Work in accordance with your ability; I, too, am working. Soon you shall know whose end is the Abode. Surely the wrongdoers will not prosper.”
And they dedicate to God a share of the crops and cattle He created, saying, “This belongs to God”—or so they claim—“and this belongs to our partners.” But that which is for their partners does not reach God, and that which is for God does reach their partners. Evil indeed is the judgment they make
Likewise have their partners made the slaying of their children seem fair unto many of the idolaters, that they may ruin them and confound them in their religion. Had God willed, they would not have done so. So leave them and that which they fabricate
And they say, “These cattle and crops are sacrosanct; none shall eat of them save whom we will”—or so they claim—and [there are] cattle whose backs are forbidden, and cattle over which they do not invoke the Name of God, fabricating against Him. Soon will He recompense them for that which they used to fabricate
And they say, “That which is in the bellies of these cattle is reserved for our males, and forbidden to our wives, but if it be stillborn, then all shall have a share therein.” Soon will He recompense them for that which they ascribe. Truly He is Wise, Knowing
Lost indeed are those who slay their children foolishly, without knowledge, and make forbidden that which God has provided them, fabricating against God. They indeed have gone astray, and were not rightly guided
He it is Who brings into being gardens, trellised and untrellised, and the date palm and crops with diverse produce, olives and pomegranates, like unto one another and yet not alike. Eat of their fruit when they grow, and pay the due thereof on the day of its harvest, but be not prodigal. Truly He loves not the prodigal
And [He produces] the cattle, some for burden and some for slaughter. Eat of that which God has provided you, and follow not the footsteps of Satan. Truly he is a manifest enemy unto you
Eight pairs: of sheep, two, and of goats, two. Say, “Is it the two males He has forbidden or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females contain? Tell me with knowledge, if you are truthful.”
And of camels, two, and of oxen, two. Say, “Is it the two males He has forbidden or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females contain? Or were you present when God enjoined this upon you?” Who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God, that he may lead men astray without knowledge? Truly God guides not wrongdoing people
Say, “I do not find in that which is revealed unto me anything forbidden to one who would eat thereof, save carrion or blood poured forth, or the flesh of swine—for that is surely defilement—or a sinful offering made to other than God. But whosoever is compelled by necessity, without willfully disobeying or transgressing, truly thy Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.”
And unto those who are Jews, We forbade every animal with claws; and of oxen and sheep We forbade them the fat thereof, save that upon their backs or their entrails or that which is mingled with bone. Thus did We recompense them for their willful disobedience, and surely We are truthful
But if they deny thee, say, “Your Lord is Possessed of vast Mercy, but His Might will not be averted from the guilty people.”
Those who ascribe partners unto God will say, “Had God willed, we would not have ascribed partners unto God, nor our fathers, nor would we have forbidden anything.” Those who were before them had similarly denied, till they tasted Our Might. Say, “Do you have any knowledge that you can produce for us? You follow naught but conjecture, and you merely surmise.”
Say, “Unto God belongs the conclusive argument. Had He willed, He could surely have guided you all.”
Say, “Bring forward your witnesses who can bear witness that God has forbidden this.” Then if they bear witness, do not bear witness with them, and do not follow the caprices of those who deny Our signs, nor those who believe not in the Hereafter and ascribe equals unto their Lord
Say, “Come, I will recite that which your Lord has forbidden you: that you ascribe nothing as partner unto Him, and that you be virtuous toward parents, and that you slay not your children for fear of poverty—We will provide for you and for them—and approach not indecencies, whether outward or inward, and slay not the soul that God has made inviolable, save by right. This He has enjoined upon you, that haply you may understand.”
And approach not the orphan’s property, save in the best manner, till he reaches maturity. And observe fully the measure and the balance with justice. We task no soul beyond its capacity. And when you speak, be just, even if it be [against] a kinsman, and fulfill the pact of God. This He has enjoined upon you, that haply you may remember
This indeed is My path made straight; so follow it, and follow not other ways, lest they separate you from His way. This He has enjoined upon you, that haply you may be reverent
Then We gave unto Moses the Book, complete for those who would be virtuous, as an exposition of all things, and as a guidance and a mercy, that haply they might believe in the meeting with their Lord
And this is a blessed Book that We have sent down; so follow it and be reverent, that haply you may receive mercy
Lest you should say, “The Book was only sent down upon two groups before us, and we were indeed heedless of their study.”
Or lest you should say, “If the Book had been sent down upon us, we would surely have been better guided than they.” Now there has come unto you a clear proof from your Lord, a guidance and a mercy. So who does greater wrong than one who denies the signs of God and turns away from them? Soon shall We recompense those who turn away from Our signs with a terrible punishment for their having turned away
Do they await aught but that the angels should come upon them, or that thy Lord should come, or one of the signs of thy Lord should come? On the day that one of the signs of thy Lord does come, believing will be of no avail to any soul that did not believe beforehand and did not earn some goodness in its belief. Say, “Wait! We, too, are waiting.”
Truly those who have divided their religion and become factions, thou hast nothing to do with them. Their matter rests with God alone; then He will inform them about that which they used to do
Whosoever brings a good deed shall have ten times the like thereof; but whosoever brings an evil deed shall be recompensed only with the like thereof, and they shall not be wronged
Say, “Truly my Lord has guided me unto a straight path, an upright religion, the creed of Abraham, a ?anif, and he was not of the idolaters.”
Say, “Truly my prayer and my sacrifice, my living and my dying are for God, Lord of the worlds
He has no partner. This I am commanded, and I am the first of those who submit.”
Say, “Shall I seek a lord other than God, while He is lord of all things? No soul does evil, save against itself, and none shall bear the burden of another. Then unto your Lord is your return and He will inform you of that wherein you differed.”
He it is Who appointed you vicegerents upon the earth and raised some of you by degrees above others, that He may try you in that which He has given you. Truly thy Lord is Swift in retribution, and truly He is Forgiving, Merciful
Alif. Lam. Mim. ?ad
[This is] a Book sent down unto thee—so let there be no constriction in thy breast because of it—that thou mayest warn thereby, and a Reminder for the believers
Follow that which has been sent down unto you from your Lord, and follow not any protectors apart from Him. Little do you reflect
How many a town have We destroyed! Our Might came upon them by night, or while they took their ease at midday
Their plea, when Our Might came upon them, was but to say, “Truly we were wrongdoers.”
Then We shall surely question those unto whom Our message was sent, and We shall surely question the messengers
Then We shall recount unto them with knowledge, for We were never absent
And the weighing on that Day is true. So those whose balance is heavy, it is they who shall prosper
And as for those whose balance is light, it is they who have ruined their souls by having treated Our signs wrongfully
And We have indeed established you upon the earth and placed means of livelihood for you therein. Little do you give thanks
Indeed, We created you, then We formed you, then We said unto the angels, “Prostrate yourselves before Adam.” And they all prostrated, save Iblis; he was not among those who prostrated
He said, “What prevented thee from prostrating when I commanded thee?” He said, “I am better than him. Thou hast created me from fire, while Thou hast created him from clay.”
He said, “Get down from it! It is not for thee to wax arrogant here. So go forth! Thou art surely among those who are humbled.”
He said, “Grant me respite till the Day they are resurrected.”
He said, “Truly thou art among those granted respite.”
He said, “Because Thou hast caused me to err, I shall surely lie in wait for them on Thy straight path
Then I shall come upon them from in front of them and from behind them, and from their right and from their left. And Thou wilt not find most of them thankful.”
He said, “Go forth from it, disgraced and banished! Whosoever among them follows you, I shall surely fill Hell with you all.”
“O Adam! Dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden, and eat from wheresoever you two will, but approach not this tree, lest you two be among the wrongdoers.”
Then Satan whispered to them, that he might expose to them that which was hidden from them of their nakedness. And he said, “Your Lord has only forbidden you this tree, lest you should become angels, or among those who abide [forever].”
And he swore unto them, “Truly I am a sincere adviser unto you.”
Thus he lured them on through deception. And when they tasted of the tree, their nakedness was exposed to them, and they began to sew together the leaves of the Garden to cover themselves. And their Lord called out to them, “Did I not forbid you from that tree, and tell you that Satan is a manifest enemy unto you?”
They said, “Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If Thou dost not forgive us and have Mercy upon us, we shall surely be among the losers.”
He said, “Get down, each of you an enemy to the other! There will be for you on earth a dwelling place, and enjoyment for a while.”
He said, “Therein you shall live, and therein you shall die, and from there shall you be brought forth.”
O Children of Adam! We have indeed sent down upon you raiment to cover your nakedness, and rich adornment. But the raiment of reverence, that is better. This is among the signs of God, that haply they may remember
O Children of Adam! Let not Satan tempt you, as he caused your parents to go forth from the Garden, stripping them of their raiment to show them their nakedness. Surely he sees you—he and his tribe—whence you see them not. We have indeed made the satans the friends of those who do not believe
When they commit an indecency, they say, “We found our fathers practicing it, and God has commanded us thus.” Say, “Truly God commands not indecency. Do you say of God that which you know not?”
Say, “My Lord has commanded justice. So set your faces [toward Him] at every place of prayer, and call upon Him, devoting religion entirely to Him. Just as He originated you, so shall you return.”
Some He has rightly guided, and some are deserving of error. Truly they took satans as their protectors apart from God and deem them rightly guided
O Children of Adam! Put on your adornment at every place of worship, and eat and drink, but be not prodigal. Truly He loves not the prodigal
Say, “Who has forbidden the adornment of God, which He has brought forth for His servants, and the good things among [His] provision?” Say, “These are for those who believe, in the life of this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they are for them alone.” Thus do We expound the signs for a people who know
Say, “My Lord has only forbidden indecencies—both outward and inward—and sin, and tyranny without right, and that you should ascribe partners unto God, for which He has sent down no authority, and that you should say of God that which you know not.”
And for every community there is a term appointed. When their term comes, they shall not delay it by a single hour, nor shall they advance it
O Children of Adam! Should there come unto you messengers from among yourselves, recounting My signs unto you, then whosoever is reverent and makes amends, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve
But those who deny Our signs and treat them with disdain, it is they who are the inhabitants of the Fire. They shall abide therein
And who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God or denies His signs? For such as these, their portion of the book will reach them, till, when Our messengers come to take them away, they will say, “Where is that which you used to call upon apart from God?” They will respond, “They have forsaken us.” And they bear witness against themselves that they were disbelievers
He will say, “Enter the Fire among communities of jinn and men that have passed away before you!” Every time a community enters, it curses its sister, till, when they have all successively arrived there, the last of them will say of the first of them, “Our Lord, it was they who led us astray; so give them a double punishment in the Fire.” He will say, “For each of you it shall be doubled, but you know not.”
And the first of them will say to the last of them, “You are no better than us; so taste the punishment for that which you have earned.”
Truly those who deny Our signs and wax arrogant against them, the gates of Heaven shall not be opened for them, nor shall they enter the Garden till the camel pass through the eye of the needle. Thus do We recompense the guilty
Hell shall be their resting place, with coverings above them. And thus do We recompense the wrongdoers
As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds—We task no soul beyond its capacity—it is they who are the inhabitants of the Garden; they shall abide therein
And We shall remove whatever rancor lies within their breasts. Rivers shall run below them. And they will say, “Praise be to God, Who guided us unto this. We would not have been rightly guided, had God not guided us. The messengers of our Lord certainly brought the truth.” And a call will be made unto them, “This is the Garden. You have inherited it for that which you used to do.”
The inhabitants of the Garden will call out to the inhabitants of the Fire, “We have found that which our Lord promised us to be true. Have you found that which your Lord promised to be true?” They will respond, “Yes.” Thereupon a herald shall proclaim in their midst, “The curse of God be upon the wrongdoers!”
Those who turn from the way of God and seek to make it crooked, disbelieving in the Hereafter
And there will be a veil between them. And upon the Heights are men who know all by their marks. They will call out to the inhabitants of the Garden, “Peace be upon you!” They will not have entered it, though they hope
And when their eyes turn toward the inhabitants of the Fire, they will say, “Our Lord! Place us not among the wrongdoing people!”
And the inhabitants of the Heights will call out to men whom they know by their marks, “Your accumulating has not availed you, nor has your waxing arrogant
Are these the ones concerning whom you swore that God would not extend any mercy?” “Enter the Garden! No fear shall come upon you, nor shall you grieve.”
The inhabitants of the Fire will call out to the inhabitants of the Garden, “Pour some water down upon us, or some of that which God has provided you.” They will respond, “Truly God has forbidden them both to the disbelievers,”
who took their religion to be diversion and play, and were deluded by the life of this world. So this Day We forget them, as they forgot the meeting with this Day of theirs, and as they used to reject Our signs
We have indeed brought them a Book, which We have expounded with knowledge, as a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe
Do they wait for aught save the full disclosure thereof? The Day when its full disclosure comes, those who forgot it beforehand will say, “The messengers of our Lord indeed brought the truth! Have we any intercessors who might intercede for us? Or might we be returned, that we might do other than what we used to do?” They have surely lost their souls, and that which they used to fabricate has forsaken them
Truly your Lord is God, Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then mounted the Throne. He causes the night to cover the day, which pursues it swiftly; and the sun, the moon, and the stars are made subservient by His Command. Do not creation and command belong to Him? Blessed is God, Lord of the worlds
Call upon your Lord humbly and in secret. Truly He loves not the transgressors
And work not corruption upon the earth after it has been set aright, but call upon Him in fear and in hope. Surely the Mercy of God is ever nigh unto the virtuous
He it is Who sends the winds as glad tidings ahead of His Mercy, so that when they bear heavy-laden clouds, We may drive them toward a land that is dead, and send down water upon it, and thereby bring forth every kind of fruit. Thus shall We bring forth the dead, that haply you may remember
As for the good land, its vegetation comes forth by the leave of its Lord. And as for the bad, it comes forth but sparsely. Thus do We vary the signs for a people who give thanks
Indeed, We sent Noah unto his people, and he said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. Truly I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day!”
The notables among his people said, “Truly we think that you are in manifest error.”
He said, “O my people! There is no error in me, but rather I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I deliver unto you the messages of my Lord, and advise you sincerely, and I know from God what you know not
Or do you marvel that a reminder from your Lord should come unto you by means of a man from among yourselves, so as to warn you, that you might be reverent, and that haply you may receive mercy?”
Yet they denied him. So We saved him and those who were with him in the Ark, and We drowned those who denied Our signs. Truly they were a blind people
And unto ?Ad, their brother, Hud. He said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. Will you not be reverent?”
The notables among his people who disbelieved said, “Truly we think that you are foolish, and we consider you to be among the liars.”
He said, “O my people! There is no foolishness in me, but rather I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I deliver unto you the messages of my Lord, and truly I am a trustworthy adviser unto you
Or do you marvel that a reminder from your Lord should come to you by means of a man from among yourselves, so as to warn you? Remember when He made you vicegerents after the people of Noah, and increased you amply in stature. So remember the boons of God, that haply you may prosper.”
They said, “Have you come unto us so that we may worship God alone, and leave aside what our fathers worshipped? Then bring upon us that wherewith you have threatened us, if you are truthful.”
He said, “Defilement and wrath have already come upon you from your Lord. Do you dispute with me over names that you have named—you and your fathers—for which God has sent down no authority? Then wait! Truly I am waiting along with you.”
So We saved him and those who were with him through a mercy from Us, and We cut off the last remnant of those who denied Our signs and were not believers
And unto Thamud, their brother, ?ali?. He said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. There has come unto you a clear proof from your Lord. This she-camel of God is a sign unto you. Leave her to graze freely on God’s earth, and cause her no harm, lest a painful punishment seize you
Remember when He made you vicegerents after ?Ad and settled you on the earth: you build castles for yourselves on the open plain and hew dwellings in the mountains. So remember the boons of God, and behave not wickedly upon the earth, working corruption.”
The notables among his people who were arrogant said to those among them who believed and whom they deemed weak, “Do you know that ?ali? has been sent by his Lord?” They said, “Truly we believe in that wherewith he has been sent.”
Those who were arrogant said, “Truly we believe not in that which you believe.”
So they hamstrung the she-camel and insolently defied the Command of their Lord. And they said, “O ?ali?! Bring upon us that wherewith you have threatened us, if you are among those sent [by God].”
So the earthquake seized them, and morning found them lying lifeless in their abode
So he turned away from them and said, “O my people! I indeed delivered unto you the message of my Lord, and advised you sincerely, but you love not sincere advisers.”
And Lot, when he said to his people, “What! Do you commit an indecency such as none in the world committed before you
Verily you come with desire unto men instead of women. Indeed, you are a prodigal people!”
And the reply of his people was but to say, “Expel them from your town! Truly they are a people who keep themselves pure.”
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was among those who lagged behind
And We sent down a rain upon them; so behold how the guilty fared in the end
And unto Midian, their brother, Shu?ayb. He said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. There has come unto you a clear proof from your Lord. So observe fully the measure and the balance and diminish not people’s goods, nor work corruption upon the earth after it has been set aright. That is better for you, if you are believers
And do not lie in wait on every path, threatening and turning away those who believe in Him from the way of God, and seeking to make it crooked. And remember when you were few, and He made you many. And behold how the workers of corruption fared in the end
If a group of you believe in that wherewith I have been sent, and a group of you believe not, then be patient till God shall judge between us, and He is the best of judges.”
The notables among his people who were arrogant said, “We shall surely expel you, O Shu?ayb, and those who believe along with you from our town, unless you revert to our creed.” He said, “What! Even though we are unwilling
We would be fabricating a lie against God were we to revert to your creed after God had delivered us from it. It is not for us to revert thereto unless God, our Lord, should will. Our Lord encompasses all things in knowledge. In God do we trust. Our Lord! Decide between us and our people in truth, and Thou art the best of deciders.”
The notables among his people who disbelieved said, “Verily if you follow Shu?ayb, you shall surely be the losers.”
So the earthquake seized them, and morning found them lying lifeless in their abode
Those who denied Shu?ayb, it was as though they had never dwelt there. Those who denied Shu?ayb, they themselves were the losers
So he turned away from them and said, “O my people! I indeed delivered unto you the messages of my Lord, and advised you sincerely. So how can I grieve for a disbelieving people?”
We sent no prophet to a town but that We seized its people with misfortune and hardship, that haply they would humble themselves
Then We replaced evil [circumstances] with good, till they multiplied and said, “Hardship and ease visited our fathers [as well].” Then We seized them suddenly, while they were unaware
Had the people of the towns believed and been reverent, We would surely have opened unto them blessings from Heaven and earth. But they denied, so We seized them for that which they used to earn
Did the people of the towns feel secure from Our Might coming upon them by night, while they were sleeping
Or did the people of the towns feel secure from Our Might coming upon them in broad daylight, while they were playing
Did they feel secure from God’s plotting? None feels secure from God’s plotting, save the people who are losers
Does it not serve as guidance unto those who inherited the earth after its [earlier] inhabitants that, if We willed, We could smite them for their sins and set a seal upon their hearts such that they would not hear
These are the towns whose stories We have recounted unto thee. Their messengers certainly brought them clear proofs, but they would not believe in what they had denied earlier. Thus does God set a seal upon the hearts of the disbelievers
We did not find most of them [faithful to their] pact. Indeed, We found most of them to be iniquitous
Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs unto Pharaoh and his notables, but they treated them wrongfully; so behold how the workers of corruption fared in the end
And Moses said, “O Pharaoh! I am truly a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
obligated to speak naught about God save the truth. I have brought you a clear proof from your Lord; so send forth with me the Children of Israel.”
He said, “If you have brought a sign, then bring it forth, if you are among the truthful.”
So he cast his staff and, behold, it was a serpent manifest
And he drew forth his hand and, behold, it was white to the onlookers
The notables among Pharaoh’s people said, “Truly this is a knowledgeable sorcerer
He desires to expel you from your land; so what do you command?”
They said, “Put him and his brother off for a while, and send marshalers to the cities
to bring you every knowledgeable sorcerer.”
And the sorcerers came unto Pharaoh. They said, “We shall surely have a reward if it is we who are victorious.”
He said, “Yes, and indeed you shall be among those brought nigh.”
They said, “O Moses! either you cast, or we will be the ones who cast.”
He said, “Cast!” And when they cast, they bewitched the eyes of the people and struck them with awe, and they brought forth a mighty sorcery
And We revealed unto Moses, “Cast thy staff!” And, behold, it devoured all their deceptions
Thus the truth came to pass, and whatsoever they did was shown to be false
Then and there they were vanquished and turned back, humbled
And the sorcerers were cast down prostrate
They said, “We believe in the Lord of the worlds
the Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
Pharaoh said, “You believe in him before I grant you leave! This is surely a plot you have devised in the city, that you might expel its people therefrom. Soon you shall know
I shall surely cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides; then I shall surely crucify you all!”
They said, “Truly we turn unto our Lord
You take vengeance upon us only because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came unto us. Our Lord, shower us with patience, and let us die as submitters.”
The notables among Pharaoh’s people said, “Will you leave Moses and his people to work corruption in the land and to leave you and your gods?” He said, “We shall slay their sons and spare their women. Truly we are above them, dominant.”
Moses said unto his people, “Seek help from God and be patient. Truly the land belongs to God; He bequeaths it to whomsoever He will among His servants. And the end belongs to the reverent.”
They said, “We were persecuted before you came to us, and after you came to us.” He said, “It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemies and make you vicegerents upon the earth, that He may observe how you behave.”
And We indeed afflicted the House of Pharaoh with drought and a shortage of crops, that haply they would be reminded
But whenever good came to them, they would say, “This is ours.” And if an evil befell them, they would consider it an ill omen on account of Moses and those who were with him. Nay, their ill omen lies with God, though most of them know not
And they said, “Whatever sign you may bring to bewitch us thereby, we will not believe in you.”
So We sent against them the flood and the locusts, and the lice and the frogs and the blood—signs expounded. But they waxed arrogant, and they were a guilty people
And when the torment came down upon them, they said, “O Moses! Call upon your Lord for us by the covenant He has made with you. If you lift this torment from us, we shall surely believe in you, and we shall surely send forth the Children of Israel with you.”
But when We lifted the torment from them, for a term they were to fulfill, behold, they reneged
So We took vengeance upon them and drowned them in the sea for their having denied Our signs and for having been heedless of them
And We bequeathed unto the people who were oppressed the eastern and western parts of the land that We blessed. And the most beautiful Word of thy Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel because they were patient. And We demolished all that Pharaoh and his people had wrought and that which they used to build
And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and they came upon a people clinging to their idols. They said, “O Moses! Make for us a god as they have gods.” He said, “Truly you are an ignorant people
As for these, what they practice shall perish, and vain is that which they used to do.”
He said, “Shall I seek for you a god other than God, when He has favored you above the worlds?”
And when We saved you from the House of Pharaoh, who inflicted terrible punishment upon you, slaying your sons and sparing your women. And in this was a great trial from your Lord
And We appointed for Moses thirty nights, and We completed them with ten [more]; thus was completed the appointed term of his Lord: forty nights. And Moses said unto his brother, Aaron, “Take my place among my people, set matters aright, and follow not the way of those who work corruption.”
And when Moses came to Our appointed meeting and his Lord spoke unto him, he said, “My Lord, show me, that I might look upon Thee.” He said, “Thou shalt not see Me; but look upon the mountain: if it remains firm in its place, then thou wilt see Me.” And when his Lord manifested Himself to the mountain, He made it crumble to dust, and Moses fell down in a swoon. And when he recovered, he said, “Glory be to Thee! I turn unto Thee in repentance, and I am the first of the believers.”
He said, “O Moses! Verily I have chosen thee above mankind through My messages and My speaking [unto thee]. So take that which I have given thee, and be among the thankful.”
And We wrote for him upon the Tablets an exhortation concerning all things, and an elaboration of all things. “Take hold of them with strength, and command thy people to hold to the best of them. Soon I shall show thee the abode of the iniquitous.”
I shall turn away from My signs those who wax arrogant upon the earth without right. Even if they were to see every sign, they would not believe in them. And if they were to see the way of sound judgment, they would not take it as a way, but if they were to see the way of error, they would take it as a way. That is because they denied Our signs and were heedless of them
As for those who deny Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, their deeds have come to naught. Are they recompensed for aught save that which they used to do
And while he was away, the people of Moses took a calf [made] from their ornaments—a body that lowed. Did they not consider that it spoke not unto them, nor guided them to any way? They took it up, and they were wrongdoers
And when they wrung their hands and saw that they had gone astray, they said, “If our Lord does not have mercy upon us and forgive us, we shall surely be among the losers!”
And when Moses returned unto his people angry and aggrieved, he said, “How evil is the course you have followed after me! Would you hasten the Command of your Lord?” And he cast down the Tablets and seized his brother by the head, dragging him toward himself. He said, “Son of my mother! Truly the people deemed me weak, and they were about to kill me. So let not the enemies rejoice in my misfortune, and place me not with the wrongdoing people.”
He said, “My Lord, forgive me and my brother and bring us into Thy Mercy, for Thou art the most Merciful of the merciful.”
As for those who took up the calf, anger from their Lord shall seize them, and abasement in the life of this world. Thus do We recompense those who fabricate
But as for those who commit evil deeds and then repent thereafter and believe, surely, thereafter, thy Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
And when the anger abated from Moses, he took up the Tablets; and in their inscription lay a guidance and a mercy for those who are in awe of their Lord
And Moses chose seventy men from his people for Our meeting. And when the earthquake seized them, he said, “My Lord! Hadst Thou willed, Thou wouldst have destroyed them and me beforehand. Wilt Thou destroy us for that which the fools among us have done? It is naught but Thy trial, whereby Thou leadest astray whomsoever Thou wilt, and guidest whomsoever Thou wilt. Thou art our Protector, so forgive us and have mercy upon us, and Thou art the best of forgivers
And prescribe good for us in the life of this world, and in the Hereafter; truly we have turned unto Thee.” He said, “I cause My Punishment to smite whomsoever I will, though My Mercy encompasses all things. I shall prescribe it for those who are reverent, and give alms, and those who believe in Our signs
those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whom they find inscribed in the Torah and the Gospel that is with them, who enjoins upon them what is right, and forbids them what is wrong, and makes good things lawful for them, and forbids them bad things, and relieves them of their burden and the shackles that were upon them. Thus those who believe in him, honor him, help him, and follow the light that has been sent down with him; it is they who shall prosper.”
Say, “O mankind! Truly I am the Messenger of God unto you all—Him to Whom belongs Sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. He gives life and causes death. So believe in God and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in God and His Words; and follow him, that haply you may be guided.”
And among the people of Moses is a community that guides by the truth and does justice thereby
And We divided them into twelve tribes, communities. And We revealed to Moses, when his people asked him for water, “Strike the rock with thy staff.” Then twelve springs gushed forth from it: all the people knew their drinking place. And We shaded them with clouds, and sent down manna and quails upon them, “Eat of the good things We have provided you.” And they wronged Us not, but themselves did they wrong
And when it was said unto them, “Settle in this town, and eat of that which is therein wheresoever you will, and say, ‘Remove the burden!’ And enter the gate prostrating, that We may forgive you your iniquities. We shall increase the virtuous.”
Then those among them who did wrong substituted a word other than that which had been said unto them. So We sent down upon them a torment from heaven for the wrong they used to do
And ask them about the town that was by the sea, when they transgressed the Sabbath. Their fish would come to them, surfacing on the day of their Sabbath, but on the day when they did not observe the Sabbath, they would not come to them. Thus did We try them for their having been iniquitous
And when a community among them said, “Why do you admonish a people whom God is about to destroy or punish with a severe punishment?” They said, “As an excuse before your Lord, and that haply they may be reverent.”
And when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We saved those who forbade evil, and We seized those who did wrong with a dreadful punishment for their having committed iniquity
When they were insolent concerning that which they had been forbidden, We said unto them, “Be you apes, outcast.”
And when thy Lord proclaimed that He would surely send against them, till the Day of Resurrection, those who would inflict upon them a terrible punishment. Truly thy Lord is swift in retribution, and truly He is Forgiving, Merciful
And We divided them into communities on the earth: some of them are righteous and some are otherwise. And We tried them with good things and with evil things, that haply they would return
Then a generation succeeded them who inherited the Book. They grasp the ephemeralities of this lower world and say, “It will be forgiven us.” And if other ephemeralities like them were to come their way, they would grasp them [also]. Did not the covenant of the Book commit them to say naught of God save the truth? They have studied what is in it. And the Abode of the Hereafter is better for those who are reverent. Will you not understand
As for those who cling to the Book and perform the prayer—surely We neglect not the reward of the workers of righteousness
And when We lifted the mountain above them, as if it were a canopy, and they thought it would fall upon them, “Take hold of that which We have given you with strength, and remember what is therein, that haply you may be reverent.”
And when thy Lord took from the Children of Adam, from their loins, their progeny and made them bear witness concerning themselves, “Am I not your Lord?” they said, “Yea, we bear witness”—lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection, “Truly of this we were heedless,”
or lest you should say, “[It is] only that our fathers ascribed partners unto God beforehand, and we were their progeny after them. Wilt Thou destroy us for that which the falsifiers have done?”
Thus do We expound the signs, that haply they may return
And recite unto them the account of the one to whom We gave Our signs, but he cast them off. So Satan made him his follower, and he became one of the deviant
Had We willed, We would surely have elevated him thereby, but he inclined toward the earth and followed his caprice. Thus his parable is that of a dog: if you attack him, he lolls out his tongue, and if you leave him alone, he lolls out his tongue. That is the likeness of the people who deny Our signs. So recount the stories, that haply they may reflect
Evil is the parable of the people who denied Our signs and wronged themselves
Whomsoever God guides, he is rightly guided; and whomsoever He leads astray, it is they who are the losers
We have indeed created for Hell many among jinn and men: they have hearts with which they understand not; they have eyes with which they see not; and they have ears with which they hear not. Such as these are like cattle. Nay, they are even further astray. It is they who are heedless
Unto God belong the Most Beautiful Names; so call Him by them, and leave those who deviate with regard to His Names. Soon they shall be recompensed for that which they used to do
And among those We have created, there is a community that guides by the truth and does justice thereby
And as for those who deny Our signs, We shall lead them on little by little, whence they know not
And I will grant them respite; truly My scheme is firm
Have they not reflected? There is no madness in their companion. He is naught but a clear warner
Or have they not contemplated the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and what things God has created, and that their term may already have drawn nigh? So in what discourse after this will they believe
Whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he. And He leaves them to wander confused in their rebellion
They question thee about the Hour, when it will set in. Say, “Knowledge thereof lies only with my Lord. None save He shall manifest it at its proper time. Heavy shall it weigh upon the heavens and the earth. It shall not come upon you but suddenly.” They question thee as if thou knew it well. Say, “Knowledge thereof lies only with God, but most of mankind know not.”
Say, “I have no power over what benefit or harm may come to me, save as God wills. Had I knowledge of the unseen, I would have acquired much good, and no evil would have touched me. I am naught save a warner and a bearer of glad tidings unto a people who believe
He it is Who created you from a single soul, and made from it its mate, that he might find rest in her. Then, when he covered her, she bore a light burden, and carried it about. But when she had grown heavy, they called upon God, their Lord, “If Thou giveth us a healthy child, we shall surely be among the thankful.”
Then, when He gave them a healthy child, they ascribed partners unto Him with regard to that which He had given them. Exalted is God above the partners they ascribe
Do they ascribe as partners those who created naught and are themselves created
Those who can neither help them, nor help themselves
And if you call them to guidance, they follow you not. It is the same for you whether you call them or whether you remain silent
Truly those whom they call upon apart from God are servants like you. So call upon them! Let them answer you, if you are truthful
Have they feet with which they walk? Have they hands with which they grasp? Have they eyes with which they perceive? Have they ears with which they hear? Say, “Call upon your partners, then scheme against me, and grant me no respite
Truly my Protector is God, Who sent down the Book, and He protects the righteous
And those whom you call upon apart from Him can neither help you, nor help themselves.”
If thou callest them unto guidance, they hear not. Thou seest them looking upon thee, but they see not
Take to pardoning, and enjoin right, and turn away from the ignorant
And should a temptation from Satan provoke thee, seek refuge in God. Truly He is Hearing, Knowing
Truly those who are reverent, when they are touched by a visitation from Satan, they remember; then behold, they see
But as for their brethren, they draw them ever further into error, and then they cease not
And when thou bringest them not a sign, they say, “Why do you not choose it?” Say, “I only follow that which is revealed unto me from my Lord. These are insights from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe.”
And when the Quran is recited, hearken unto it, and listen, that haply you may receive mercy
And remember thy Lord within thy soul, humbly and in awe, being not loud of voice, in the morning and the evening, and be not among those who are heedless
Surely those who are with thy Lord are not too arrogant to worship Him. And they glorify Him, and prostrate unto Him
They question thee concerning the spoils. Say, “The spoils belong to God and the Messenger.” So reverence God and set matters aright among yourselves. And obey God and His Messenger, if you are believers
Only they are believers whose hearts quake with fear when God is mentioned, and when His signs are recited unto them, they increase them in faith, and they trust in their Lord
who perform the prayer and spend from that which We have provided them
It is they who truly are believers. For them are ranks in the sight of their Lord, and forgiveness and a generous provision
[Remember] how thy Lord brought thee forth from thy home in truth, while a group of the believers were averse
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become clear, as though they were being driven to death as they looked on
And [remember] when God promised you that one of the two companies was to be yours, and you wished that the unarmed one would be yours. But God desires to verify the truth through His Words, and to cut off the last remnant of the disbelievers
so that He may verify the truth and prove falsehood to be false, though the guilty be averse
When you sought succor from your Lord, He responded to you, “I shall aid you with a thousand angels rank upon rank.”
And God made it not save as a glad tiding, and that your hearts may be at peace thereby. And victory comes from God alone; truly God is Mighty, Wise
Behold, He covered you with sleepiness, security from Him, and sent down upon you water from the sky to purify you thereby, to remove the defilement of Satan from you, to fortify your hearts, and to make firm your steps thereby
Behold, thy Lord revealed unto the angels, “Truly I am with you; so make firm those who believe. I shall cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve. So strike above the neck, and strike their every fingertip.”
That is because they are in schism with God and His Messenger. And whosoever opposes God and His Messenger—truly God is severe in retribution
Thus it is, so taste it, and [know] that the disbelievers shall have the punishment of the Fire
O you who believe! When you meet those who disbelieve arrayed [for battle], turn not your backs to them
And whosoever turns his back to them that day—unless it be a stratagem of battle or to withdraw to another company—shall certainly earn wrath from God. And his refuge shall be Hell. What an evil journey’s end
You did not slay them, but God slew them, and thou threwest not when thou threwest, but God threw, that He might try the believers with a beautiful trial from Him. Truly God is Hearing, Knowing
Thus it is, and [know] that God makes feeble the scheming of the disbelievers
If you seek victory, then victory has come to you. And if you desist, it would be better for you. And if you return, We shall return, and your company will not avail you aught, even if they be many. And [know] that God is with the believers
O you who believe! Obey God and His Messenger, and turn not away from him, even as you hear [him]
And be not like those who say, “We hear,” though they hear not
Truly the worst of beasts in the sight of God are the deaf and the dumb who understand not
Had God known of any good in them, He would have caused them to hear; yet had He caused them to hear, they would have turned away in rejection
O you who believe! Respond to God and the Messenger when he calls you unto that which will give you life. And know that God comes between a man and his heart, and that unto Him shall you be gathered
And be mindful of a trial that will not befall only those among you who do wrong; and know that God is severe in retribution
And remember when you were few, deemed weak in the land, fearing that the people would snatch you away. Then He sheltered you, and strengthened you with His help, and provided you with good things, that haply you may give thanks
O you who believe! Betray not God and the Messenger, and betray not your trusts knowingly
And know that your property and your children are only a trial, and that God—with Him is a great reward
O you who believe! If you reverence God, He will make for you a criterion, and absolve you of your evil deeds, and forgive you. And God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
And [remember] when those who disbelieve plotted against thee, to capture thee, or to slay thee, or to expel thee. They plotted, and God plotted. And God is the best of plotters
And when Our signs are recited unto them they say, “We have heard already. Had we willed, we could have said the like of this. This is naught but fables of those of old.”
And [remember] when they said, “O God, if this be the truth from Thee, rain down stones upon us from the sky, or bring us a painful punishment.”
But God will not punish them while thou art among them. And God will not punish them while they seek forgiveness
What have they to keep God from punishing them, while they turn [others] from the Sacred Mosque though they are not its protectors? Its protectors are none but the reverent, but most of them know not
Their prayer at the House is naught but whistling and clapping. So taste the punishment for having disbelieved
Truly those who disbelieve spend their wealth to turn [others] from the way of God. They will spend it; then it will be a source of regret for them, and then they will be overcome. And the disbelievers will be gathered unto Hell
that God may separate the bad from the good, and place the bad one upon the other and heap them all together, and place them in Hell. It is they who are the losers
Say to the disbelievers that, if they desist, what is past will be forgiven them, but if they relapse, then the wont of those of old has already passed
And fight them until there is no strife, and religion is wholly for God. But if they desist, then truly God sees whatsoever they do
And if they turn away, know that God is your Master—an excellent Master, an excellent Helper
And know that whatsoever you take as spoils, a fifth is for God and the Messenger, and for kinsfolk, orphans, the indigent, and the traveler, if you believe in God and what We sent down upon Our servant on the Day of Discrimination, the day the two hosts met—and God is Powerful over all things—
when you were on the near slope and they were on the far slope, and the caravan was below you. And had you made a tryst with each other, you would have failed the tryst. But [it came to pass] so that God may conclude a matter that was to be done, so that whosoever should perish, perishes according to a clear proof, and whosoever should live, lives according to a clear proof. And truly God is Hearing, Knowing
[Remember] when God showed them in thy dream as being few. And hadst thou seen them as being many, you would have surely faltered and quarreled over the matter. But God delivered [you]. Truly He knows what lies within breasts
And [remember] when He showed them to you, when you met them, as being few in your eyes, and made you appear to be few in their eyes, so that God may conclude a matter that was to be done. And unto God are all matters returned
O you who believe! When you meet a company in battle, be firm and remember God much, that haply you may prosper
And obey God and His Messenger, and do not quarrel among yourselves lest you falter and your good fortune depart. And be patient; truly God is with the patient
And be not like those who left their homes boastfully and to be seen of men, and to turn [others] from the way of God. And God encompasses whatsoever they do
And [remember] when Satan made their deeds seem fair unto them, and said, “None among mankind shall overcome you today, and I am indeed your defender.” But when the two hosts saw each other, he turned on his heels and said, “I am quit of you! Truly I see what you see not. Truly I fear God, and God is severe in retribution.”
[Remember] when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said, “Their religion has deluded them.” But whosoever trusts in God, truly God is Mighty, Wise
And if only thou couldst see when the angels take those who disbelieve, striking their faces and their backs, and [saying], “Taste the punishment of the burning
This is for what your hands sent forth, and because God wrongs not His servants.”
[Theirs was] like the way of the House of Pharaoh and those before them; they disbelieved in the signs of God; so God seized them for their sins. Truly God is Strong, severe in retribution
That is because God never changes a blessing by which He blesses a people until they change what is in themselves, and because God is Hearing, Knowing
[Theirs was] like the way of the House of Pharaoh and those before them; they denied the signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them for their sins, and drowned the House of Pharaoh, for all were wrongdoers
Truly the worst of beasts in the sight of God are those who have disbelieved and will not believe
those among them with whom thou madest a pact and who then break their pact every time, and who are not reverent
So if thou comest upon them in war, use them to scatter those who will come after them, that haply they might be reminded
And if thou fearest treachery from a people, withdraw from them in a just way. Truly God loves not the treacherous
And let not those who disbelieve suppose that they have outstripped [anyone]. Indeed, they thwart nothing
And prepare for them what you can of strength [of arms] and horses tethered [for battle], frightening thereby the enemy of God and your enemy, and others besides them whom you know not. God knows them. Whatsoever you spend in the way of God shall be paid unto you in full. And you shall not be wronged
And if they incline toward peace, incline thou toward it, and trust in God. Truly He is the Hearing, the Knowing
And if they desire to deceive thee, then God suffices thee. He it is Who supports thee with His Help, and with the believers
and joined their hearts. Hadst thou spent all that is on the earth, it would not have joined their hearts. But God joined them together. Truly He is Mighty, Wise. d
Prophet! God suffices thee and those believers who follow thee. e
Prophet! Rouse the believers to fight. If there be twenty steadfast among you, they shall overcome two hundred. And if there be one hundred of you, they shall overcome one thousand of those who disbelieve, because they are a people who understand not
Now God has lightened your burden, for He knows that there is weakness in you. And if there be one hundred steadfast among you, they shall overcome two hundred. And if there be one thousand, they shall overcome two thousand by God’s Leave. And God is with the steadfast
It is not for a prophet to take captives until he overwhelms [his enemy] in the land. You desire the ephemeralities of this world, while God desires the Hereafter. And God is Mighty, Wise
Were it not for a decree that had already gone forth from God, a great punishment would have befallen you for what you took
So consume the spoils you have taken, lawfully and in a good way, and reverence God. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful. p
Prophet! Say to those captives in your custody, “If God knows there to be any good in your hearts, He will give you what is better than that which was taken from you, and will forgive you. And God is Forgiving, Merciful.”
But if they desire treachery against thee, they have been treacherous with God before and He gave [thee] power over them. And God is Knowing, Wise
Truly those who believe, and migrate, and strive with their wealth and themselves in the way of God, and those who sheltered and helped—they are protectors of one another. As for those who believe and did not migrate, you owe them no protection until they migrate. But if they ask your help for the sake of religion, then help is a duty upon you, except against a people with whom you have a covenant. And God sees whatsoever you do
As for those who disbelieve, they are protectors of one another. Unless you do the same, there will be a strife in the land, and a great corruption
As for those who believe, and migrate, and strive in the way of God, and those who sheltered and helped, it is they who truly are believers. Theirs is forgiveness and a generous provision
As for those who believe after you and migrate and strive with you, they are [to be counted] among you. But family relations have the strongest claim on one another in the Book of God. Truly God is Knower of all things
A repudiation from God and His Messenger to those idolaters with whom you made a treaty
So travel freely throughout the land for four months, and know that you cannot thwart God, and that God shall disgrace the disbelievers
And an announcement from God and His Messenger to the people on the day of the greater ?ajj: that God and His Messenger have repudiated the idolaters. So, if you repent, it would be better for you. And if you turn away, then know that you cannot thwart God. And give the disbelievers glad tidings of a painful punishment
save for those idolaters with whom you have made a treaty, and who thereafter commit no breach against you, nor support anyone against you. So fulfill the treaty with them for its duration. Truly God loves the reverent
Then, when the sacred months have passed, slay the idolaters wheresoever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them at every place of ambush. But if they repent, and perform the prayer and give the alms, then let them go their way. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And if any of the idolaters seek asylum with thee, grant him asylum until he hears the Word of God. Then convey him to his place of safety. That is because they are a people who know not
How can the idolaters have a treaty with God and with His Messenger, save for those with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Mosque? If they remain true to you, remain true to them. Truly God loves the reverent
How, since if they prevail over you, they will not observe any kinship or treaty with you? They please you with their mouths, while their hearts refuse. And most of them are iniquitous
They have sold the signs of God for a paltry price, and have turned from His way. Evil indeed is that which they used to do
observing neither kinship nor treaty with any believer. And it is they who are the transgressors
But if they repent, and perform the prayer and give the alms, then they are your brethren in religion. And We expound the signs for a people who know
But if they renege on their oaths after having made their treaty, and vilify your religion, then fight the leaders of disbelief—truly they have no oaths—that they might desist
Will you not fight a people who broke their oaths, and intended to expel the Messenger, and opened [hostility] against you first? Do you fear them? For God is worthier of being feared by you, if you are believers
Fight them and God will punish them by means of your hands and disgrace them, and He will grant you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people
and will dispel the rage within their hearts. God relents unto whomsoever He will, and God is Knowing, Wise
Or did you suppose that you would be left alone, while God had yet to know whom among you strove and took no friend apart from God, His Messenger, and the believers? And God is Aware of whatsoever you do
It is not for the idolaters to maintain the mosques of God, bearing witness of disbelief against themselves. They are those whose deeds have come to naught, and in the Fire shall they abide
Only they shall maintain the mosques of God who believe in God and the Last Day, perform the prayer and give the alms, and fear none but God. Such as these may be among the rightly guided
Or do you consider giving drink to the pilgrims and maintaining the Sacred Mosque to be like those who believe in God and the Last Day and strive in God’s way? They are not equal in the Eyes of God. And God guides not wrongdoing people
Those who believe and emigrate and strive in the way of God with their wealth and their selves are greater in rank in the Eyes of God. And it is they who are the triumphant
Their Lord gives them glad tidings of Mercy from Him, and Contentment, and Gardens wherein they shall have lasting bliss
abiding therein forever. Truly with God is a great reward
O you who believe! Take not your fathers and your brothers as protectors if they prefer disbelief to belief. As for those among you who take them as protectors, it is they who are the wrongdoers
Say, “If your fathers, your children, your brothers, your spouses, your tribe, the wealth you have acquired, commerce whose stagnation you fear, and dwellings you find pleasing are more beloved to you than God, and His Messenger, and striving in His way, then wait till God comes with His Command.” And God guides not iniquitous people
God indeed granted you victory on many a field, and on the Day of ?unayn when you were impressed at how numerous you were. But it availed you naught, and the earth, despite its breadth, closed in upon you. Then you turned your backs
Then God sent down His Tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and sent down hosts whom you saw not, and punished those who disbelieved. And that is the recompense of the disbelievers
Then thereafter God will relent unto whomsoever He will. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! The idolaters are surely unclean; so let them not come near the Sacred Mosque after this year of theirs. If you fear poverty, God will enrich you from His Bounty if He will. Truly God is Knowing, Wise
Fight those who believe not in God and in the Last Day, and who do not forbid what God and His Messenger have forbidden, and who follow not the Religion of Truth among those who were given the Book, till they pay the jizyah with a willing hand, being humbled
The Jews say that Ezra is the son of God, and the Christians say that the Messiah is the son of God. Those are words from their mouths. They resemble the words of those who disbelieved before. God curse them! How they are perverted
They have taken their rabbis and monks as lords apart from God, as well as the Messiah, son of Mary, though they were only commanded to worship one God. There is no god but He! Glory be to Him above the partners they ascribe
They desire to extinguish the Light of God with their mouths. But God refuses to do aught but complete His Light, though the disbelievers be averse
He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth to make it prevail over all religion, though the idolaters be averse
O you who believe! Verily many of the rabbis and monks consume the wealth of people falsely, and turn from the way of God. [As for] those who hoard gold and silver and spend it not in the way of God, give them glad tidings of a painful punishment
on the Day when it will be heated in the Fire of Hell, and their foreheads, their sides, and their backs will be branded with it. “This is what you hoarded up for yourselves; so taste that which you hoarded.”
Truly the number of months in the Eyes of God is twelve months, [laid down] in the Book of God, the day He created the heavens and the earth. Of them four are sacred. That is the upright religion. So wrong not yourselves during them. And fight the idolaters all together, just as they fight you all together. And know that God is with the reverent
Truly the nasi? is but an increase in disbelief, whereby the disbelievers go astray. They make it lawful one year and forbid it another, in order to reconcile it with the number made sacred by God, thus making lawful that which God has forbidden. The evil of their deeds is made to seem fair unto them, but God guides not the disbelieving people
O you who believe! What ails you, that when it is said unto you, “Go forth in the way of God,” you sink down heavily to the earth? Are you content with the life of this world over the Hereafter? Yet the enjoyment of the life of this world, compared with the Hereafter, is but a little
If you go not forth, He will punish you with a painful punishment, and will place another people in your stead, and you will not harm Him in the least. And God is Powerful over all things
If you help him not, yet God has already helped him. Remember when those who disbelieved expelled him, the second of the two. Yea, the two were in the cave, when he said to his companion, “Grieve not; truly God is with us.” Then God sent down His Tranquility upon him, and supported him with hosts you see not. And He made the word of those who disbelieve to be the lowliest, and the Word of God is the highest. And God is Mighty, Wise
Go forth in the way of God, lightly or heavily, and strive with your wealth and yourselves in the way of God. That is better for you, if you but knew
Were it something ephemeral nearby or an easy journey, they would have followed thee. But the trek was too great for them. And they will swear by God, “If we had been able, we would have gone out with you.” They destroy themselves, and God knows that they are liars
God pardon thee! Why didst thou grant them leave before it became clear to thee who spoke the truth and who the liars were
Those who believe in God and the Last Day ask of thee no leave from striving with their wealth and their selves. And God knows the reverent
Only they ask leave of thee who believe not in God and the Last Day, whose hearts are in doubt, and so they waver in their doubt
And had they desired to go forth, they would have made some preparations for it. But God was averse to their being sent forth; so He held them back, and it was said unto them, “Stay back with those who stay back.”
And had they gone forth with thee, it would have increased thee in naught but troubles. And they would have hurried about in your midst, seeking to incite discord among you. And among you are some who hearken to them. And God knows the wrongdoers
And indeed they sought to incite trials earlier, and turned thee over in their minds, until the truth came and the Command of God was manifest, though they were averse
And among them some say, “Grant me leave, and tempt me not.” Nay, they have fallen into temptation. And truly Hell encompasses the disbelievers
If some good befalls thee, it troubles them. But if some affliction befalls thee, they say, “We already took precautions beforehand,” and they turn away, exulting
Say, “Naught befalls us, save that which God has decreed for us. He is our Master, and in God let the believers trust.”
Say, “Do you anticipate that aught will befall us save one of the two best things? But we anticipate for you that God will afflict you with a punishment from Him, or by our hands. So wait! Truly we are waiting along with you.”
Say, “Spend willingly or unwillingly; it shall never be accepted from you. Truly you are an iniquitous people.”
And naught prevented their spending from being accepted from them, save that they disbelieved in God and in His Messenger, and only come to the prayer lazily, and only spend reluctantly
And let not their wealth or their children impress thee. God desires but to punish them thereby in the life of this world, and that their souls should depart while they are disbelievers
And they swear by God that truly they are of you, but they are not of you. Rather, they are a fearful people
Were they to find a refuge, or caves, or a place to enter, they would turn toward it defiantly
And among them some reproach thee over the charitable offerings; if they are given thereof, they are content, but if they are not given thereof, behold, they are angry
If only they had been content with what God and His Messenger gave them, and said, “God suffices us. God will give unto us from His Bounty, as will the Messenger. Truly our desire is for God.”
The charitable offerings are only for the poor, and the indigent, and those working with them, and those whose hearts are [to be] reconciled, and for [ransoming] slaves and for debtors, and in the way of God, and for the traveler: a duty from God. And God is Knowing, Wise
And among them are those who torment the Prophet, and say, “He is an ear.” Say, “An ear that is good for you. He believes in God and he has faith in the believers, and he is a mercy to those among you who believe.” And [as for] those who torment the Messenger of God, theirs shall be a painful punishment
They swear by God to you, to please you. But God and His Messenger are worthier of being pleased by them, if they are believers
Do they know not that whosoever opposes God and His Messenger, surely for him shall be the Fire of Hell, to abide therein? That is the great disgrace
The hypocrites dread lest a surah be sent down against them, informing them of that which is in their hearts. Say, “Go on mocking. Truly God will bring forth what you dread.”
And if thou askest them, they will surely say, “We were only engaging [in vain talk] and playing.” Say, “Is it God, His signs, and His Messenger you were mocking?”
Make no excuses. You disbelieved after having believed. If We pardon a group of you, We shall punish another group for having been guilty
The hypocrites, men and women, are like unto one another, enjoining wrong, forbidding right, clutching their hands shut. They forgot God; so He forgot them. Truly the hypocrites are iniquitous
Verily God has promised the hypocrites, men and women, and the disbelievers the Fire of Hell, to abide therein. It shall suffice them. God curses them, and theirs shall be a lasting punishment
[Remember] those who were before you. They were mightier than you in power, and greater in wealth and children. So they enjoyed their share, and you enjoyed your share, just as those before you enjoyed their share. And you have engaged [in vain talk] as they engaged [in vain talk]. It is they whose deeds came to naught in this world and in the Hereafter, and it is they who are the losers
Has not the account come to them of those who were before them, the people of Noah, ?Ad, and Thamud, and the people of Abraham, the inhabitants of Midian, and the overthrown cities? Their messengers brought them clear proofs. God wronged them not, but themselves did they wrong
But the believing men and believing women are protectors of one another, enjoining right and forbidding wrong, performing the prayer, giving the alms, and obeying God and His Messenger. They are those upon whom God will have Mercy. Truly God is Mighty, Wise
God has promised the believing men and the believing women Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein, and goodly dwellings in the Gardens of Eden. But Contentment from God is greater; that is the great triumph! s
Prophet! Strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh with them. Their refuge is Hell. What an evil journey’s end
They swear by God that they said it not, but indeed they spoke the word of disbelief, and disbelieved after having submitted [to God]. And they had ambitions that they did not achieve, and they were vengeful only because God and His Messenger enriched them from His Bounty. If they repent, it would be better for them. But if they turn away, God will punish them with a painful punishment in this world and in the Hereafter, and on earth they shall have neither protector nor helper
And among them are those who make a pact with God [saying], “If He gives unto us from His Bounty, we will surely spend in charity, and we will surely be among the righteous.”
But when He gave unto them from His Bounty, they were miserly with it, and turned away in rejection
So He requited them with hypocrisy in their hearts, till the Day they will meet Him, for having failed in that which they promised Him and for having lied
Know they not that God knows their secret and their private discourse, and that God is Knower of things unseen
As for they who reproach those believers who give freely and those who have naught but their keep [to give], and ridicule them—God ridicules them, and theirs shall be a painful punishment
Seek forgiveness for them, or seek not forgiveness for them. If thou seekest forgiveness for them seventy times, God will not forgive them. That is because they disbelieve in God and His Messenger. And God guides not iniquitous people
Those who were left behind exulted in staying back, opposing the Messenger of God, and were averse to striving with their wealth and with their selves in the way of God. And they said, “Go not forth in the heat.” Say, “The Fire of Hell is of a heat more intense,” if they but understood
So let them laugh little and weep much, as a recompense for that which they used to earn
And if God returns thee to a group of them, and they seek leave of thee to go forth, say, “You shall not go forth with me ever; nor shall you fight with me against any enemy. You were content to stay back the first time; so stay back with those who remain behind.”
And never pray over one of them who dies, nor stand by his grave. Truly they disbelieved in God and His Messenger and died iniquitous
And let not their wealth or their children impress thee. God desires only to punish them thereby in this world, and that their souls should depart while they are disbelievers
And when a surah is sent down [saying], “Believe in God and strive with His Messenger,” the affluent among them ask thee for leave, and say, “Let us be among those who stay back.”
They are content to be among those who remain behind, and a seal is set upon their hearts. And so they understand not
But the Messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and with their selves. And it is they who shall have good things, and it is they who shall prosper
God has prepared for them Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein. That is the great triumph
Those seeking to be excused among the Bedouin came in order to be granted leave, while those who lied to God and His Messenger stayed back. A painful punishment shall befall those among them who disbelieve
No blame is there upon the weak, nor upon the sick, nor those who find nothing to spend, if they are sincere toward God and His Messenger. There is no argument against the virtuous—and God is Forgiving, Merciful—
nor upon those who, when they came to thee to give them a mount, and thou didst say to them, “I find nothing upon which to mount you,” turned back, their eyes flowing with tears, grieving that they found nothing to spend
The argument falls only upon those who seek leave of thee though they are wealthy. They are content to be among those who remain behind, and God has set a seal upon their hearts. And so they know not
They will offer excuses to you when you return to them. Say, “Offer no excuses! We shall not believe you. God has already given us news of you. God and His Messenger will see your deeds. Then you will be brought back to the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of that which you used to do.”
They will swear by God to you, when you return to them, that you may turn away from them. So turn away from them. Truly, they are a defilement, and their refuge is Hell, a recompense for that which they used to earn
They swear to you, that you might be content with them. But though you may be content with them, God is not content with iniquitous people
The Bedouin are more severe in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more liable not to know the limits [ordained] in what God has sent down unto His Messenger. And God is Knowing, Wise
And among the Bedouin are those who regard that which they spend as a loss, and they await a change in fortune for you. Upon them shall be an evil change of fortune. And God is Hearing, Knowing
And among the Bedouin are those who believe in God and the Last Day, and regard that which they spend as [a means to attain] nearness unto God and the blessings of the Messenger. Behold! It shall surely be nearness for them. God will cause them to enter His Mercy. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
[As for] the foremost, the first among the Emigrants and the Helpers, and those who followed them with virtue, God is content with them, and they are content with Him. And He has prepared for them Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein forever. That is the great triumph
Among the Bedouin around you there are hypocrites, and among the people of Madinah, who are headstrong in hypocrisy. Thou knowest them not; We know them and We shall punish them twice. Then they shall be relegated to a great punishment
And [there are] others who admit their sins; they mixed righteous deeds with others that are evil. It may be that God will relent unto them. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Take thou a charitable offering from their wealth, cleansing them and purifying them thereby, and bless them. Truly thy blessings are a comfort for them. And God is Hearing, Knowing
Know they not that God accepts repentance from His servants, and receives the charitable offerings, and that God is the Relenting, the Merciful
Say, “Perform your deeds. God will see your deeds, as will the Messenger and the believers, and you will be brought back to the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of that which you used to do.”
And others are made to await the Command of God. Either He will punish them, or He will relent unto them. And God is Knowing, Wise
And as for those who established a mosque for harm and disbelief, and to divide the believers, and to be an outpost for those who made war on God and His Messenger before, they will surely swear, “We desire only what is best.” But God bears witness that truly they are liars
Never stand therein! Truly a mosque founded upon reverence from the first day is worthier of thy standing therein. Therein are men who love to purify themselves, and God loves those who purify themselves
So is one who founded his building upon reverence for God and [His] Contentment better, or one who founded his building on the brink of a crumbling bank, which then crumbles with him into the Fire of Hell? And God guides not wrongdoing people
The building they have built will cease not to be a disquiet in their hearts, till their hearts are rent asunder. And God is Knowing, Wise
Truly God has purchased from the believers their souls and their wealth in exchange for the Garden being theirs. They fight in the way of God, slaying and being slain. [It is] a promise binding upon Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Quran. And who is truer to His pact than God? So rejoice in the bargain you have made. That indeed is the great triumph
The penitent, and the worshippers, and the celebrants of praise, and the wayfarers, and those who bow, and those who prostrate, and those who enjoin right, and those who forbid wrong, and those who maintain the limits set by God; and give glad tidings unto the believers
It is not for the Prophet and those who believe to seek forgiveness for the idolaters, even if they be kin, after it has become clear to them that they shall be the inhabitants of Hellfire
Abraham’s plea for forgiveness of his father was only due to a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of God, he repudiated him. Truly Abraham was tenderhearted, clement
It is not for God to lead a people astray after having guided them, till He makes clear unto them that whereof they should be mindful. Truly God is Knower of all things
Truly unto God belongs Sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death. Apart from God you have neither protector nor helper
God indeed has relented unto the Prophet, and the Emigrants and the Helpers who followed him in the difficult hour, after the hearts of a group of them nearly swerved. Then He relented unto them—truly He is Kind, Merciful unto them—
and unto the three who were left behind until the earth, despite its breadth, closed in upon them, and their own souls closed in upon them, and they deemed there to be no refuge from God, save with Him. Then He relented unto them, that they might repent. Truly God is Relenting, Merciful
O you who believe! Reverence your Lord, and be among the truthful
It is not for the people of Madinah and the Bedouin who dwell around them to remain behind from the Messenger of God, or to prefer themselves to him. That is because no thirst, nor toil, nor hunger befalls them in the way of God, nor do they take any step enraging the disbelievers, nor do they endure aught at the hands of an enemy, but that a righteous deed is recorded for them on account of it. Truly God neglects not the reward of the virtuous
Nor do they spend aught, be it small or large, nor traverse a valley, but that it is written down for them, that God may reward them for the best of that which they used to do
But it is not for the believers all to go forth. And why should not a party from each group go forth to gain understanding in religion, and to warn their people when they return to them, that haply they will beware
O you who believe! Fight those disbelievers who are near to you, and let them find harshness in you. And know that God is with the reverent
And whensoever a surah is sent down, some among them say, “Which of you has this increased in faith?” As for those who believe, it increases them in faith, and they rejoice
As for those in whose hearts is a disease, it added defilement to their defilement, and they die while they are disbelievers
See they not that they are tried each year, once or twice; yet they neither repent nor take heed
And whensoever a surah is sent down, they look at each other [saying], “Does anyone see you?” Then they turn away. God has turned their hearts away because they are a people who understand not
A Messenger has indeed come unto you from among your own. Troubled is he by what you suffer, solicitous of you, kind and merciful unto the believers
But if they turn away, say, “God suffices me. There is no god but He. In Him do I trust, and He is the Lord of the mighty Throne.”
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the signs of the Wise Book
Is it a marvel for mankind that We have sent revelation unto a man from among themselves, [saying], “Warn mankind and give glad tidings to those who believe that they shall have a station of sincerity with their Lord”? The disbelievers say, “Surely this is a manifest sorcerer.”
Truly your Lord is God, Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then mounted the Throne, directing the affair. There is no intercessor, save by His Leave. That is God, your Lord; so worship Him! Will you not remember
Unto Him is your return all together; God’s Promise is true. Verily He originates creation, then He brings it back, that He may recompense with justice those who believe and perform righteous deeds. As for the disbelievers, theirs shall be a drink of boiling liquid and a painful punishment for having disbelieved
He it is Who made the sun a radiance, and the moon a light, and determined for it stations, that you might know the number of years and the reckoning [of time]. God did not create these, save in truth. He expounds the signs for a people who know
Surely in the variation of the night and the day and whatsoever God has created in the heavens and on the earth are signs for a people who are reverent
Truly those who anticipate not the meeting with Us, and who are content with the life of this world and feel secure therein, and who are heedless of Our signs
it is they whose refuge shall be the Fire for that which they used to earn
Truly those who believe and perform righteous deeds, their Lord guides them by their faith. They shall have rivers running below them in Gardens of bliss
Their supplication therein shall be, “Glory be to Thee, O God!” And therein their greeting shall be, “Peace.” And the conclusion of their supplication shall be, “Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds!”
Were God to hasten evil for mankind, even as they would hasten the good, their appointed term would have been concluded. But We leave those who anticipate not the meeting with Us to wander confused in their rebellion
And when harm afflicts man, he calls upon Us, [lying] on his side, or sitting, or standing. Then, when We remove his affliction from him, he carries on as if he had not called upon Us concerning the harm that had befallen him. Thus is that which they used to do made to seem fair unto the prodigal
We have indeed destroyed generations before you when they did wrong, and their messengers brought them clear proofs, but they would not believe. Thus do We recompense the guilty people
Then We made you vicegerents upon the earth after them, that We might observe how you behave
And when Our signs are recited unto them as clear proofs, those who anticipate not the meeting with Us say, “Bring a Quran other than this, or alter it.” Say, “It is not for me to alter it of my own accord. I follow only that which is revealed unto me. Truly I fear, should I disobey my Lord, the punishment of a tremendous day.”
Say, “Had God willed, I would not have recited it unto you; nor would He have made it known to you. Indeed, I tarried among you for a lifetime before it. Do you not understand?”
And who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God or denies His signs? Surely the guilty will not prosper
They worship apart from God that which neither harms them nor benefits them. And they say, “These are our intercessors with God.” Say, “Would you inform God about something in the heavens or on the earth that He does not know? Glory be to Him and exalted is He above the partners they ascribe!”
Mankind was but one community, then they differed. And if not for a Word that had preceded from thy Lord, judgment would have been made between them concerning that wherein they differed
And they say, “Why has no sign been sent down unto him from his Lord?” Say, “Truly the Unseen belongs to God alone. So wait! Truly I am among those waiting along with you.”
When We make men taste mercy after hardship has befallen them, behold, they have a plot regarding Our signs. Say, “God is swifter in plotting.” Surely Our messengers record whatsoever you plot
He it is Who carries you over land and sea, even when you are sailing in ships, till, when they sail with them upon a favorable wind, and rejoice therein, there comes upon them a violent gale, and the waves come at them from every side, and they think they shall be encompassed by them. They call upon God, devoting religion entirely to Him: “If Thou savest us from this, we shall surely be among the thankful!”
Then when He saves them, behold, they behave tyrannically upon the earth without right. O mankind! Your tyranny is only against yourselves—the enjoyment of the life of this world. Then unto Us shall be your return, whereupon We shall inform you of that which you used to do
The parable of the life of this world is that of water which We send down from the sky: the earth’s vegetation, from which men and cattle eat, mingles with it till, when the earth takes on its luster and is adorned, and its inhabitants think they have gained mastery over it, Our Command comes upon it by night or by day, whereupon We make it a mown field, as if it had not flourished the day before! Thus do We expound the signs for a people who reflect
And God calls unto the Abode of Peace, and guides whomsoever He will unto a straight path
Unto those who are virtuous shall be that which is most beautiful and more besides. Neither darkness nor abasement shall come over their faces. It is they who are the inhabitants of the Garden; they shall abide therein
And as for those who commit evil deeds, the recompense of an evil is one like it, and abasement shall overcome them. There will be none to protect them from God. [It will be] as if their faces are covered with dark patches of night. It is they who are the inhabitants of the Fire; they shall abide therein
On the Day when We shall gather them all together, then We shall say to those who ascribed partners unto God, “Stop there! You and your partners!” Then We shall separate them, and their partners will say, “It was not us whom you worshipped
God suffices as a Witness between you and us. We were heedless of your worship.”
There and then every soul shall experience that which it did in the past, and they shall be brought back unto God, their true Master, and that which they used to fabricate will forsake them
Say, “Who provides for you from Heaven and earth? Who has power over hearing and sight? And who brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living, and who directs the affair?” They will say, “God.” So say, “Will you not, then, be reverent?”
That is God, your true Lord. What is there beyond truth but error? How, then, are you turned away
Thus the Word of thy Lord came due for those who are iniquitous: truly they believe not
Say, “Is there, among your partners, one who originates creation and then brings it back?” Say, “God originates creation, then brings it back. How, then, are you perverted?”
Say, “Is there any among your partners who guides unto Truth?” Say, “God guides unto Truth. Is one who guides unto Truth worthier to be followed, or one who cannot guide unless he be guided? What ails you? How do you judge?”
And most of them follow naught but conjecture. Truly conjecture does not avail against the truth in the least. Truly God knows what they do
This Quran could not have been fabricated [by anyone] apart from God; rather, it is a confirmation of that which came before it, and an elaboration of the Book in which there is no doubt, from the Lord of the worlds
Or do they say, “He has fabricated it”? Say, “Then bring a surah like it, and call upon whomsoever you can apart from God, if you are truthful.”
Nay, but they deny that whose knowledge they cannot comprehend and whose interpretation has not yet come to them. Even so did those who were before them deny. So behold how the wrongdoers fared in the end
Among them are those who believe in it, and among them are those who do not believe in it, and thy Lord knows best the workers of corruption
And if they deny thee, say, “Unto me, my deeds, and unto you, your deeds. You are quit of that which I do, and I am quit of that which you do.”
And among them are those who listen to thee. But dost thou make the deaf to hear, though they understand not
And among them are those who look at thee. But couldst thou guide the blind, though they see not
Truly God does not wrong human beings in the least, but rather human beings wrong themselves
On the Day when He shall gather them, it will be as if they tarried but an hour of the day, acquainting themselves with one another. Lost indeed are those who denied the meeting with God, and they were not rightly guided
Whether We show thee a part of that which We promise them, or We take thee, their return shall be unto Us. Then God is Witness over that which they do
For every community there is a messenger, and when their messenger comes, judgment shall be rendered between them with justice, and they will not be wronged
And they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
Say, “I have no power over what harm or benefit may come to me, save as God wills. For every community there is a term. When their term comes, they shall not delay it by a single hour, nor shall they advance it.”
Say, “Have you considered: if His Punishment should come upon you by night or by day, what part thereof would the guilty seek to hasten?”
And then, when it comes to pass, will you believe in it? Now? While you once sought to hasten it
Then it shall be said unto the wrongdoers, “Taste the punishment everlasting. Are you recompensed for aught save that which you used to earn?”
And they inquire of thee, “Is it true?” Say, “Yea, by my Lord it is true, and you cannot thwart [it].”
Were it so that each soul that had done wrong possessed all that is on the earth, he would surely seek to ransom himself thereby, and they will hide their remorse when they see the punishment. And judgment shall be rendered between them with justice, and they will not be wronged
Truly unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth. Verily God’s Promise is true, but most of them know not
He gives life and causes death, and unto Him shall you be returned
O mankind! There has come unto you an exhortation from your Lord, and a cure for that which lies within breasts, and a guidance and a mercy for the believers
Say, “In the Bounty of God and His Mercy—in that let them rejoice! It is better than that which they amass.”
Say, “Have you seen that which God sent down unto you for provision? Then you made some of it forbidden and some lawful.” Say, “Has God granted you leave, or do you fabricate against God?”
What will those who fabricate lies against God conjecture on the Day of Resurrection? Truly God is Possessed of Bounty for mankind, but most of them do not give thanks
Thou art not upon any task, nor dost thou recite any part of the Quran, nor do you perform any deed, save that We are a Witness over you when you engage therein. Not a mote’s weight evades thy Lord on earth or in Heaven, nor smaller than that nor larger, but that it is in a clear Book
Behold! Truly the friends of God, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve—
those who believe and are reverent
For them are glad tidings in the life of this world and in the Hereafter. There is no altering the Words of God. That is the great triumph
And let not their speech grieve thee. Truly might belongs altogether to God; He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Behold! Truly unto God belongs whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth. And what is it that they follow, those who call upon partners apart from God? They follow naught but conjecture, and they do but surmise
He it is Who made the night for you, that you might rest therein, and the day by which to see. Truly in that are signs for a people who hear
They say, “God has taken a child.” Glory be to Him! He is the Self-Sufficient. Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. You have no authority for this. Do you say about God that which you know not
Say, “Surely those who fabricate a lie against God will not prosper.”
An enjoyment in this world, then unto Us shall be their return, and We shall make them taste severe punishment for their having disbelieved
And recite unto them the story of Noah, when he said to his people, “O my people! If my presence is grievous to you, and [so too] my reminding of the signs of God, then in God do I trust. So decide on your plan, you and your partners; then let there be no doubt concerning your plan, but carry it out against me, and grant no respite
And if you turn your backs, I have not asked of you any reward. My reward lies only with God, and I am commanded to be among those who submit.”
Yet, they denied him. So We saved him and those with him in the Ark. And We made them vicegerents, and We drowned those who denied Our signs. So observe how those who were warned fared in the end
Then, after him, We sent messengers unto their people, and they brought them clear proofs. But it was not for them to believe in that which they had denied beforehand. Thus do We set a seal upon the hearts of the transgressors
Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs to Pharaoh and his notables. But they waxed arrogant, and they were a guilty people
So when the Truth came unto them from Us, they said, “Surely this is manifest sorcery!”
Moses said, “Do you say [this] about the truth when it comes unto you? Is this sorcery? The sorcerers will not prosper.”
They said, “Have you come unto us to turn us away from that which we found our fathers following, so that grandeur in the land might belong to you two? We will not believe in the two of you!”
Pharaoh said, “Bring me every knowing sorcerer.”
And when the sorcerers came, Moses said to them, “Cast what you would cast.”
And when they cast, Moses said, “That which you have produced is sorcery; God will soon bring it to naught. Surely God does not allow the deeds of those who work corruption to flourish
God verifies the truth through His Words, though the guilty be averse.”
But none believed in Moses, save some progeny from among his people, for fear of Pharaoh and his notables, that he would oppress them; for truly Pharaoh was exalted in the land, and he was indeed among the prodigal
And Moses said, “O my people! If you believe in God, then trust in Him, if you are submitters.”
And they said, “In God do we trust. Our Lord! Make us not a temptation for the wrongdoing people
And save us through Thy Mercy from disbelieving people.”
And We revealed unto Moses and his brother, “Appoint for thy people houses in Egypt, and make your houses places of worship and perform the prayer, and give glad tidings unto the believers.”
Moses said, “Our Lord! Truly Thou hast given Pharaoh and his notables ornament and wealth in the life of this world, our Lord, so that they may lead astray from Thy way. Our Lord! Blot out their wealth and harden their hearts, so that they will not believe till they see the painful punishment.”
He said, “Your supplication has been answered. So stand firm, and follow not the way of those who know not.”
We carried the Children of Israel across the sea, and Pharaoh and his hosts pursued them out of envy and enmity till, when drowning overtook them, he said, “I believe that there is no god but the One in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am among those who submit.”
Now, though previously you disobeyed and were among the workers of corruption
Today We shall save you in your body that you might be a sign unto those who come after you. Yet many among mankind are heedless of Our signs
Certainly We settled the Children of Israel in a sure settlement, and We provided them with good things. They differed not till knowledge came unto them. Thy Lord will surely judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they differed
So if thou art in doubt concerning that which We have sent down unto thee, ask those who recite the Book before thee. The truth has certainly come unto thee from thy Lord. So be thou not among the doubters
And be not thou among those who deny the signs of God, lest thou shouldst be among the losers
Truly those for whom the Word of thy Lord has come due will not believe
though every sign should come unto them, till they see the painful punishment
Why has not a single town believed and benefitted from its belief, other than the people of Jonah? When they believed, We removed from them the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world, and We granted them enjoyment for a while
And had thy Lord willed, all those who are on the earth would have believed all together. Wouldst thou compel men till they become believers
It is not for a soul to believe, save by God’s Leave. And He lays defilement upon those who understand not
Say, “Observe that which is in the heavens and on the earth.” But neither signs nor warnings avail a people who believe not
Do they wait for aught save the like of the days of those who passed away before them? Say, “So wait! Truly I am waiting along with you.”
Then We save Our messengers and those who believe. Thus is it incumbent upon Us to save the believers
Say, “O mankind! If you are in doubt concerning my religion, then [know that] I worship not those whom you worship apart from God; rather, I worship God, Who shall take you [unto Himself]. And I am commanded to be among the believers
and ‘Set thy face toward the religion as a ?anif, and be thou not among the idolaters
And call not, apart from God, upon that which neither benefits thee, nor harms thee. For if thou dost so, thou shalt surely be among the wrongdoers.’”
And if God should touch thee with affliction, none can remove it save He; and if He desires some good for thee, none can hold back His Bounty. He causes it to fall upon whomsoever He will among His servants. And He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
Say, “O mankind! The Truth has come unto you from your Lord. Whosoever is rightly guided is only rightly guided for the sake of his own soul, and whosoever is astray is only astray to its detriment. And I am not a guardian over you.”
And follow that which has been revealed unto thee, and be patient till God renders judgment, and He is the best of judges
Alif. Lam. Ra. A Book whose signs have been determined, then expounded, from the Presence of One Wise, Aware
“Worship none but God. Truly I am a warner from Him, and a bearer of glad tidings
And seek forgiveness from your Lord; then turn unto Him in repentance. He will grant you goodly enjoyment for a term appointed and give His Bounty unto everyone possessed of merit. But if you turn away, then truly I fear for you the punishment of a great Day
Unto God is your return, and He is Powerful over all things.”
Behold! They fold up their breasts to hide from Him. Behold! When they cover themselves with their garments, He knows that which they hide and that which they disclose. Truly He knows what lies within breasts
There is no creature that crawls upon the earth but that its provision lies with God. And He knows its dwelling place and its repository. All is in a clear Book
He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, while His Throne was upon the water, that He may try you as to which of you is most virtuous in deed. Yet if thou sayest, “Truly you shall be resurrected after death,” the disbelievers will surely say, “This is naught but manifest sorcery!”
And if We grant them reprieve from the punishment for a limited time, they will surely say, “What holds it back?” Behold! On the day when it comes upon them, it shall not be turned away from them, and that which they used to mock will beset them
And if We cause man to taste Mercy from Us, and then withdraw it from him, verily he is despondent, ungrateful
And if We cause him to taste some favor after adversity has befallen him, he will surely say, “The evils have gone from me.” Verily he is exultant, boastful
save those who are patient and perform righteous deeds; it is they for whom there shall be forgiveness and a great reward
Perchance thou mightest omit some of that which We have revealed unto thee, and thy breast might be constrained because they say, “Why has no treasure been sent down upon him, or an angel not come with him?” Thou art only a warner, and God is Guardian over all things
Or do they say, “He has fabricated it”? Say, “Then bring ten surahs like it, fabricated, and call upon whomsoever you can apart from God, if you are truthful.”
But if they answer thee not, then know that it has been sent down with God’s Knowledge and that there is no god but He. So are you submitters
Whosoever desires the life of this world and its adornment, We shall pay them in full for their deeds therein, and therein they will not be deprived
They are those for whom there shall be naught in the Hereafter but the Fire. Whatsoever they had wrought therein shall come to naught, and vain was that which they used to do
So what of the one who stands upon a clear proof from his Lord, and for whom it is recited by a witness from Him? And before it there was the Book of Moses, a guide and a mercy. It is they who believe in it. And whosoever disbelieves in it from among the parties, the Fire is their tryst. So be not in doubt concerning it. Verily it is the truth from thy Lord, but most of mankind believe not
And who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God? It is they who will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, “These are the ones who lied against their Lord.” Behold! The curse of God is upon the wrongdoers
those who turn from the way of God and seek to make it crooked, and who disbelieve in the Hereafter
Such as these cannot thwart [aught] on earth, and they have no protector apart from God. For them the punishment will be multiplied. They were not able to hear; neither did they see
They are those who have lost their souls, and that which they used to fabricate has forsaken them
There is no doubt that in the Hereafter they shall be the greatest losers
Truly those who believe and perform righteous deeds and are humble before their Lord, it is they who are the inhabitants of the Garden; they shall abide therein
The parable of these two groups is that of one blind and deaf, and one hearing and seeing. Are they equal when compared? Will you not remember
Indeed, We sent Noah unto his people, “Truly I am unto you a clear warner
that you might worship none but God. Truly I fear for you the punishment of a painful day.”
But the notables among his people who disbelieved said, “We see you as naught but a human being like us, and we see none who follow you, save the lowliest among us, as is clear to see. Nor do we see that you have any merit over us; nay, we think that you are liars.”
He said, “O my people! What think you: if I stand upon a clear proof from my Lord, and He has granted me Mercy from Himself, and you are blind to it. Shall we force it upon you, though you are unwilling
O my people! I ask not of you any wealth in return for it; my reward lies only with God. And I shall not drive away those who believe; truly they shall meet their Lord. But I see that you are an ignorant people
O my people! Who would help me against God, were I to drive them away? Will you not remember
I say not unto you that with me are the treasuries of God; nor do I know the Unseen. And I say not that I am an angel; nor do I say of those who are despicable in your eyes, ‘God will not give them any good’—God knows best what is in their souls—for then I would indeed be among the wrongdoers.”
They said, “O Noah! You have disputed with us, and have prolonged the disputation; so bring upon us that wherewith you have threatened us, if you are among the truthful.”
He said, “God alone shall bring it to you, if He will, and you cannot thwart [it]
And my sincere advice will not benefit you, much as I desire to advise you, if God desires to cause you to err. He is your Lord, and unto Him shall you be returned.”
Or do they say, “He has fabricated it”? Say, “If I fabricated it, then my guilt is upon me; but I am quit of that which you commit.”
And it was revealed unto Noah, “None of thy people shall believe, save those who had already believed. So be not distressed by that which they used to do
Build the Ark before Our Eyes and by Our Revelation. And address Me not concerning those who did wrong; surely they shall be drowned.”
And he was building the Ark, and whenever notables among his people passed by him, they would scoff at him. He said, “If you scoff at us, surely we shall scoff at you, just as you scoff
For soon you shall know upon whom there comes a punishment that disgraces him and upon whom there falls a punishment enduring.”
Till when Our Command came, and the oven gushed forth, We said, “Carry on board two of every kind, and thy family—save the one against whom the Word has already gone forth—and those who believe.” And none believed along with him, save a few
He said, “Embark upon it. In the Name of God be its coursing and its mooring. Truly my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.”
And it sailed with them upon waves like mountains. And Noah called out to his son, who remained aloof, “O my son! Embark with us, and be not with the disbelievers.”
He said, “I shall take refuge on a mountain; it will protect me from the water.” He said, “There is no protector on this day from the Command of God, save for the one upon whom He has Mercy.” And the waves came between them, and he was among the drowned
And it was said, “O earth! Swallow your water! And O sky! Hold back!” And the water was made to recede, and the command was carried out, and it settled on [Mount] Judi. And it was said, “Away with the wrongdoing people!”
And Noah called out to his Lord and said, “O my Lord! Truly my son is from my family. Thy Promise is indeed true, and Thou art the most just of judges.”
He said, “O Noah! Truly he is not from thy family; surely such conduct was not righteous. So question Me not concerning that whereof thou hast no knowledge; truly I exhort thee, lest thou be among the ignorant.”
He said, “My Lord! Truly I seek refuge in Thee from questioning Thee concerning that whereof I have no knowledge. If thou dost not forgive me and have Mercy upon me, I shall be among the losers.”
It was said, “O Noah! Disembark with peace from Us, and blessings upon thee and upon the communities that [will arise] from those with thee, and communities for whom We shall grant enjoyment. Then a painful punishment from Us shall befall them.”
These are among the accounts of the Unseen that We reveal unto thee. Thou knewest not of them, neither thou nor thy people, beforehand. So be patient. Truly the end belongs to the reverent
And unto ?Ad, their brother Hud. He said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. You are naught but fabricators
O my people! I ask not of you any reward for it. My reward lies only with the One Who originated me. Do you not understand
O my people! Seek forgiveness from your Lord; then turn unto Him in repentance. He will send the sky upon you with abundant rain, and add strength to your strength. And turn not away, guilty.”
They said, “O Hud! You have not brought us a clear proof, and we shall not forsake our gods on your word, for we are not believers in you
We say only that one of our gods has smitten you with evil.” He said, “I call God as witness—and you be witness—that I am quit of that which you ascribe as partners
apart from Him. So scheme against me then, all together, and grant me no respite
Truly I trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is no creature that crawls, but that He holds it by its forelock. Truly my Lord is upon a straight path
But if you turn away, [know that] I have delivered unto you the message wherewith I have been sent by Him. My Lord will cause you to be succeeded by a people other than yourselves, and you harm Him not in the least. Truly my Lord is Watcher over all things.”
And when Our Command came, We saved Hud and those who believed with him through a Mercy from Us; and We saved them from a grave punishment
That was ?Ad. They rejected the signs of their Lord, disobeyed the messengers, and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant
And they were pursued by a curse in this world, and [shall be] on the Day of Resurrection. Behold! Truly ?Ad disbelieved in their Lord. Behold! Away with ?Ad, the people of Hud
And to Thamud, their brother ?ali?. He said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. He brought you forth from the earth and settled you therein. So seek forgiveness from Him; then turn unto Him in repentance. Truly my Lord is Nigh, Responsive.”
They said, “O ?ali?! You were a source of hope among us before this. Do you forbid us to worship that which our fathers worshipped, while we remain in grave doubt about that to which you call us?”
He said, “O my people! What think you: if I stand up on a clear proof from my Lord, and He has granted me Mercy from Himself, then who can help me against God, were I to disobey Him? For you would increase me in naught but loss. d
O my people! This she-camel of God is a sign unto you. Leave her to graze freely on God’s earth, and cause her no harm, lest you be seized by a punishment nigh.”
But they hamstrung her. So he said, “Enjoy yourselves in your abode for three days—that is a promise that will not be belied.”
So when Our Command came, We saved ?ali? and those who believed with him, through a Mercy from Us, and from the disgrace of that day. Truly thy Lord, He is the Strong, the Mighty
The Cry seized those who did wrong, and morning found them lying lifeless in their abode
as though they had never dwelt there. Behold! Truly Thamud disbelieved in their Lord. Behold! Away with Thamud
And indeed Our messengers came to Abraham with glad tidings. They said, “Peace.” “Peace,” he said, and he hastened to bring them a roasted calf
Then when he saw that their hands reached not toward it, he conceived a fear of them. They said, “Fear not. Verily we have been sent unto the people of Lot.”
And his wife was standing there and she laughed. Then We gave her glad tidings of Isaac, and after Isaac, of Jacob
She said, “Oh, woe unto me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman, and this husband of mine is an old man? That would surely be an astounding thing.”
They said, “Do you marvel at the Command of God? The Mercy of God and His Blessings be upon you, O People of the House! Truly He is Praised, Glorious.”
So when the awe had left Abraham and glad tidings had come unto him, he pleaded with Us concerning the people of Lot
Truly Abraham was clement, tenderhearted, penitent
“O Abraham! Turn away from this. Truly the Command of thy Lord has come, and surely a punishment that cannot be repelled comes upon them.”
When Our messengers came to Lot, he was distressed on their account, and felt himself powerless concerning them. And he said, “This is a terrible day!”
And his people came hurrying toward him, while earlier they had been committing evil deeds. He said, “O my people! These are my daughters; they are purer for you. So reverence God, and disgrace me not with regard to my guests. Is there not among you a man of sound judgment?”
They said, “Certainly you know that we have no right to your daughters, and surely you know that which we desire.”
He said, “Would that I had the strength [to resist] you, or could seek refuge in some mighty support!”
They said, “O Lot! We are the envoys of thy Lord. They shall not reach thee. So set out with thy family during the night, and let none of you turn around, save thy wife; surely that which befalls them shall befall her. Indeed, the morning shall be their tryst. Is not the morning nigh?”
So when Our Command came, We made its uppermost to be its lowermost, and We rained down upon them stones of baked clay, one upon another
marked by thy Lord; and they are never far from the wrongdoers
And unto Midian, their brother Shu?ayb. He said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. Diminish not the measure and the balance. Truly I see you faring well, but I fear for you the punishment of an all-encompassing Day
O my people! Observe fully the measure and the balance with justice and diminish not people’s goods, and behave not wickedly upon the earth, working corruption
The remnant from God is better for you, if you are believers, and I am not a keeper over you.”
They said, “O Shu?ayb! Does your manner of praying require that we forsake that which our fathers worshipped, or that we should not do as we will with our wealth? Surely you are a man of forbearance and sound judgment.”
He said, “O my people! What think you: if I stand upon a clear proof from my Lord, and He has provided me with goodly provision from Himself? I desire not to do behind your backs that which I forbid you. I desire naught but to set matters aright so far as I am able; but my success lies with God alone. In Him do I trust and unto Him do I turn
O my people! Let not your dissension with me lead you into sin, such that there should befall you that which befell the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of ?ali?; and the people of Lot are not far from you
And seek forgiveness from your Lord; then turn unto Him in repentance. Truly my Lord is Merciful, Loving.”
They said, “O Shu?ayb! We do not comprehend much of what you say, and verily we consider you to be weak among us. And were it not for your clan, we would surely stone you, for you have no power over us.”
He said, “O my people! Is my clan mightier over you than God? Yet, you would put Him behind you with disregard. Surely my Lord encompasses whatsoever you do
O my people! Act according to your position; I, too, am acting. Soon you shall know upon whom there comes a punishment that disgraces him, and who is a liar. So keep watch! I, too, am among you watching.”
And when Our Command came, We saved Shu?ayb and those who believed with him, through a Mercy from Us. And the Cry seized those who did wrong, and morning found them lying lifeless in their abode
as though they had never dwelt there. Behold! Away with Midian, just as Thamud was done away
And indeed We sent Moses with Our signs and a manifest authority
unto Pharaoh and his notables. But they followed the command of Pharaoh, and the command of Pharaoh was not sound
He shall go before his people on the Day of Resurrection and lead them to the Fire. Evil indeed is the watering place to which they are led
And they were pursued in this [world] by a curse, and [shall be] on the Day of Resurrection. Evil indeed is the gift that will be offered them
These are among the stories We have recounted unto thee of the towns. Among them are some that remain and some that have been mown down
We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves. And their gods whom they called upon apart from God did not avail them in the least when the Command of thy Lord came, and they increased them in naught but ruin
Such is the seizing of thy Lord when He seizes the towns while they are doing wrong. Surely His seizing is painful, severe
Truly in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the Hereafter. That is a Day on which mankind shall be gathered together, and that is a Day that shall be witnessed
And We delay it not, save for a limited term
On the Day it comes, no soul shall speak save by His Leave. Among them shall be the wretched and the felicitous
As for those who are wretched, they shall be in the Fire, wherein there shall be for them groaning and wailing
abiding therein for so long as the heavens and the earth endure, save as thy Lord wills. Surely thy Lord does whatsoever He wills
And as for those who are felicitous, they shall be in the Garden, abiding therein for so long as the heavens and the earth endure, save as thy Lord wills—a gift unfailing
So be not in doubt concerning that which these [people] worship; they worship only as their fathers worshipped before. We shall surely give them their share, undiminished
Indeed, We gave unto Moses the Book; then difference arose regarding it. And were it not for a Word that had preceded from thy Lord, judgment would have been rendered between them. Yet, truly they are confounded by doubt regarding it
Surely for each, thy Lord shall pay them in full for their deeds. Truly He is Aware of what they do
So be steadfast, as thou hast been commanded—and those who turn in repentance along with you—and be not rebellious. Truly He sees whatsoever you do
And incline not toward the wrongdoers, lest the Fire should touch you—and you will have no protector apart from God. Thereafter you will not be helped
And perform the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the early hours of the night. Truly good deeds remove those that are evil. This is a reminder for those who remember
And be thou patient. Truly God neglects not the reward of the virtuous
So why were there not among the generations before you those possessing merit, who would forbid corruption upon the earth, other than a few of those whom We saved among them? Those who did wrong pursued the luxuries they had been given, and they were guilty
And thy Lord would never destroy the towns unjustly, while their people were reforming
And had thy Lord willed, He would have made mankind one community. But they cease not to differ
save those upon whom thy Lord has Mercy—and for this He created them. And the Word of thy Lord is fulfilled: “I shall surely fill Hell with jinn and men all together!”
All that We recount unto thee of the stories of the messengers is that whereby We make firm thine heart. And herein there has come unto thee the Truth, and an exhortation and a reminder for the believers
And say unto those who believe not, “Act according to your position; we, too, are acting
And wait! We, too, are waiting.”
Unto God belongs the Unseen in the heavens and on the earth, and unto Him are all matters returned. So worship Him, and trust in Him. And thy Lord is not heedless of that which you do
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the signs of the clear Book
Truly We sent it down as an Arabic Quran, that haply you may understand
We recount unto thee the most beautiful of stories by Our having revealed unto thee this Quran, though before it thou wert among the heedless
When Joseph said unto his father, “O my father, truly I have seen eleven stars, and the sun and the moon. I saw them prostrating before me.”
He said, “O my son! Recount not thy vision to thy brothers, lest they devise some scheme against thee. Surely Satan is a manifest enemy unto man
Thus shall thy Lord choose thee, and teach thee the interpretation of events, and complete His Blessing upon thee, and upon the House of Jacob, just as He completed it upon thy forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Truly thy Lord is Knowing, Wise.”
Certainly in Joseph and his brothers there are signs for the inquiring
[Remember] when they said, “Truly Joseph and his brother are more beloved unto our father than are we, though we are a group. Surely our father is in manifest error
Slay Joseph, or cast him out to some land, that your father’s concern might be for you. And be, thereafter, a righteous people.”
One among them said, “Slay not Joseph, but cast him into the depths of the well, that some caravan might pick him up, if you would take some action.”
They said, “O father! What ails thee that thou dost not trust us with Joseph? Truly we wish him well
Send him forth with us tomorrow, to frolic and play. We shall surely be his keepers.”
He said, “Truly it grieves me that you should go with him. And I fear that the wolf may eat him, while you are heedless of him.”
They said, “If the wolf should eat him, while we are a group, then we would surely be losers!”
So when they went with him, and agreed to put him in the depths of the well, We revealed unto him, “Verily thou wilt inform them of this affair of theirs, when they are unaware.”
And in the evening they came weeping unto their father
They said, “O father! We went racing with one another, and left Joseph with our things, and the wolf ate him. But thou wouldst not believe us, even if we were truthful.”
And they brought forth his shirt with false blood. He said, “Nay, your souls have seduced you in this matter. Beautiful patience! And God is the One Whose help is sought against that which you describe.”
And then a caravan came along and sent their water carrier, and he let down his bucket. He said, “Good news! Here is a boy!” So they hid him as merchandise. And God knew well what they were doing
And they sold him for a low price, a number of dirhams, for they valued him not
The man from Egypt who bought him said unto his wife, “Give him honorable accommodation. It may be that he will bring us some benefit, or that we may take him as a son.” And thus did We establish Joseph in the land, that We might teach him the interpretation of events. And God prevails over His affair, but most of mankind know not
When he reached his maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We recompense the virtuous
But she in whose house he was staying sought to lure him from himself. She locked the doors and said, “Come, thou!” He said, “God be my refuge! Truly He is my lord, and has made beautiful my accommodation. Verily the wrongdoers will not prosper!”
She indeed inclined toward him, and he would have inclined toward her, had he not seen the proof of his Lord. Thus it was, that We might turn him away from evil and indecency. Truly he was among Our sincere servants
And they raced to the door, while she tore his shirt from behind. And they encountered her master at the door. She said, “What is the recompense for one who desires ill toward thy wife, save that he be imprisoned, or a painful punishment?”
He said, “It was she who sought to lure me from myself.” And a witness from her own people testified, “If his shirt is torn from the front, then she has spoken the truth and he is among the liars
But if his shirt is torn from behind, then she has lied and he is among the truthful.”
So when he saw that his shirt was torn from behind, he said, “Verily this is among the schemes of you women—your scheming is great indeed
Joseph, turn away from this. And you, seek forgiveness for your sin. Truly you were among those at fault.”
Some women of the city said, “The viceroy’s wife sought to lure her slave boy from himself! He has filled her with ardent love. Truly we consider her to be in manifest error.”
So when she heard of their plotting, she sent for them, and prepared a repast for them, and gave each of them a knife. And she said [to Joseph], “Come out before them!” Then when they saw him, they so admired him that they cut their hands and said, “God be praised! This is no human being. This is naught but a noble angel!”
She said, “This is the one on whose account you blamed me. I indeed sought to lure him from himself, but he remained chaste. And if he does not do as I command, he shall surely be imprisoned; and he shall be among those humbled.”
He said, “My Lord! Prison is dearer to me than that to which they call me. If Thou dost not turn their scheming away from me, I shall incline toward them and be among the ignorant.”
So his Lord answered him, and turned their scheming away from him. Truly He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Then it occurred to them, after they had seen the signs, that they should imprison him for a time
Now two young men entered the prison with him. One of them said, “Truly I see myself [in a dream] pressing wine.” The other said, “Truly I see myself [in a dream] carrying bread atop my head, from which the birds eat.” “Inform us of its interpretation. Truly we see you as being among the virtuous.”
He said, “No food with which you are provided will come unto you, save that I shall inform you of its interpretation before it comes. This is among the things my Lord has taught me. I forsake the creed of a people who believe not in God, and they who are disbelievers in the Hereafter
And I follow the creed of my fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. It is not for us to ascribe any partners unto God. That is from the bounty God has bestowed upon us and upon mankind, but most of mankind do not give thanks
O my fellow prisoners! Are diverse lords better, or God, the One, the Paramount
You worship apart from Him naught but names that you have named—you and your fathers—for which God has sent down no authority. Judgment belongs to God alone. He commands that you worship none but Him. That is the upright religion, but most of mankind know not. A
my fellow prisoners! As for one of you, he shall serve wine to his lord. But as for the other, he shall be crucified, and the birds will eat from his head. The matter about which you inquired has been decreed.”
And he said to the one of them whom he knew would be saved, “Mention me to your lord.” But Satan caused him to forget to make mention to his lord. So he remained in prison for several years
And the king said, “Verily I see [in a dream] seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones; and seven green heads of grain, and others dry
notables! Give me your opinion on my vision, if you can interpret visions.”
They said, “What confused dreams! And we are not experts in the interpretation of dreams!”
Now the one who had been saved among the two said, remembering after a while, “I shall inform you of its interpretation, so send me forth.”
“Joseph, O truthful one! Give us thine opinion concerning seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and seven green heads of grain, and others dry, that haply I may return to the people, that they might know.”
He said, “You will sow diligently for seven years. Then whatever you harvest, leave in its ear, save a little that you eat
Then after this will come seven hard [years] which will devour that which you have saved in advance for them, save a little of that which you have stored
Then after this will come a year wherein people will be granted succor, and wherein they will press [wine and oil].”
The king said, “Bring him to me!” So when the messenger came to him he said, “Return to your lord and ask him, ‘What of the women who cut their hands? Surely my Lord knows well their scheming!’”
He said, “What was your purpose when you sought to lure Joseph from himself?” They said, “God be praised! We know no evil against him.” The viceroy’s wife said, “Now the truth has come to light. It was I who sought to lure him from himself, and verily he is among the truthful.”
“This is so, that he may know that I betrayed him not in his absence. Truly God guides not the scheming of the treacherous
But I absolve not my own soul. Surely the soul commands to evil, save whom my Lord may show mercy. Truly my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.”
And the king said, “Bring him to me, that I might reserve him exclusively for myself.” Then when he had spoken with him, he said, “Truly this day thou shalt be of high rank and trusted in our presence.”
He said, “Set me over the storehouses of the land. Truly I am a skilled keeper.”
Thus did We establish Joseph in the land, that there he might settle wheresoever he will. We cause Our Mercy to fall upon whomsoever We will, and We neglect not the reward of the virtuous
And the reward of the Hereafter is better for those who believe and are reverent
The brothers of Joseph came and entered upon him, and he recognized them, while they knew him not
And when he had arranged for their provisions, he said, “Bring me a brother of yours from your father. Do you not see that I give full measure, and that I am the best of hosts
But if you bring him not unto me, you shall have no measure from me, nor shall you come nigh unto me.” a They said, “We shall seek to lure him from his father; that we shall surely do.”
He said to his servant boys, “Put their merchandise in their saddlebags. Perchance they will recognize it when they have gone back to their people; perchance they will return.”
So when they returned to their father, they said, “O father! The measure has been withheld from us. So send our brother with us that we might obtain the measure. We shall surely be his keepers.”
He said, “Should I entrust him to you as I entrusted his brother to you aforetime? But God is the best of keepers, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful.”
And when they opened their belongings, they found their merchandise had been returned to them. They said, “O father! What [more] do we seek? This is our merchandise returned unto us! Now we can provide for our family, and keep watch over our brother, while getting another camel-load—these are meager rations!”
He said, “I will not send him forth with you till you give me a solemn pledge before God that you will surely bring him back to me, unless you are surrounded.” So when they gave their solemn pledge, he said, “God is Guardian over what we say.”
And he said, “O my sons! Enter not by one gate, but enter by separate gates. Yet, I cannot avail you aught against God. Judgment belongs to God alone. I trust in Him; and let those who trust, trust in Him.”
And when they entered whence their father had commanded them, it did not avail them aught against God, but it fulfilled a need in Jacob’s soul. Truly he was possessed of knowledge because of that which We taught him, but most of mankind know not
And when they entered upon Joseph, he drew his brother close to himself and said, “Truly I am your brother; so be not distressed on account of that which they used to do.”
And when he had made ready their provisions, he put the drinking cup into his brother’s saddlebag. Then a herald cried out, “O you men of the caravan! Truly you are thieves!”
Turning toward them, they said, “What are you missing?”
They said, “We are missing the goblet of the king.” “For whosoever brings it forth, there shall be a camel-load. I shall be its guarantor.”
They said, “By God, you certainly know that we came not to work corruption in the land, and we are not thieves.”
They said, “And what will be the recompense for it if you be liars?”
They said, “Its recompense will be that he in whose saddlebag it is found—he himself shall be its recompense. Thus do we recompense the wrongdoers.”
Then he began with their baggage, before the baggage of his brother. Then he removed it from his brother’s baggage. Thus did We devise a scheme for Joseph. Under the king’s law, he could not have taken his brother unless God willed. We raise in degrees whomsoever We will, and above every possessor of knowledge is a knower
They said, “If he has stolen, a brother of his had stolen aforetime.” But Joseph kept it secret in his soul and disclosed it not unto them. He said, “You are in a worse position! And God knows best concerning that which you describe.”
They said, “O viceroy! He has a venerable, aged father; so take one of us in his place. Truly we see you as being among the virtuous.”
He said, “God be my refuge that we should take any save the one with whom we found our property! For then we would surely be wrongdoers.”
So when they despaired of [swaying] him, they conferred privately. The eldest of them said, “Do you not know that your father has taken a solemn pledge from you before God, and earlier you neglected Joseph? Thus I shall not depart from this land till my father grants me leave, or God renders judgment upon me, and He is the best of judges
Return unto your father and say, ‘O father! Verily your son has committed theft. And we bore witness to that which we knew, but we are not keepers of the unseen
So ask the town wherein we were, and the caravan with which we approached. Verily we are truthful.’”
He said, “Nay, your souls have seduced you in this matter. Beautiful patience! It may be that God will bring them to me all together. Truly He is the Knowing, the Wise.”
And he turned away from them and said, “Oh, how great is my grief for Joseph!” His eyes had turned white with grief, and he was choked with anguish
They said, “By God, wilt thou go on remembering Joseph till thou art ill to the point of death, or till thou hast perished?”
He said, “I complain of my sorrow and grief to God alone. And I know from God that which you know not
O my sons! Go and inquire about Joseph and his brother and despair not of God’s Comfort; truly none despairs of God’s Comfort save the disbelieving people.”
So when they entered upon him they said, “O viceroy! Affliction has befallen us and our people. We bring but meager merchandise; yet grant us full measure and be charitable unto us. Truly God shall recompense the charitable.”
He said, “Do you know what you have done with Joseph and his brother, when you were ignorant?”
They said, “Art thou indeed Joseph?” He said, “I am Joseph and this is my brother. God has been gracious unto us. Verily whosoever is reverent and patient—surely God neglects not the reward of the virtuous.”
“By God!” they said, “God has preferred thee over us, and we were at fault.”
He said, “There is no reproach against you this day. God will forgive you. And He is the most Merciful of the merciful
Take this shirt of mine and cast it upon my father’s face; he will come to see. And bring me your family, all together.”
And as the caravan set off, their father said, “Truly I sense the scent of Joseph, if you think me not senile!”
They said, “By God! Truly thou art astray as of old.”
And when the bearer of glad tidings came, he cast it upon his face and he was restored to sight. He said, “Did I not say unto you that I know from God that which you know not?”
They said, “O father! Seek forgiveness for us from our sins. Truly we were at fault.”
He said, “I shall indeed seek forgiveness for you from my Lord. Truly He is Forgiving, Merciful.”
So when they entered upon Joseph, he drew his parents close to himself and said, “Enter Egypt in security, if God wills!”
And he raised his parents up to the throne, and they [all] fell prostrate toward him. He said, “O my father! This is the fulfillment of my vision; my Lord has made it come true. He was good to me when He brought me forth from prison, and brought thee from the desert, after Satan incited evil between my brothers and me. Indeed, my Lord is Subtle in that which He wills. Truly He is the Knower, the Wise
My Lord! Thou hast given me something of sovereignty, and taught me the interpretation of events. Originator of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my Protector in this world and in the Hereafter! Take me as a submitter unto Thyself, and admit me to the company of the righteous.”
These are among the accounts of the unseen which We reveal unto thee. And thou wert not with them when they decided upon their affair and plotted
And most of mankind, however much thou mightest desire, are not believers
And thou askest of them no reward for it; it is naught but a reminder for the worlds
How many a sign is there in the heavens and on the earth by which they pass; yet they turn away from them
And most of them believe not in God, save that they ascribe partners unto Him
Do they feel secure from the coming of an overwhelming punishment from God upon them? Or from the coming of the Hour suddenly, while they are unaware
Say, “This is my way. I call unto God with clear sight—I, and those who follow me. Glory be to God! And I am not among those who ascribe partners unto God.”
And We sent none before thee, save men unto whom We sent revelation among the people of the towns. Have they not journeyed upon the earth and observed how those before them fared in the end? And the Abode of the Hereafter is better for those who are reverent. Do you not understand
Till, when the messengers despaired and thought that they were deemed liars, Our Help came unto them, and whosoever We willed was saved. And Our Might shall not be turned back from the guilty people
Certainly in their stories is a lesson for those possessed of intellect. It is not a fabricated account; rather, it is a confirmation of that which came before it, and an elaboration of all things, and a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe
Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are the signs of the Book; and that which has been sent down unto thee from thy Lord is the truth, but most of mankind believe not
God it is Who raised the heavens without pillars that you see, then mounted the Throne; and He made the sun and the moon subservient, each running for a term appointed. He directs the affair, expounding the signs, so that you may be certain of the meeting with your Lord
He it is Who spread out the earth and placed therein firm mountains and streams, and of every kind of fruit He placed therein two kinds. He causes the night to cover the day. Truly in that are signs for a people who reflect
Upon the earth are neighboring tracts, vineyards, sown fields, and date palms of a shared root and not of a shared root, watered by one water. And We have favored some above others in bounty. Truly in that are signs for a people who understand
And if thou dost wonder, then wondrous is their saying, “When we are dust, shall we indeed be [raised] in a new creation?” It is they who disbelieve in their Lord; it is they who will have shackles upon their necks; and it is they who will be the inhabitants of the Fire; they shall abide therein
Yet they would have thee hasten evil before good, though examples have passed before them. Truly thy Lord is Possessed of Forgiveness for mankind despite their wrongdoing, and truly thy Lord is severe in retribution
Those who disbelieve say, “Why has not some sign been sent down upon him from his Lord?” Thou art but a warner; and for every people there is a guide
God knows that which every female bears, how wombs diminish and how they increase. Everything with Him is according to a measure—
Knower of the Unseen and the seen, the Great, the Exalted
Alike among you are those who speak secretly and those who do so openly, those who lurk by night, and those who go forth by day
For him there are attendant angels to his front and to his rear, guarding him by God’s Command. Truly God alters not what is in a people until they alter what is in themselves. And when God desires evil for a people, there is no repelling it; and apart from Him they have no protector
He it is Who shows you lightning, arousing fear and hope, and Who produces heavy-laden clouds
The thunder hymns His praise, as do the angels, in awe of Him. He sends forth the thunderbolts and strikes therewith whomsoever He will. Yet they dispute concerning God, and He is severe in wrath
Unto Him is the supplication of truth; and those whom they supplicate apart from Him answer them not in the least, save as one who stretches forth his palms toward water that it may reach his mouth, though it never reaches him. And the supplication of the disbelievers is naught but astray
And unto God prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening
Say, “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Say, “God.” Say, “Then have you taken, apart from Him, protectors who have no power over what benefit or harm may come to themselves?” Say, “Are the blind and the seer equal, or are darkness and light equal?” Or have they ascribed unto God partners who have created the like of His creation, such that that creation seems alike to them? Say, “God is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Paramount.”
He sends down water from the sky, so that the riverbeds flow according to their measure and the torrent carries a swelling froth; and from that which they kindle in the fire, seeking ornament or pleasure, is a froth like unto it. Thus does God set forth truth and falsehood. As for the froth, it passes away as dross. And as for that which benefits mankind, it remains on the earth. Thus does God set forth parables
Those who answer their Lord shall have that which is most beautiful. But those who answer Him not—were they to possess all that is on the earth and the like of it besides, they would seek to ransom themselves thereby. For them there shall be an evil reckoning. Their refuge is Hell. What an evil resting place
Is one who knows that what has been sent down unto thee from thy Lord is the truth like one who is blind? Only those who possess intellect reflect
who fulfill the pact with God and break not the covenant
who join what God has commanded be joined, fear their Lord, and dread an evil reckoning
and who are patient, seeking the Face of their Lord, perform the prayer, and spend from that which We have provided them, secretly and openly, and who repel evil with good. For them there shall be the reward of the Abode—
Gardens of Eden that they shall enter along with those who were righteous from among their fathers, their spouses, and their progeny; and angels shall enter upon them from every gate
“Peace be upon you because you were patient.” How excellent is the Ultimate Abode
As for those who break God’s pact after accepting His covenant, and sever what God has commanded be joined, and work corruption upon the earth, it is they who shall have the curse, and theirs shall be the evil abode
God outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will. They rejoice in the life of the world; yet compared to the Hereafter, the life of the world is but [fleeting] enjoyment
Those who disbelieve say, “Why has some sign not been sent down upon him from his Lord?” Say, “Truly God leads astray whomsoever He will and guides to Himself whosoever turns in repentance—
those who believe and whose hearts are at peace in the remembrance of God. Are not hearts at peace in the remembrance of God
Those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs is blessedness and a beautiful return
Thus have We sent thee unto a community before whom other communities have passed away, that thou mayest recite unto them that which We have revealed unto thee; yet they disbelieve in the Compassionate. Say, “He is my Lord; there is no god but He. In Him do I trust and unto Him do I turn.”
Were there a Quran whereby the mountains were set in motion, or the earth was cleft, or the dead were made to speak! Nay! Unto God belongs the affair altogether. Do not those who believe understand that if God had willed, He would have guided mankind all together? And those who disbelieve, calamity will never cease to befall them because of that which they have wrought, or to alight close to their abode until God’s Promise comes. Truly God will not fail the tryst
Certainly messengers were mocked before thee. But I granted respite to those who disbelieved; then I seized them. How, then, was My Retribution
What of He Who attends to every soul in accordance with what it has earned? Yet they ascribe partners unto God. Say, “Name them! Or will you inform Him of something He does not know upon the earth, or are these vain words?” Nay! But their plotting has been made to seem fair unto those who disbelieve, and they have been turned from the way. And whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he
Theirs shall be punishment in the life of this world, and surely the punishment of the Hereafter will be more wretched; they shall have none to shield them from God
The parable of the Garden that has been promised to the reverent: with rivers running below, its food everlasting, as is its shade. That is the ultimate end of those who were reverent, while the ultimate end of the disbelievers is the Fire
And those to whom We have given the Book rejoice in that which has been sent down unto thee. And among the parties are those who reject some of it. Say, “I have only been commanded to worship God, and to not ascribe partners unto Him. Unto Him do I call and unto Him is my return.”
Thus have We sent it down as a Judgment in Arabic. Yet if thou followest their caprices after the knowledge that has come to thee, thou shalt have no protector against God, and no defender
Indeed We sent messengers before thee and appointed for them wives and progeny, and it is not for a messenger to bring a sign, save by God’s Leave; and for every term there is a Book
God effaces what He will and establishes, and with Him is the Mother of the Book
Whether We show thee a part of that which We promise them, or We take thee [unto Us], thine is only to proclaim, and Ours is the Reckoning
Have they not considered how We come upon the land, reducing it of its outlying regions? And God judges; none repeals His Judgment, and He is swift in reckoning
Indeed those who were before them plotted, but unto God belongs plotting altogether. He knows what every soul earns, and the disbelievers will know whose is the Ultimate Abode
And those who disbelieve say, “You have not been sent.” Say, “God and whosoever possesses knowledge of the Book suffices as a witness between you and me.”
Alif. Lam. Ra. [This is] a Book that We have sent down unto thee, that thou mightest bring forth mankind out of darkness into light, by the leave of their Lord, unto the path of the Mighty, the Praised—
God, unto Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. Woe unto the disbelievers for a severe punishment
Those who prefer the life of this world over the Hereafter, and who turn from the way of God and seek to make it crooked; it is they who are far astray
And We have sent no messenger, save in the language of his people, that he might make clear unto them. Then God leads astray whomsoever He will and guides whomsoever He will. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
We indeed sent Moses with Our signs, “Bring thy people out of darkness into light, and remind them of the Days of God. Truly in that are signs for all who are patient, thankful.”
And [remember] when Moses said unto his people, “Remember God’s Blessing upon you, when He saved you from the House of Pharaoh, who inflicted terrible punishment upon you, slaying your sons and sparing your women—and in that was a great trial from your Lord—
and when your Lord proclaimed, ‘If you give thanks, I shall surely grant you increase, but if you are ungrateful, truly My Punishment is severe!’”
And Moses said, “If you are ungrateful—you and whosoever is on the earth all together—[know that] verily God is Self-Sufficient, Praised.”
Has not the account come to you of those who came before you—the people of Noah, and ?Ad, and Thamud, and those who came after them? None knows them but God. Their messengers brought them clear proofs, but they thrust their hands into their mouths and said, “Verily we disbelieve in that wherewith you have been sent, and we are in grave doubt about that to which you call us.”
Their messengers said, “Is there any doubt concerning God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you that He might forgive some of your sins and grant you reprieve till a term appointed.” They said, “You are but human beings like us. You desire to turn us away from that which our fathers used to worship. So bring us a manifest authority!”
Their messengers said unto them, “We are but human beings like yourselves, but God is gracious unto whomsoever He will among His servants. And it is not for us to bring you an authority, save by God’s Leave; so in God let the believers trust
And why should we not trust in God, when He has guided us in our ways? And we shall surely endure patiently, however you may torment us. And let those who trust, trust in God.”
But those who disbelieved said to their messengers, “We shall surely expel you from our land, or you shall revert to our creed.” So their Lord revealed unto them, “We shall surely destroy the wrongdoers
And We shall surely make you to dwell in the land after them. This is for those who fear My Station and fear My Threat.”
And they sought victory, and every stubborn tyrant fails
Beyond him lies Hell; and he shall be given to drink of oozing pus
which he will gulp down, but can scarcely swallow. Death shall come upon him from every side; yet he will not die, and before him lies a grave punishment
The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord: their deeds are as ashes that the wind blows hard on a stormy day. They have no power over aught they have earned. That is extreme error
Hast thou not considered that God created the heavens and the earth in truth? If He wills, He can remove you and bring a new creation
and that is no great matter for God
They will appear before God all together, and the weak will say to those who waxed arrogant, “Truly we were your followers; so can you avail us in any way against the Punishment of God?” They will say, “Had God guided us, we would have guided you. It is the same for us whether we are anxious or patient; for us there is no refuge.”
And Satan will say, when the matter has been decreed, “Verily God made you the Promise of truth; and I made you a promise, but I failed you. And I had no authority over you, save that I called you, and you responded to me. So do not blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot respond to your cries for help; nor can you respond to my cries for help. Truly I disbelieved in your ascribing me as partner aforetime. As for the wrongdoers, surely theirs shall be a painful punishment.”
Those who believe and perform righteous deeds shall be made to enter Gardens with rivers running below, abiding therein by the leave of their Lord. Their greeting therein shall be, “Peace!”
Hast thou not considered how God sets forth a parable? A good word is as a good tree: its roots firm and its branches in the sky
It brings forth fruit in every season, by the Leave of its Lord. God sets forth parables for mankind, that haply they may remember
And the parable of a bad word is a bad tree: uprooted from the face of the earth; it has no stability
God makes firm those who believe with firm speech in the life of this world and in the Hereafter. And God leads the wrongdoers astray; God does whatsoever He wills
Hast thou not considered those who exchanged the Blessing of God for ingratitude and caused their people to dwell in the abode of perdition—
Hell, wherein they shall burn. What an evil dwelling place
They set up equals unto God, that they might lead astray from His Way. Say, “Enjoy yourselves! For truly your journey is unto the Fire!”
Tell My servants who believe to perform the prayer and to spend from that which We have provided them, secretly and openly, before a day comes wherein there shall be neither bargaining nor befriending
God it is Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down water from the sky, then brought forth fruits thereby for your provision. He has made the ships subservient unto you, so that they sail upon the sea by His Command, and has made the rivers subservient unto you
And He has made the sun and the moon subservient unto you, constant, and He made the night and the day subservient unto you
And He gives you something of all that you ask of Him, and were you to count the Blessings of God, you could not number them. Truly mankind is wrongdoing, ungrateful
And [remember] when Abraham said, “My Lord! Make this land secure, and keep me and my children from worshipping idols
My Lord! Surely they have led astray many among mankind. So whosoever follows me, he is of me. And whosoever disobeys me, surely Thou art Forgiving, Merciful
Our Lord! Verily I have settled some of my progeny in a valley without cultivation by Thy Sacred House, our Lord, that they might perform the prayer. So cause the hearts of some men to incline toward them, and provide them with fruits, that haply they may give thanks
Our Lord! Surely Thou knowest what we hide and what we disclose. And naught is hidden from God, on earth or in Heaven
Praise be to God, Who bestowed upon me Ishmael and Isaac, in my old age. Truly my Lord is the Hearer of supplications
My Lord! Make me a performer of prayer, and my progeny. Our Lord! Accept my supplication
Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents and the believers on the Day when the Reckoning is come.”
Do not suppose that God is heedless of the deeds of the wrongdoers; He merely grants them reprieve till a day when eyes will stare, transfixed
running with necks outstretched and heads upraised, their glance returning not to them, their hearts vacant
And warn mankind of the Day when the punishment shall come upon them, whereupon those who did wrong will say, “Our Lord! Grant us reprieve for a term nigh, that we might respond to Thy Call and follow the messengers.” [It will be said unto them], “Did you not earlier swear that there would be no end for you?”
And you settled in the dwellings of those who had wronged themselves, though it was made clear to you how We dealt with them, and We set forth for you the parables
And they devised their plot, but their plot lies with God, though their plotting be such as to move mountains
So do not suppose that He would fail to keep His Promise unto His messengers. Truly God is Mighty, Possessor of Vengeance
On that Day the earth shall be changed into other than the earth, and the heavens [too], and they will appear before God, the One, the Paramount
On that Day thou wilt see the guilty bound together in fetters
their garments made of pitch, and the Fire covering their faces
that God may recompense every soul for that which it has earned; surely God is swift in reckoning
This is a proclamation unto mankind, that they may be warned thereby, and that they may know that He is the One God, and that the possessors of intellect might be reminded
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the signs of the Book and a clear Quran
It may be that those who disbelieve will wish that they had submitted
Leave them to eat and enjoy themselves and to be beguiled by hopes, for soon they will know
Never did We destroy a town, but that it had a known decree
No community can hasten its term, nor delay it
And they say, “O you unto whom the Reminder has been sent down, truly you are possessed
Why do you not bring us the angels, if you are among the truthful?”
We do not send down the angels, save in truth, and were We to do so, they would be granted no respite
Truly it is We Who have sent down the Reminder, and surely We are its Preserver
We indeed sent [messengers] before thee to communities among those of old
And never did a messenger come unto them, but that they mocked him
Thus do We place it into the hearts of the guilty
They believe not in it, though the wont of those of old has already passed away
Were We to open for them a gate unto Heaven, that they might continue to ascend through it
they would say, “Our eyes are merely spellbound. Nay, we are a people bewitched!”
We have set constellations in the sky, and We have adorned them for the onlookers
And We have preserved them from every satan outcast
save he who gains a hearing by stealth, and then a manifest flaming star pursues him
And the earth We spread out, and cast therein firm mountains, and We caused to grow therein all manner of things in due balance
And We placed therein means of livelihood for you and for those for whom you provide not
Naught is there, but that its treasuries lie with Us, and We do not send it down, save in a known measure
And We sent forth the winds, fertilizing. And We sent down water from the sky, providing you with sufficient drink thereby, and you are not the keepers of its stores
Surely it is We Who give life and cause death, and We are the Inheritor
We indeed know those among you who advance, and We indeed know those who lag behind
and verily it is thy Lord who will gather them. Truly He is Wise, Knowing
And We indeed created man from dried clay, made of molded mud
and the jinn We created earlier from scorching fire
And [remember] when thy Lord said unto the angels, “Behold! I am creating a human being from dried clay, made of molded mud
so when I have proportioned him and breathed into him of My Spirit, fall down before him prostrating.”
Thereupon the angels prostrated, all of them together
save Iblis. He refused to be with those who prostrated
He said, “O Iblis! What ails you that you are not with those who prostrate?”
He said, “I am not one to prostrate to a human being whom Thou hast created from dried clay, made of molded mud.”
He said, “Go forth from it! Surely thou art outcast
and surely the curse shall be upon thee till the Day of Judgment!”
He said, “My Lord! Grant me respite till the Day they are resurrected.”
He said, “Then verily thou art among those granted respite
till the Day of the Moment Known.”
He said, “My Lord! Since Thou hast caused me to err, I shall surely make things seem fair unto them on earth, and I shall cause them to err all together
save Thy sincere servants among them.”
He said, “This is a straight path unto Me
As for My servants, truly thou hast no authority over them, save for those in error who follow thee
And verily Hell shall be their tryst, all together.”
Seven gates it has, and for each gate is appointed a separate portion of them
Truly the reverent shall be amidst gardens and springs
“Enter them in peace, secure”—
We shall remove whatever rancor lies within their breasts—“as brothers, upon couches, facing one another.”
No weariness shall befall them therein; nor shall they be expelled therefrom
Tell My servants that I am indeed the Forgiving, the Merciful
and that My Punishment is the painful punishment
And tell them of the guests of Abraham
when they entered upon him and said, “Peace!” He said, “Verily of you we are afraid.”
They said, “Be not afraid. Truly we bring thee glad tidings of a knowing son.”
He said, “Do you bring me glad tidings when old age has befallen me? So of what do you bring me glad tidings?”
They said, “We bring thee glad tidings in truth; so be not among those who despair.”
He said, “Who despairs of the Mercy of his Lord, save those who are astray?”
He said, “What is your errand
messengers?”
They said, “We have been sent unto a guilty people
save for the family of Lot. We shall surely save them, all together
except for his wife; We have determined that she is indeed among those who lagged behind.” a So when the messengers came to the family of Lot
he said, “Verily you are an unfamiliar folk.”
They said, “Nay, but we bring thee that which they used to doubt
And we bring thee the truth, and surely we are truthful
So set out with thy family during the night, and follow behind them, and let not any of you turn around, but go forth wheresoever you are commanded.”
And We decreed this matter unto him: that the last remnant of those people will be rooted out in the morning
And the people of the city came, rejoicing
He said, “Truly these are my guests; so dishonor me not
Reverence God, and disgrace me not.”
They said, “Did we not forbid you from [providing protection] to all the people?”
He said, “These are my daughters, if you must act.”
By thy life, they wandered confused in their drunkenness
So the Cry seized them at sunrise
then We made its uppermost to be its lowermost, and We rained down upon them stones of baked clay
Truly in that are signs for those who discern
and verily they are on a path still standing
Truly in that is a sign for the believers
And verily the inhabitants of the thicket were wrongdoers
So We took vengeance upon them. Truly the two of them are on a clear road
And indeed the inhabitants of al-?ijr denied the messengers
And We gave them Our signs, but they used to turn away therefrom
And they would hew dwellings in the mountains, [feeling] secure
Yet the Cry seized them in the morning
and that which they used to earn availed them not
And We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, save in truth. And surely the Hour is coming; so forbear with beautiful forbearance
Truly thy Lord is the knowing Creator
And We have indeed given thee the seven oft-repeated, and the Mighty Quran
Strain not thine eyes toward the enjoyments We have bestowed upon certain classes of them, and grieve not for them, and lower thy wing unto the believers
and say, “Truly I am the clear warner.”
Such as We have sent down for those who make division
who made the Quran into fragments
So by thy Lord, We shall question them all
concerning that which they used to do
So proclaim as thou hast been commanded, and turn away from the idolaters
Truly We shall suffice thee against those who mock
those who set up another god along with God; yet soon they will know
And certainly We know that thy breast is straitened because of what they say
So hymn the praise of thy Lord, and be among those who prostrate
And worship thy Lord, till certainty comes unto thee
The Command of God is coming; so seek not to hasten it. Glory be to Him and exalted is He above the partners they ascribe
He sends down angels with the Spirit from His Command to whomsoever He will among His servants, “Give warning that there is no god but I, so reverence Me!”
He created the heavens and the earth in truth. Exalted is He above the partners they ascribe
He created man from a drop, and behold, he is a manifest adversary
And cattle has He created for you, in which there is warmth and [other] uses, and whereof you eat
And in them there is beauty for you, when you bring them home, and when you take them out to pasture
And they bear your burdens to a land you would never reach, save with great hardship to yourselves. Truly your Lord is Kind, Merciful
And [He has created] horses, mules, and asses, that you may ride them, and as adornment, and He creates that which you know not
And it is for God to show the way, for some of them lead astray. Had He willed, He would have guided you all together
He it is Who sends down water from the sky, from which you have drink, and from which comes forth vegetation wherewith you pasture your cattle
Therewith He causes the crops to grow for you, and olives, and date palms, and grapevines, and every kind of fruit. Truly in that is a sign for a people who reflect
He has made the night and the day subservient unto you, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars are subservient by His Command. Truly in that are signs for a people who understand
And whatsoever He created for you on the earth of diverse hues—truly in this is a sign for a people who reflect
He it is Who made the sea subservient, that you may eat fresh meat therefrom, and extract from it ornaments that you wear. You see the ships plowing through it, and [this is so] that you may seek His Bounty, and that haply you may give thanks
And He cast firm mountains in the earth, lest it shake beneath you, and streams, and ways, that haply you may be guided
and landmarks, and by the stars they are guided
Is He Who creates like one who creates not? Will you not, then, reflect
And were you to count the blessings of God, you could not number them. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And God knows what you hide and what you disclose
And those whom they call upon apart from God create naught, and are themselves created
[They are] dead, not living, and they are not aware of when they will be resurrected
Your God is one God. And those who believe not in the Hereafter, their hearts deny and they wax arrogant
There is no doubt that God knows what they hide and what they disclose. Truly He loves not the arrogant
When it is said unto them, “What has your Lord sent down?” they say, “Fables of those of old!”
[This is so], that on the Day of Resurrection they may bear their burdens completely, along with some of the burdens of those whom they lead astray without knowledge. Behold! Evil is that which they bear
Those before them also plotted. Then God came upon their building from the foundations, and the roof fell down upon them from above, and the punishment came upon them whence they were not aware
Then on the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and say, “Where are My partners on whose account you were defiant?” Those who were given knowledge will say, “Surely, this day, disgrace and evil are upon the disbelievers”—
those whom the angels took while they were wronging themselves. Then they will offer submission, “We were not doing any evil.” Nay, but God knows best that which you were doing
So enter the gates of Hell, to abide therein. Evil indeed is the abode of the arrogant
And it will be said unto those who are reverent, “What has your Lord sent down?” They will say, “Goodness.” For those who are virtuous in this world, there shall be good, and the Abode of the Hereafter is better. Excellent indeed is the abode of the reverent
They shall enter the Gardens of Eden with rivers running below. Therein shall they have whatsoever they will. Thus does God recompense the reverent
those whom the angels take while they are in a state of goodness. They will say, “Peace be upon you! Enter the Garden for that which you used to do.”
Do they await aught but that the angels should come upon them, or that the Command of thy Lord should come? Those before them did likewise. And God wronged them not, but they wronged themselves
Thus they were stricken by the evil deeds they had done, and were beset by that which they used to mock
Those who ascribe partners unto God say, “Had God willed, we would not have worshipped aught apart from Him—neither us nor our fathers—nor would we have considered sacred aught apart from Him.” Those before them did likewise. Is aught incumbent upon the Messenger save the clear proclamation
We indeed sent a messenger unto every community, “Worship God, and shun false deities!” Then among them were those whom God guided; and among them were those who were deserving of error. So journey upon the earth and behold how the deniers fared in the end
Though thou eagerly desire that they be guided, verily God guides not those who lead astray, and they shall have no helpers
And they swear by God their most solemn oaths [that] God will not resurrect those who die. Nay, but it is a promise binding upon Him, though most of mankind know not
[This is so] that He might make clear unto them that wherein they differed, and that those who disbelieved might know that truly they were liars
And Our Word unto a thing, when We desire it, is only to say to it, “Be!” and it is
And those who emigrate for the sake of God, after having been wronged, We shall surely settle them in a good place in this world—and the reward of the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew—
those who are patient and trust in their Lord
We sent no messengers before thee, save men unto whom We revealed—ask the people of the Reminder, if you know not—
clear proofs and scriptures. And We have sent down the Reminder unto thee that thou mightest clarify for mankind that which has been sent down unto them, that haply they may reflect
Do those who have plotted evil deeds feel secure that God will not cause the earth to engulf them, or that the punishment will not come upon them whence they are not aware
Or that He will not seize them in the midst of their going to and fro, and they will be powerless to thwart [it]
Or that He will not seize them with a gradual diminishing? And truly your Lord is Kind, Merciful
Have they not considered that whatsoever God has created casts its shadow to the right and to the left, prostrating to God while in a state of abject humility
And unto God prostrates whatever crawling creatures or angels are in the heavens or on the earth, and they do not wax arrogant
They fear their Lord above them, and they do whatsoever they are commanded
And God says, “Do not take up two gods. Truly He is only one God. So be in awe of Me.”
Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and religion belongs to Him forever. Will you then revere something other than God
Whatever blessing you have, it is from God. Then, when affliction befalls you, it is unto Him that you cry for help
Then, when He removes the affliction from you, behold, a group among you ascribes partners unto their Lord
So let them be ungrateful for that which We have given them: “Enjoy yourselves! For soon you will know.”
And they dedicate a share of that which We have provided them unto that which they know not. By God, you shall surely be questioned about that which you used to fabricate
And they assign unto God daughters—glory be to Him!—while they have that which they desire
And when one of them receives tidings of a female [child], his face darkens, and he is choked with anguish
He hides from the people on account of the evil of the tidings he has been given. Shall he keep it in humiliation, or bury it in the dust? Behold! Evil indeed is the judgment they make
Those who believe not in the Hereafter have an evil description, while unto God belongs the loftiest description. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
And were God to take mankind to task for their wrongdoing, He would not leave a single creature upon [the earth]. But He grants them reprieve till a term appointed. And when their term comes, they shall not delay it a single hour, nor shall they advance it
They assign unto God that to which they are averse. And their tongues utter the lie that the best shall be theirs. There is no doubt that theirs shall be the Fire, and they shall be hastened [toward it]
By God, We have indeed sent messengers unto communities before thee. But Satan made their deeds seem fair unto them. So he is their protector on this day, and theirs shall be a painful punishment
And We did not send down unto thee the Book, save that thou mightest make clear to them that wherein they differed, and as a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe
And God sends down water from the sky, and thereby revives the earth after its death. Surely in this is a sign for a people who hear
And surely in the cattle there is a lesson for you: We give you to drink from that which is in their bellies, between refuse and blood, as pure milk, palatable to those who drink [thereof]
And from the fruits of the date palm and the vine, from which you derive strong drink and a goodly provision. Surely in this is a sign for a people who understand
And thy Lord revealed unto the bee, “Take up dwellings among the mountains and the trees and among that which they build
Then eat of every kind of fruit, and follow the ways of your Lord made easy.” A drink of diverse hues comes forth from their bellies wherein there is healing for mankind. Truly in that is a sign for a people who reflect
God created you; then He takes you [unto Himself]. And among you are those who are brought back to the weakest of ages, such that they know nothing after having had knowledge. Truly God is Knowing, Powerful
And God has favored some of you above others in provision. Those who have been favored do not hand over their provision to those whom their right hands possess, such that they would be equal in this regard. Would they thus reject the blessings of God
And God has ordained mates for you from among yourselves, and from your mates He has ordained for you children and grandchildren. And He provided you with good things. Will they then believe in that which is false, and show ingratitude for the blessings of God
And they worship, apart from God, that which has no power over any provision that may come to them from the heavens and the earth; nor are they capable [of such]
So set forth no parables for God. Truly God knows and you know not
God sets forth a parable: a servant enslaved, with power over naught, and he unto whom We have provided a goodly provision from Us, who then spends of it secretly and openly. Are they equal? Praise be to God! Nay, but most of them know not
God sets forth a parable: two men, one of whom is dumb, with power over naught, who is a burden unto his master; wheresoever he dispatches him, he brings no good. Is he equal to one who enjoins justice, and who is on a straight path
Unto God belongs the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. The matter of the Hour is as the blinking of an eye, or nearer still. Truly God is Powerful over all things
And God brought you forth from the bellies of your mothers, knowing naught. And He endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts, that haply you may give thanks
Have they not considered the birds, made subservient, in midair? None holds them save God. Truly in that are signs for a people who believe
And God has ordained for you a place of rest in your dwellings, and He has made dwellings for you from the skins of cattle, which you bear with ease on the day you travel and the day you pitch camp. And from their wool, and their fur, and their hair, furnishings and enjoyment for a while
And God has made shade for you from among that which He created, and He has made places of refuge for you in the mountains. He has made coats for you that protect you from the heat and coats that protect you from your own might. Thus does God complete His Blessing unto you, that haply you may submit
Then if they turn away—only the clear proclamation is incumbent upon thee
They recognize the Blessing of God, and then deny it, and most of them are disbelievers
And on that Day We shall raise up a witness from every community; then those who disbelieved will not be permitted [to speak], nor can they make amends
And when those who did wrong see the punishment, it shall not be lightened for them, nor shall they be granted respite
When those who ascribed partners unto God see the partners they ascribed, they will say, “Our Lord! These are our partners whom we called upon apart from Thee.” But they will retort, “Verily you are liars!”
And they will offer submission unto God on that Day, and that which they used to fabricate will forsake them
Those who disbelieve and who have turned from the way of God, for them We shall add punishment on top of punishment, for their having worked corruption
And on that Day We shall raise up in every community a witness against them from among themselves, and We shall bring thee as a witness against these. And We sent down unto thee the Book as a clarification of all things, and as a guidance and a mercy and glad tidings for those who submit
Truly God commands justice, virtue, and giving to kinsfolk, and He forbids indecency, wrong, and rebelliousness. And He admonishes you, that haply you may remember
Fulfill the pact of God when you have pledged it, and break not your oaths after solemnly affirming them, and having made God a Witness over you. Surely God knows whatsoever you do
Be not like she who unravels her yarn, breaking it after it had been strong [by] taking your oaths to practice deception among yourselves, so that one community might be larger and wealthier than another. God only tries you thereby. And on the Day of Resurrection, He will surely clarify for you that wherein you differed
Had God willed, He would have made you one community. But He leads astray whomsoever He will and guides whomsoever He will. And you shall surely be questioned about that which you used to do
Take not your oaths to practice deception among yourselves, lest a foot slip after it had been firmly planted, and you taste evil for your having turned from the way of God, and yours should be a great punishment
Sell not the pact of God for a paltry price. Surely that which is with God is better for you, if you but knew
That which is with you comes to an end, but that which is with God subsists. And surely We shall render unto those who are patient their reward for the best of that which they used to do
Whosoever works righteousness, whether male or female, and is a believer, We shall give them new life, a good life, and We shall surely render unto them their reward in accordance with the best of that which they used to do
So when you recite the Quran, seek refuge in God from the outcast Satan
Truly he has no authority over those who believe and trust in their Lord
His authority is only over those who take him as a protector, and those who take him as a partner
And when We replace one sign with another—and God knows best that which He sends down—they say, “You are only a fabricator!” Nay, but most of them know not
Say, “The Holy Spirit has brought it down from thy Lord in truth, to make firm those who believe, and as guidance and glad tidings for those who submit.”
Indeed, We know that they say, “He has merely been taught by a human being.” The tongue of the one whom they falsely implicate is foreign, while this is [in] a clear, Arabic tongue
Truly those who believe not in the signs of God, God guides them not, and theirs shall be a painful punishment
Only those who believe not in the signs of God fabricate lies. It is they who are liars
Whosoever disbelieves in God after having believed—save one who is coerced, while his heart is at peace in faith—but whosoever opens his breast unto disbelief, upon them shall be the Wrath of God, and theirs shall be a great punishment
That is for their having preferred the life of this world to the Hereafter. And surely God guides not disbelieving people
It is they on whose hearts God has placed a seal, and on their hearing and their seeing. It is they who are heedless
There is no doubt that in the Hereafter they are the losers
Then indeed thy Lord, for those who emigrated after being oppressed, then strove and were patient, surely thy Lord thereafter is Forgiving, Merciful
That Day every soul will come disputing on behalf of itself, and every soul will be paid in full for that which it has done. They shall not be wronged
God sets forth a parable: a town secure and at peace, its provision coming unto it abundantly from every side. Yet, it was ungrateful for the blessings of God; so God let it taste the garment of hunger and fear for that which they had wrought
A messenger from among themselves had surely come unto them, but they denied him. And so the punishment seized them while they were wrongdoers
So eat of the lawful and good things God has provided you, and give thanks for the Blessing of God, if it is He Whom you worship
He has only forbidden you carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which has been offered to other than God. But whosoever is compelled by necessity, without willfully disobeying or transgressing, truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And utter not lies in what your tongues assert, [saying], “This is lawful and this is forbidden,” such that you fabricate a lie against God. Surely those who fabricate lies against God will not prosper
A little enjoyment, while theirs shall be a painful punishment
And unto those who are Jews, We forbade that which We recounted unto thee beforehand. We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves
Then truly thy Lord—for those who commit evil in ignorance, then later repent and make amends—truly thy Lord thereafter is Forgiving, Merciful
Truly Abraham was a community, devoutly obedient to God, a ?anif, and he was not among the idolaters
[And he was] thankful for His Blessings. He chose him and guided him unto a straight path
And We granted him good in this world, and surely in the Hereafter he shall be among the righteous
Then We revealed unto thee, “Follow the creed of Abraham, a ?anif, and he was not among the idolaters.”
And the Sabbath was only ordained for those who differed concerning it, and surely thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection, concerning that wherein they used to differ
Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and goodly exhortation. And dispute with them in the most virtuous manner. Surely thy Lord is He Who knows best those who stray from His way, and He knows best the rightly guided
And if you would punish, then punish with the like of that wherewith you were punished. But if you are patient, then that is better for the patient
So be patient, and thy patience is only with God. And grieve not on their account, nor be distressed by what they plot
Truly God is with those who are reverent, and those who are virtuous
Glory be to Him Who carried His servant by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque, whose precincts We have blessed, that We might show him some of Our signs. Truly He is the Hearer, the Seer
And We gave unto Moses the Book, and We made it a guidance for the Children of Israel—“Take no guardian apart from Me”—
the progeny of those whom We carried with Noah. Truly he was a thankful servant
And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Book, “Surely you will work corruption upon the earth twice, and you will ascend to great height.”
So when the promise of the first of these came to pass, We sent against you servants of Ours, possessed of great might, and they ravaged your dwellings, and it was a promise fulfilled
Then We gave you a turn against them, and We aided you with wealth and children, and We made you greater in number
If you are virtuous, you are virtuous for the sake of your own souls, and if you commit evil, it is for them. So when the other promise comes to pass, they will make wretched your faces, and enter the Temple as they entered it the first time, and utterly ruin whatsoever they overtake
It may be that your Lord will have mercy upon you, but if you revert, We shall revert. And We have made Hell a prison for the disbelievers
Truly this Quran guides toward that which is most upright, and gives glad tidings to the believers who perform righteous deeds that theirs shall be a great reward
and that We have prepared a painful punishment for those who believe not in the Hereafter
Man prays for evil as he prays for good, and man is ever hasty
We made the night and the day two signs. Then We effaced the sign of the night, and made the sign of the day, giving sight, that you might seek bounty from your Lord, and that you might know the number of years and the reckoning. And We have expounded everything in detail
And [for] every man We have fastened his omen upon his neck, and We shall bring it forth for him on the Day of Resurrection as a book he will meet wide open
“Read your book! On this Day, your soul suffices as a reckoner against you.”
Whosoever is rightly guided is only rightly guided for the sake of his own soul, and whosoever is astray is only astray to its detriment. None shall bear the burden of another. And never do We punish till We have sent a messenger
And when We desire to destroy a town, We command those who live a life of luxury within it; yet they commit iniquity therein. Thus the Word comes due against it and We annihilate it completely
How many a generation have We destroyed after Noah! Thy Lord suffices as One Aware of the sins of His servants, Seeing
Whosoever would desire the ephemeral, We hasten for him therein whatsoever We will for whomsoever We desire. Then We appointed Hell for him, wherein he shall burn, blameworthy, banished
And whosoever desires the Hereafter, and endeavors for it earnestly, and is a believer, it is they whose efforts shall be appreciated
Each do We aid—both these and those—with the Gift of thy Lord; and the Gift of thy Lord is not confined
Observe how We have favored some of them over others, and surely the Hereafter is greater in ranking and greater in favor
Do not set up another god along with God, lest you sit blameworthy, forsaken
Thy Lord decrees that you worship none but Him, and be virtuous to parents. Whether one or both of them reaches old age, say not to them “Uff!” nor chide them, but speak unto them a noble word
Lower unto them the wing of humility out of mercy and say, “My Lord! Have mercy upon them, as they raised me when I was small.”
Your Lord knows best that which is in your souls. If you are righteous, then verily He is Forgiving toward the penitent
Give unto the kinsman his right, and unto the indigent and the traveler, but do not squander wastefully
Truly the wasteful are the brethren of satans, and Satan is ungrateful to his Lord
But if thou turnest away from them, seeking a mercy from thy Lord, for which thou dost hope, then speak unto them a gentle word
And let not thine hand be shackled to thy neck; nor let it be entirely open, lest thou shouldst sit condemned, destitute
Truly thy Lord outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will. Verily of His servants He is Aware, Seeing
And slay not your children for fear of poverty. We shall provide for them and for you. Surely their slaying is a great sin
And approach not adultery; verily it is indecency and an evil way
And slay not the soul that God has made inviolable, save by right. And whosoever is slain unjustly, We have appointed authority unto his heir. Then let him not be excessive in slaying. Verily he shall be helped
And approach not the orphan’s property, save in the most virtuous manner, till he reaches maturity. And fulfill the pact; surely the pact is called to account
And give full measure when you measure, and weigh with the straight balance. That is better and more virtuous in the end
And pursue not that whereof you have no knowledge. Truly hearing, and sight, and the heart—all of these will be called to account
And walk not exultantly upon the earth; surely thou shalt not penetrate the earth, nor reach the mountains in height
The evil of all this is loathsome unto thy Lord
That is from the wisdom thy Lord has revealed unto thee. Do not set up another god along with God, lest thou be cast into Hell, condemned, banished
Did your Lord favor you with sons, while He took females from among the angels [for Himself]? Surely you speak a monstrous word
And We have indeed varied [Our signs] in this Quran, that they might reflect, though it increased them in naught but aversion
Say, “If there were gods with Him, as they say, they would surely seek a way unto the Possessor of the Throne.”
Glory be to Him! Exalted is He above whatsoever they say
The seven heavens, and the earth, and whosoever is in them glorify Him. And there is no thing, save that it hymns His praise, though you do not understand their praise. Truly He is Clement, Forgiving
And when thou recitest the Quran, We place a hidden veil between thee and those who believe not in the Hereafter
And We have placed coverings over their hearts, such that they understand it not, and in their ears a deafness. And whenever thou dost mention thy Lord alone in the Quran, they turn their backs in aversion
We know best that which they listen for when they listen to thee, and when they converse in secret, when the wrongdoers say, “You follow naught but a man bewitched!”
Look how they set forth descriptions of thee. Thus they go astray and cannot find a way
They say, “What! When we are bones and dust, shall we indeed be resurrected as a new creation?”
Say, “Be you of stone, or of iron
or some other created thing more difficult [to resurrect] to your minds.” Then they will say, “Who will bring us back?” Say, “He Who originated you the first time.” And they will shake their heads at thee and say, “When will it be?” Say, “It may well be nigh.”
The Day when He calls you, you will respond by praising Him, and you will think that you tarried but a short while
Say unto My servants that they should say that which is more virtuous. Surely Satan provokes ill feeling between them. Surely Satan is a manifest enemy unto man
Your Lord knows you best. If He wills, He has Mercy upon you, and if He wills, He punishes you, and We have not sent thee as a guardian over them
And thy Lord knows best whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. And We indeed favored some of the prophets over others, and unto David We gave the Psalms
Say, “Call upon those whom you claim apart from Him, but they have no power to remove affliction from you, nor to change [it].”
It is they who make supplication, seeking a means of approach to their Lord. Which of them is nearer? And they hope for His Mercy and fear His Punishment. Truly the Punishment of thy Lord is something of which to be wary
There is no town, save that We shall destroy it before the Day of Resurrection, or punish it with a severe punishment. That is inscribed in the Book
Naught hinders Us from sending signs, save that those of old denied them. And We gave unto Thamud the she-camel as a clear portent, but they wronged her. And We do not send down Our signs, save to inspire fear
And [remember] when We said unto thee, “Surely thy Lord encompasses mankind.” We did not ordain the vision that We showed thee, save as a trial for mankind, and the Accursed Tree in the Quran. And We inspire fear in them, but it increases them in naught but great rebellion
And when We said unto the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” they all prostrated, save Iblis. He said, “Shall I prostrate before one whom Thou hast created of clay?”
He said, “Dost Thou see this, which Thou hast honored above me? If Thou dost grant me reprieve till the Day of Resurrection, I shall surely gain mastery over his progeny, all save a few.”
He said, “Go! And whosoever among them should follow thee, surely Hell shall be thy recompense—an ample recompense
So incite whomsoever thou canst among them with thy voice, and bear down upon them with thy cavalry and thy infantry, and be their partner in wealth and children, and make them promises.” Satan promises them naught but delusion
“As for My servants, truly thou hast no authority over them.” And thy Lord suffices as a Guardian
Your Lord is He Who makes the ships sail upon the sea, that you might seek of His Bounty. Verily, He is Merciful unto you
And whenever affliction befalls you at sea, forgotten are those whom you would call upon, save for Him. Then when He has delivered you safely to land, you turn away. Man is ever ungrateful
Do you feel secure that He will not cause the shore to engulf you or unleash a torrent of stones upon you? Then would you find no guardian for yourselves
Or do you feel secure that He will not cause you to return to it another time, and unleash upon you a tempestuous wind, and drown you for your having been ungrateful? Then you would find no avenger therein against Us
We have indeed honored the Children of Adam, and We carry them over land and sea, and provide them with good things, and We have favored them above many We have created
On the Day We shall call every people by their imam, whosoever is given his book in his right hand, it is they who shall read their book, and they shall not be wronged so much as the thread of a date stone
And whosoever was blind in this [life] will be blind in the Hereafter, and further astray from the way
And they were about to tempt thee away from that which We revealed unto thee, that thou mightest falsely ascribe unto Us something other than it, whereupon they would surely have taken thee as a friend
And had We not made thee firm, thou wouldst certainly have inclined toward them a little
Then We would have made thee taste double in life and double in death. Then thou wouldst have found for thyself no helper against Us
And they were about to incite thee from the land, in order to expel thee therefrom, whereupon they would not have tarried after thee, save a little—
the wont of those among Our messengers whom We sent before thee. And thou wilt find no change in Our wont
Perform the prayer at the declining of the sun till the darkening of the night. And the recitation at dawn—truly, the recitation at dawn is ever witnessed
And keep vigil in prayer for part of the night, as a supererogatory act for thee. It may be that thy Lord will resurrect thee in a praiseworthy station
And say, “My Lord! Make me enter in a sincere manner, and make me go forth in a sincere manner, and ordain for me, from Thy Presence, an authority to help me.”
Say, “Truth has come, and falsehood has vanished. Truly falsehood is ever vanishing.”
And We send down of the Quran that which is a cure and a mercy for the believers. And it increases the wrongdoers in naught but loss
And whenever We bestow a blessing upon man, he turns away and withdraws. And whenever evil befalls him, he is in despair
Say, “Each acts according to his disposition, and your Lord knows well who is more rightly guided on the way.”
They ask thee about the Spirit. Say, “The Spirit is from the Command of my Lord, and you have not been given knowledge, save a little.”
And if We willed, We could take away that which We revealed unto thee. Then thou wouldst not find, for thyself, any guardian against Us
save a mercy from thy Lord. Truly His Bounty toward thee is ever great
Say, “Surely if mankind and jinn banded together to bring the like of this Quran, they would not bring the like thereof, even if they supported one another.”
And indeed We have employed every kind of parable for mankind in this Quran. Yet most of mankind refuse aught but disbelief
And they say, “We shall not believe in you till you make a spring gush forth for us from the earth
or till you have a garden of date palms and grapevines, and you make streams gush forth in the midst of it
or till you make the sky fall upon us in pieces, as you have claimed, or you bring God and the angels before us
or till you have a house of gold ornament, or you ascend to Heaven. And we shall not believe in your ascension till you bring down unto us a book we can read.” Say, “Glory be to my Lord! Am I aught but a human being, a messenger?”
And nothing hindered men from believing when guidance came unto them, save that they said, “Has God sent a human being as a messenger?”
Say, “Were there angels walking about upon the earth in peace, We would have sent down upon them an angel from Heaven as a messenger.”
Say, “God suffices as a Witness between you and me. Verily, of His servants He is Aware, Seeing.”
Whomsoever God guides, he is rightly guided; and whomsoever He leads astray, thou wilt find no protectors for them apart from Him. And We shall gather them on the Day of Resurrection upon their faces—blind, dumb, and deaf—their refuge shall be Hell. Every time it abates, We shall increase for them a blazing flame
That is their recompense for having disbelieved in Our signs. And they say, “What! When we are bones and dust, shall we indeed be resurrected as a new creation?”
Have they not considered that God, Who created the heavens and the earth, has the power to create the like of them? And He has ordained for them a term, about which there is no doubt. Yet the wrongdoers refuse aught but disbelief
Say, “Were you to possess the treasuries of my Lord’s Mercy, you would surely withhold them, out of fear of spending. Man is ever miserly!”
And We indeed gave unto Moses nine clear signs. So ask the Children of Israel. When he came unto them, Pharaoh said, “Truly I think that you, O Moses, are bewitched!”
He said, “You certainly know that no one has sent these down as clear portents, save the Lord of the heavens and the earth. And truly I think that you, O Pharaoh, are doomed.”
And he desired to incite them from the land; so We drowned him and those with him all together
And We said thereafter unto the Children of Israel, “Dwell in the land. And when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass, We shall bring you as a mixed assembly.”
In truth We sent it down, and in truth it descended. And We sent thee not, save as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner
and [We sent it down] as a recitation We have divided in parts, that thou mayest recite it unto men in intervals, and We sent it down in successive revelations
Say, “Believe in it, or believe not.” Surely those who were given knowledge before it, when it is recited unto them, fall down prostrate on their faces
And they say, “Glory be to our Lord! The Promise of our Lord is indeed fulfilled.”
And they fall down on their faces, weeping, and it increases them in humility
Say, “Call upon God, or call upon the Compassionate. Whichever you call upon, to Him belong the Most Beautiful Names. And be not loud in your prayer, nor too quiet therein, but seek a way between.”
And say, “Praise be to God, who has no child! He has no partner in sovereignty; nor has He any protector out of lowliness.” And proclaim His Greatness
Praise be to God, Who sent down the Book unto His servant, and placed no crookedness therein
upright, that He may warn of a great might coming from His Presence and give glad tidings unto the believers who perform righteous deeds that theirs shall be a beautiful reward
wherein they shall remain forever
and that He may warn those who say, “God has taken a child.”
They have no knowledge thereof, nor do their fathers. A monstrous word it is that issues from their mouths. They speak naught but a lie
Yet perhaps thou wouldst destroy thyself with grief for their sake, should they believe not in this account
Surely We made whatsoever is on the earth an adornment for it, that We may try them as to which of them is most virtuous in deed
And surely We shall make whatsoever is upon it a barren plain
Dost thou reckon that the Companions of the Cave and the Inscription are a marvel among Our signs
When the youths took refuge in the cave, they said, “Our Lord! Grant us mercy from Thy Presence, and make us incline to sound judgment concerning our affair.”
So We placed [a veil] over their ears in the cave for a number of years
Then We raised them up again, that We might know which of the two parties had best calculated how long they had tarried
We recount their story unto thee in truth. Verily they were youths who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance
And We fortified their hearts. When they arose, they said, “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We shall call upon no god apart from Him, for then we would have certainly uttered an outrage
These, our people, have taken gods apart from Him. Why do they not bring a clear authority concerning them? For who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God
And when you have withdrawn from them and all that they worship save God, then take refuge in the cave. Your Lord will spread forth something of His Mercy for you, and make you incline to ease in your affair.”
Thou wouldst have seen the sun when it rose, slanting away from their cave to the right; and when it set, turning away from them to the left, while they were in an open space within it. That is among the signs of God. Whomsoever God guides, he is rightly guided; and whomsoever He leads astray, thou wilt find no protector to lead him aright
Thou wouldst have thought them awake, though they were asleep. And We turned them to the right and to the left, with their dog stretching forth his paws at the threshold. Hadst thou come upon them, thou wouldst have turned away in flight and been filled with terror on their account
And in this way We raised them up again, that they might question one another. One of them said, “How long have you tarried?” They said, “We have tarried a day or part of a day.” They said, “Your Lord knows best how long you have tarried. So send one of you with this money of yours into the city, and let him observe which of them has the purest food and bring you some provision therefrom. Let him be discreet and make no one aware of you
Verily, if they come to know of you, they will stone you, or make you revert to their creed, and then you will never prosper.”
And in this way We caused them to be discovered, that they might know that God’s Promise is true, and that there is no doubt about the Hour. When they were disputing among themselves about their affair, they said, “Erect a building over them; their Lord knows them best.” Those who prevailed over their affair said, “We shall build a place of worship over them.”
They say, “[They were] three, and the fourth was their dog.” And they say, “Five, and the sixth was their dog”—guessing at the unseen. And they say, “Seven, and the eighth was their dog.” Say, “My Lord knows best their number; none know them save a few.” So dispute not concerning them, save with clear argument, nor consult any of them about them
And say not of anything, “Surely, I shall do it tomorrow.”
Save that God wills. And remember thy Lord when thou dost forget, and say, “It may be that my Lord will guide me nearer than this to rectitude.”
And they tarried in their cave three hundred years, plus nine more
Say, “God knows best how long they tarried. Unto Him belongs the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. How well He sees, how well He hears! They have no protector apart from Him, and He makes no one a partner unto Him in His Judgment.”
Recite that which has been revealed unto thee from the Book of thy Lord. None alters His Words. And thou wilt find no refuge apart from Him
Make thy soul patient with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, desiring His Face. Turn not thine eyes away from them, desiring the adornment of the life of this world, nor obeying one whose heart We have made heedless of the remembrance of Us and who follows his caprice and whose affair exceeds the bounds
And say, “It is the truth from your Lord! So whosoever will, let him believe, and whosoever will, let him disbelieve.” Verily We have prepared for the wrongdoers a Fire whose canopies will encompass them. And if they plead for relief, they will be showered with water like molten lead that will scald faces—an evil drink indeed, and how evil a resting place
As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, surely We neglect not the reward of one who is virtuous in deed
For such as these, theirs shall be the Gardens of Eden with rivers running below. Therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold, and shall wear green garments of fine silk and rich brocade, reclining upon couches. Blessed indeed is the reward, and how beautiful a resting place
Set forth for them the parable of two men: For one of them We made two gardens of grapevines, and surrounded them with date palms, and placed crops between them
Both gardens brought forth their produce and failed not in the least, and We made a stream gush forth in their midst
And he had [abundant] fruit and said unto his companion as he conversed with him, “I am greater than you in wealth and stronger in men.”
And he entered his garden, wronging himself, and said, “I think not that this will ever perish
Nor do I think that the Hour is imminent. And if I am brought back to my Lord, I shall surely find something better than this in the Hereafter.”
His companion said unto him as he conversed with him, “Do you disbelieve in the One Who created you from dust, then from a drop, then fashioned you as a man
But He is God, my Lord, and I ascribe none as partner unto my Lord
When you entered your garden, why did you not say, ‘[This is] as God wills. There is no strength save in God.’ If you see that I am less than you in wealth and children
it may be that my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and unleash against it a reckoning from the sky, so that it becomes a flattened plain
Or its water may sink deep, so that you cannot seek after it.”
And his fruit was encompassed. So he began to wring his hands on account of what he had spent on it while it lay in waste upon its trellises, saying, “Would that I had not ascribed anyone as partner unto my Lord!”
And he had no party to help him apart from God; nor could he help himself
There, protection belongs to God, the Real. He is best in reward and best in requital
Set forth for them a parable of the life of this world: [It is] like water We send down from the sky. Then it mixes with the vegetation of the earth. Then it becomes chaff, scattered by the winds. And God is capable of all things
Wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world, but that which endures—righteous deeds—are better in reward with thy Lord, and better [as a source of] hope
On the Day We will set the mountains in motion, and you will see the earth an open plain. And We will gather them, and leave not one of them behind
They shall be arrayed before thy Lord in ranks. “Indeed, you have come unto Us as We created you the first time. Nay, but you claimed that We would never appoint a tryst for you.”
And the Book will be set down. Then thou wilt see the guilty fearful of what is in it. And they will say, “Oh, woe unto us! What a book this is! It leaves out nothing, small or great, save that it has taken account thereof.” And they find present [therein] whatsoever they did. And thy Lord wrongs no one
When We said unto the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” they prostrated, save Iblis. He was of the jinn and he deviated from the command of his Lord. Will you then take him and his progeny as protectors apart from Me, though they are an enemy unto you? How evil an exchange for the wrongdoers
I did not make them witnesses to the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor to their own creation. And I take not those who lead astray as a support
On the Day when He says, “Call those whom you claimed as My partners,” they will call upon them, but they will not respond to them, and We will place a gulf between them
The guilty will see the Fire, and know they shall fall into it, but they will find no means of escape therefrom
And indeed We have employed every kind of parable for mankind in this Quran. And man is the most contentious of beings
And naught prevents men from believing when guidance comes unto them, and from seeking forgiveness of their Lord, save that [they await] the wont of those of old to come upon them, or the punishment to come upon them face-to-face
And We send not the messengers, save as bearers of glad tidings and as warners. And those who disbelieve dispute falsely in order to refute the truth thereby. They take My signs and that whereof they were warned in mockery
And who does greater wrong than one who has been reminded of the signs of his Lord, then turns away from them and forgets that which his hands have sent forth? Surely We have placed coverings over their hearts, such that they understand it not, and in their ears a deafness. Even if thou callest them to guidance, they will never be rightly guided
And thy Lord is Forgiving, Possessed of Mercy. Were He to take them to task for that which they have earned, He would have hastened the punishment for them. Nay, but theirs is a tryst, beyond which they shall find no refuge
And those towns, We destroyed them for the wrong they did, and We set a tryst for their destruction
And when Moses said unto his servant, “I shall continue on till I reach the junction of the two seas, even if I journey for a long time.”
Then when they reached the junction of the two, they forgot their fish, and it made its way to the sea, burrowing away
Then when they had passed beyond, he said to his servant, “Bring us our meal. We have certainly met with weariness on this journey of ours.”
He said, “Didst thou see? When we took refuge at the rock, indeed I forgot the fish—and naught made me neglect to mention it, save Satan—and it made its way to the sea in a wondrous manner!”
He said, “That is what we were seeking!” So they turned back, retracing their steps
There they found a servant from among Our servants whom We had granted a mercy from Us and whom We had taught knowledge from Our Presence
Moses said unto him, “Shall I follow thee, that thou mightest teach me some of that which thou hast been taught of sound judgment?”
He said, “Truly thou wilt not be able to bear patiently with me
And how canst thou bear patiently that which thou dost not encompass in awareness?”
He said, “Thou wilt find me patient, if God wills, and I shall not disobey thee in any matter.”
He said, “If thou wouldst follow me, then question me not about anything, till I make mention of it to thee.”
So they went on till, when they had embarked upon a ship, he made a hole therein. He said, “Didst thou make a hole in it in order to drown its people? Thou hast done a monstrous thing!”
He said, “Did I not say unto thee that thou wouldst not be able to bear patiently with me?”
He said, “Take me not to task for having forgotten, nor make me suffer much hardship on account of what I have done.”
So they went on till they met a young boy, and he slew him. He said, “Didst thou slay a pure soul who had slain no other soul? Thou hast certainly done a terrible thing!”
He said, “Did I not say unto thee that thou wouldst not be able to bear patiently with me?”
He said, “If I question thee concerning aught after this, then keep my company no more. Thou hast attained sufficient excuse from me.”
So they went on till they came upon the people of a town and sought food from them. But they refused to show them any hospitality. Then they found therein a wall that was about to fall down; so he set it up straight. He said, “Hadst thou willed, thou couldst have taken a wage for it.”
He said, “This is the parting between thee and me. I shall inform thee of the meaning of that which thou couldst not bear patiently
As for the ship, it belonged to indigent people who worked the sea. I desired to damage it, for just beyond them was a king who was seizing every ship by force
And as for the young boy, his parents were believers and we feared that he would make them suffer much through rebellion and disbelief
So we desired that their Lord give them in exchange one who is better than him in purity, and nearer to mercy
And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and beneath it was a treasure belonging to them. Their father was righteous, and thy Lord desired that they should reach their maturity and extract their treasure, as a mercy from thy Lord. And I did not do this upon my own command. This is the meaning of that which thou couldst not bear patiently.”
And they question thee about Dhu’l-Qarnayn. Say, “I shall recite unto you a remembrance of him.”
Truly We established him in the land, and gave him the means to all things
So he followed a means
till when he reached the place of the setting sun, he found it setting in a murky spring, and there he found a people. We said, “O Dhu’l-Qarnayn! Thou mayest punish, or thou mayest treat them well.”
He said, “As for the one who has done wrong, we shall punish him. Then he shall be brought back to his Lord, whereupon He will punish him with a terrible punishment
But as for the one who believes and works righteousness, he shall have a reward, that which is most beautiful, and we shall speak unto him that which is easy from our command.”
Then he followed a means
till he reached the place of the rising sun. He found it rising over a people for whom We had not made any shelter from it
Thus [it was], and We encompassed that which lay before him in awareness
Then he followed a means
till he reached the place between the two mountain barriers. He found beyond them a people who could scarcely comprehend speech
They said, “O Dhu’l-Qarnayn! Truly Gog and Magog are workers of corruption in the land. Shall we assign thee a tribute, that thou mightest set a barrier between them and us?”
He said, “That wherewith my Lord has established me is better; so aid me with strength. I shall set a rampart between you and them
Bring me pieces of iron.” Then, when he had leveled the two cliffs, he said, “Blow!” till when he had made it fire, he said, “Bring me molten copper to pour over it.”
Thus they were not able to surmount it, nor could they pierce it
He said, “This is a mercy from my Lord. And when the Promise of my Lord comes, He will crumble it to dust. And the Promise of my Lord is true.”
And We shall leave them, on that Day, to surge against one another like waves. And the trumpet shall be blown, and We shall gather them together
And We shall present Hell, on that Day, as an array before the disbelievers
those whose eyes were veiled from the remembrance of Me, and could not hear
Do those who disbelieve reckon that they may take My servants as protectors apart from Me? Truly We have prepared Hell as a welcome for the disbelievers
Say, “Shall I inform you who are the greatest losers in respect to their deeds
Those whose efforts go astray in the life of this world, while they reckon that they are virtuous in their works.”
They are those who disbelieve in the signs of their Lord, and in the meeting with Him. Thus their deeds have come to naught, and on the Day of Resurrection We shall assign them no weight
That is their recompense—Hell—for having disbelieved and for having taken My signs and My messengers in mockery
Those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be the Gardens of Paradise as a welcome
Abiding therein, they seek not any change therefrom
Say, “If the sea were ink for the Words of my Lord, the sea would be exhausted before the Words of my Lord were exhausted, even if We brought the like thereof to replenish it.”
Say, “I am only a human being like you. It is revealed unto me that your God is one God. So whosoever hopes for the meeting with his Lord, let him perform righteous deeds and make no one a partner unto his Lord in worship.”
Kaf. Ha. Ya. ?Ayn. ?ad
A reminder of the Mercy of thy Lord unto His servant, Zachariah
when he cried out to his Lord with a secret cry
He said, “My Lord! Verily my bones have grown feeble, and my head glistens with white hair. And in calling upon Thee, my Lord, I have never been wretched
Truly I fear my relatives after me, and my wife is barren. So grant me from Thy Presence an heir
who will inherit from me and inherit from the House of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, well-pleasing.”
“O Zachariah! Truly We bring thee glad tidings of a boy whose name is John; We have not given this as a name to any before him.”
He said, “My Lord! How shall I have a boy, when my wife is barren, and I have grown decrepit with old age?”
He said, “Thus shall it be. Thy Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me! I had created thee before, when thou wast nothing!’”
He said, “My Lord! Appoint for me a sign.” He said, “Thy sign shall be that thou shalt not speak with men for three nights, [while thou art] sound.”
So he came forth from the sanctuary unto his people, and signaled to them that they should glorify morning and evening
“O John! Take the Book with strength!” And We gave him judgment as a child
and a tenderness from Our Presence, and purity; and he was reverent
and dutiful toward his parents. He was not domineering, rebellious
Peace be upon him the day he was born, and the day he dies, and the day he is raised alive
And remember Mary in the Book, when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place
And she veiled herself from them. Then We sent unto her Our Spirit, and it assumed for her the likeness of a perfect man
She said, “I seek refuge from thee in the Compassionate, if you are reverent!”
He said, “I am but a messenger of thy Lord, to bestow upon thee a pure boy.”
She said, “How shall I have a boy when no man has touched me, nor have I been unchaste?”
He said, “Thus shall it be. Thy Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me.’” And [it is thus] that We might make him a sign unto mankind, and a mercy from Us. And it is a matter decreed
So she conceived him and withdrew with him to a place far off
And the pangs of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a date palm. She said, “Would that I had died before this and was a thing forgotten, utterly forgotten!”
So he called out to her from below her, “Grieve not! Thy Lord has placed a rivulet beneath thee
And shake toward thyself the trunk of the date palm; fresh, ripe dates shall fall upon thee
So eat and drink and cool thine eye. And if thou seest any human being, say, ‘Verily I have vowed a fast unto the Compassionate, so I shall not speak this day to any man.’”
Then she came with him unto her people, carrying him. They said, “O Mary! Thou hast brought an amazing thing
O sister of Aaron! Thy father was not an evil man, nor was thy mother unchaste.”
Then she pointed to him. They said, “How shall we speak to one who is yet a child in the cradle?”
He said, “Truly I am a servant of God. He has given me the Book and made me a prophet
He has made me blessed wheresoever I may be, and has enjoined upon me prayer and almsgiving so long as I live
and [has made me] dutiful toward my mother. And He has not made me domineering, wretched
Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day I am raised alive!”
That is Jesus son of Mary—a statement of the truth, which they doubt
It is not for God to take a child. Glory be to Him! When He decrees a thing, He only says to it, “Be!” and it is
“Truly God is my Lord and your Lord; so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
Yet the parties differed among themselves, and woe unto those who disbelieve for the witnessing of a tremendous day
How well they will hear and how well they will see on the Day they come unto Us. But the wrongdoers, today, are in manifest error
And warn them of the Day of Regret, when the matter will have been decreed, while they are in a state of heedlessness and believe not
Surely We shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is upon it, and unto Us shall they be returned
And remember Abraham in the Book—verily he was truthful, a prophet—
when he said unto his father, “O my father! Why do you worship that which neither hears nor sees, nor can avail you in any way
O my father! Verily knowledge has come unto me that has not come unto you. So follow me, and I shall guide you upon a sound path
O my father! Worship not Satan; surely Satan is disobedient toward the Compassionate
O my father! Truly I fear that a punishment from the Compassionate will befall you, such that you will become a friend of Satan.”
He said, “Do you reject my gods, O Abraham? If you cease not, I shall surely stone you. Take leave of me for a long while!”
He said, “Peace be upon you! I shall seek forgiveness for you from my Lord. Verily He has been gracious unto me
And I withdraw myself from you and that which you call upon apart from God. And I call upon my Lord; it may be that in calling upon my Lord, I will not be wretched.”
So when he had withdrawn from them and that which they called upon apart from God, We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob, and each We made a prophet
And We bestowed upon them something of Our Mercy, and ordained for them a sublime, faithful renown
And remember Moses in the Book. Verily he was devoted, and he was a messenger, a prophet
We called out to him from the right side of the Mount, and drew him nigh in intimate discourse
And We bestowed upon him, from Our Mercy, his brother, Aaron, a prophet
And remember Ishmael in the Book. Verily he was true to the promise, and he was a messenger, a prophet
He used to bid his people to prayer and almsgiving, and he was pleasing unto his Lord
And remember Idris in the Book. Verily he was truthful, a prophet
And We raised him to a sublime station
They are those whom God has blessed among the prophets of the progeny of Adam, and of those whom We carried with Noah, and of the progeny of Abraham and Israel, and of those whom We guided and chose. When the signs of the Compassionate were recited unto them, they would fall down, prostrate and weeping
Then they were succeeded by a generation who neglected prayer and followed base desires. So they shall meet [the reward of] error
save for those who repent and believe and work righteousness. It is they who shall enter the Garden, and they shall not be wronged in the least
Gardens of Eden, those which the Compassionate promised His servants in the Unseen. Verily His Promise shall come to pass
They shall hear no idle talk therein, but only “Peace!” And therein they shall have their provision, morning and evening
This is the Garden We shall bequeath unto those among Our servants who were reverent
“We descend not, save by the Command of thy Lord. Unto Him belongs that which is before us and that which is behind us, and whatsoever lies between that, and thy Lord is not forgetful—
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them. So worship Him and be steadfast in His worship. Dost thou know any who can be named alongside Him?”
Man says, “When I am dead, shall I be brought forth alive?”
Does man not remember that We created him before, when he was naught
And by thy Lord, We shall surely gather them and the satans, and We shall surely bring them around Hell on their knees
Then indeed We shall pluck out from every group whosoever among them was most insolent toward the Compassionate
Then We shall surely know those who most deserve to burn therein
And there is not one of you, but that he will approach it. It is, with thy Lord, a decree determined
Then We shall save those who are reverent and leave the wrongdoers therein, on their knees
And when Our signs are recited unto them as clear proofs, those who disbelieve say unto those who believe, “Which of the two groups is better in station or fairer in company?”
How many a generation We destroyed before them who were fairer in [their] furnishings and in outward appearance
Say, “Whosoever is in error, the Compassionate will extend his term till, when they see that which they have been promised, be it the punishment or the Hour, they will know whose position is worse, and whose host is weaker.”
God increases in guidance those who are rightly guided. And that which endures—righteous deeds—are better in reward with thy Lord, and better in return
Hast thou not considered the one who disbelieves in Our signs, and says, “I shall be given wealth and children.”
Has he penetrated the Unseen, or made a pact with the Compassionate
Nay, but We shall record that which he says, and We shall prolong for him the punishment
And We shall inherit from him that which he claims, and he will come unto Us alone
And they have taken gods apart from God, that they might be a strength for them
Nay, but they will disavow their worship, and they will become an opponent unto them
Hast thou not considered how We unleash the satans on the disbelievers, to incite them cunningly
So hasten not against them; verily We are counting for them a number
On the Day We shall gather the reverent to the Compassionate as an honored delegation
and We shall drive the guilty into Hell as a thirsty herd
They have no power of intercession, save the one who has made a pact with the Compassionate
And they say, “The Compassionate has taken a child.”
You have indeed asserted a terrible thing
The heavens are well-nigh rent thereby, and the earth split asunder, and the mountains made to fall down in ruins
that they should claim for the Compassionate a child
It is not fitting for the Compassionate to take a child
There is none in the heavens and on the earth, but that it comes unto the Compassionate as a servant
He has taken account of them, and numbered them exactly
And each of them shall come unto Him on the Day of Resurrection, alone
Surely those who believe and perform righteous deeds, for them shall the Compassionate ordain love
We have only made this easy upon thy tongue that thou mayest give glad tidings unto the reverent thereby, and that thereby thou mayest warn a contentious people
How many a generation before them have We destroyed? Dost thou perceive even one of them, or hear from them a murmur
Ha
We did not send down the Quran unto thee that thou shouldst be distressed
but only as a reminder unto one who fears [God]
a revelation from He, Who created the earth and the high heavens
The Compassionate mounted the Throne
Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, whatsoever is between them, and whatsoever lies beneath the ground
And if thou speakest aloud, verily He knows what is secret and what is more hidden still
God, there is no god but He. Unto Him belong the Most Beautiful Names
Hast thou heard tell of Moses
when he saw a fire and said unto his family, “Stay here. Verily I perceive a fire. Perhaps I shall bring you a brand therefrom, or find guidance at the fire”
Then when he came to it, he was called, “O Moses
Verily I am thy Lord. Take off thy sandals. Truly thou art in the holy valley of ?uwa
I have chosen thee, so listen to what is revealed
Truly I am God, there is no god but I. So worship Me, and perform the prayer for the remembrance of Me
Surely the Hour is coming. I would keep it hidden, that every soul might be recompensed for its endeavors
So let not he who believes not and follows his caprices turn thee away from it, or thou wilt perish
And what is that in thy right hand, O Moses?”
He said, “It is my staff. I lean upon it and beat down leaves for my sheep. And I have other uses for it.”
He said, “Cast it, O Moses!”
So he cast it, and behold, it was a serpent, moving swiftly
He said, “Take hold of it, and fear not! We shall restore it to its former way
And enclose thy hand in thy side. It will come forth white, without blemish, as another sign
that We may show thee some of Our greatest signs
Go unto Pharaoh! Truly he has rebelled!”
He said, “My Lord! Expand for me my breast
Make my affair easy for me
and untie a knot from my tongue
that they may understand my speech
And appoint for me a helper from among my family
Aaron, my brother
Through him, increase my strength
and make him a partner in my affair
that we may glorify Thee much
and remember Thee much
Truly Thou dost ever see us.”
He said, “Thou hast been granted thy request, O Moses
And We have indeed shown thee favor another time
when We revealed to thy mother that which was revealed
‘Cast him into the ark and cast it into the sea. Then the sea will throw him upon the bank. An enemy unto Me and an enemy unto him shall take him.’ And I cast upon thee a love from Me, that thou mightest be formed under My eye
When thy sister went forth and said, ‘Shall I show you one who can nurse him?’ Thus We returned thee to thy mother that she might be comforted and grieve not. And thou didst slay a soul, but We saved thee from sorrow. And We tried thee with trials. Then thou didst remain some years among the people of Midian. Then thou didst come, as determined, O Moses
I selected thee for Myself
Go forth, thou and thy brother, with My signs, and tire not in the remembrance of Me
Go, both of you, unto Pharaoh! Truly he has rebelled
Yet speak unto him gently, that haply he may remember or have fear.”
They said, “Our Lord! Truly we fear that he will deal hastily with us, or that he will transgress.”
He said, “Fear not! Truly I am with ye twain; I hear and I see
So come unto him and say, ‘Truly we are two messengers of your Lord. So send forth with us the Children of Israel and punish them not. We have brought you a sign from your Lord. Peace be upon him who follows guidance
Truly it has been revealed unto us that punishment shall come upon him who denies and turns away.’”
He said, “So who is the Lord of you two, O Moses?”
He said, “Our Lord is He Who gives everything its creation, then guides [it].”
He said, “What, then, of former generations?”
He said, “Knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a Book—He errs not, nor does He forget—
the One Who made the earth a cradle for you, and threaded paths for you therein. He sent down water from the sky, wherewith We brought forth diverse kinds of vegetation [saying]
‘Eat and pasture your cattle.’” Truly in that are signs for those possessed of intelligence
From it We created you, and unto it We shall bring you back, and from it We shall bring you forth a another time
We indeed showed him Our signs, all of them; yet he denied and refused
He said, “Have you come to us in order to expel us from our land with your sorcery, O Moses
But we shall surely produce for you sorcery like it. So appoint a tryst between you and us at a neutral place, which neither you nor we shall fail to keep.”
He said, “Your tryst shall be on the Day of Adornment; let the people be gathered when the sun has risen high.”
Then Pharaoh turned away and devised his scheme. Then he came
Moses said to them, “Woe unto you! Do not fabricate a lie against God, lest He should destroy you with a punishment. Whosoever fabricates [lies] has failed.”
So they debated their affair among themselves and kept secret their intimate discourse
They said, “These two are sorcerers who wish to expel you from your land with their sorcery and to do away with your exemplary way of life
So gather your plot, then come in ranks. Today, whosoever gains the upper hand will surely have prospered!”
They said, “O Moses! Either you cast, or we shall be the first to cast.”
He said, “Nay, you cast.” Then, behold, their ropes and their staffs appeared to him, through their sorcery, to move swiftly
whereat Moses conceived a fear in his soul
We said, “Fear not! Truly thou art uppermost
Cast that which is in thy right hand; it will devour what they have produced. They have produced only a sorcerer’s trick. And the sorcerer prospers not, wherever he may go.”
Then the sorcerers were cast down in prostration. They said, “We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.”
He said, “Do you believe in Him before I give you leave? He is indeed your chief, who has taught you sorcery. Now I shall surely cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides, and I shall surely crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. And you will surely know which of us [inflicts] a more severe and lasting punishment!”
They said, “We shall never prefer you to the clear proofs that have come to us, nor to Him who originated us. So decree whatsoever you decree; you only decree in the life of this world
Truly we believe in our Lord, that He may forgive us our sins and the sorcery that you compelled us to perform. And God is better and more lasting!”
Verily, whosoever comes unto his Lord guilty, surely his shall be Hell, wherein he neither dies nor lives
But whosoever comes unto Him as a believer, having performed righteous deeds, theirs shall be the highest ranks—
Gardens of Eden with rivers running below, abiding therein. That is the recompense of one who purifies himself
And We indeed revealed unto Moses, “Set forth with My servants by night and strike for them a dry path through the sea. Be not afraid of being overtaken, and fear not.”
Then Pharaoh pursued them with his hosts, and they were overwhelmed by the sea that enshrouded them
Pharaoh led his people astray, and guided them not
O Children of Israel! We have saved you from your enemies and have appointed a tryst for you on the right side of the Mount. And We sent down unto you manna and quails
Eat of the good things We have provided you, but exceed not the limits therein, lest My Wrath be unleashed upon you. And he upon whom My Wrath is unleashed has been cast into ruin
And surely I am most forgiving toward the one who repents and believes and works righteousness, and thereafter is rightly guided
“What hast made thee hasten from thy people, O Moses?”
He said, “They are close upon my footsteps, and I hastened unto Thee, my Lord, that Thou mayest be content.”
He said, “Truly We tried thy people in thine absence, and the Samaritan led them astray.”
Then Moses returned to his people, angry and aggrieved. He said, “O my people! Did your Lord not make you a goodly Promise? Did the pact seem too long for you? Or did you desire that the anger of your Lord be unleashed upon you, such that you failed your tryst with me?”
They said, “We did not fail our tryst with thee of our own will, but we were laden with the burden of the people’s ornaments. So we cast them [into the pit], and thus did the Samaritan throw also.”
Then he brought forth for them a calf as a mere body that lowed, and they said, “This is your god and the god of Moses, though he has forgotten.”
Have they not considered that it does not respond to them with words, and that it has no power over what harm or benefit may come to them
And Aaron had indeed said to them earlier, “O my people! You are merely being tested by this, and truly your Lord is the Compassionate. So follow me and obey my command!”
They said, “We shall not cease to be its devotees till Moses returns unto us.”
He said, “O Aaron! What hindered thee, when thou didst see them going astray
that thou didst not follow me? Didst thou disobey my command?”
He said, “O son of my mother! Seize not my beard or my head. Truly I feared that thou wouldst say, ‘Thou hast caused division among the Children of Israel, and thou hast not heeded my word.’”
He said, “What was your purpose, O Samaritan?”
He said, “I saw that which they saw not. So I took a handful [of dust] from the footsteps of the messenger, and I cast it. Thus did my soul prompt me.”
He said, “Be gone! In this life it shall be yours to say, ‘Touch [me] not!’ And truly for you there is a tryst that you cannot fail to keep. Now observe your god, to whom you remained devoted: we shall surely burn it and scatter its ashes in the sea!”
Your only god is God, besides whom there is no other god. He encompasses all things in knowledge
Thus do We narrate unto thee some of the accounts of those who have come before. And We have given thee a Reminder from Our Presence
Whosoever turns away from it, verily he shall bear it as a burden on the Day of Resurrection
abiding therein. How evil a burden for them on the Day of Resurrection—
the Day the trumpet shall be blown, and We shall gather the guilty on that Day, blind
They will whisper among themselves, “You have tarried only ten [days].”
We know well that which they will say, when the most exemplary of them in conduct will say, “You have tarried only a day!”
They ask thee about the mountains. Say, “My Lord shall scatter them as ashes
And He will leave it a barren plain
You will see no crookedness or curvature therein.”
On that Day they shall follow a herald in whom there is no crookedness. And voices will be humbled before the Compassionate, and you will hear naught but a murmur
On that Day intercession will be of no benefit, save [that of] those whom the Compassionate has granted leave and with whose word He is content
He knows that which is before them and that which is behind them, and they encompass Him not in knowledge
Faces will be humbled before the Living, the Self-Subsisting. And whosoever bears wrongdoing will have failed
But whosoever performs righteous deeds and is a believer, he shall fear neither wrong nor deprivation
Thus have We sent it down as an Arabic Quran, and We have varied the threat therein that haply they may be reverent, or [that] it might occasion remembrance for them
Exalted is God, the True Sovereign. Be not in haste with the Quran before its revelation is completed for thee, but say, “My Lord! Increase me in knowledge!”
And We indeed made a pact with Adam aforetime, but he forgot. And We found no resoluteness in him
And when We said unto the angels, “Prostrate yourselves before Adam,” they prostrated, save Iblis; he refused
We said, “O Adam! Truly this is an enemy unto thee and thy wife. So let him not expel the two of you from the Garden, such that thou wouldst be wretched
Truly it is for thee that thou shalt neither hunger therein, nor go naked
and that thou shalt neither thirst therein, nor suffer from the heat of the sun.”
Then Satan whispered to him. He said, “O Adam! Shall I show thee the Tree of Everlastingness and a kingdom that never decays?”
So they both ate therefrom. Then their nakedness was exposed to them, and they began to sew together the leaves of the Garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord, and so he erred
Then his Lord chose him, and relented unto him and guided [him]
He said, “Get down from it, both you together, each of you an enemy to the other. And if guidance should come unto you from Me, then whosoever follows My Guidance shall not go astray, nor be wretched
But whosoever turns away from the remembrance of Me, truly his shall be a miserable life, and We shall raise him blind on the Day of Resurrection.”
He will say, “My Lord! Why hast Thou raised me blind, when I used to see?”
He will say, “Thus it is. Our signs came unto you, but you forgot them. Even so, this Day shall you be forgotten!”
Thus do We recompense whosoever is prodigal and believes not in the signs of his Lord. And surely the punishment of the Hereafter is more severe and more lasting
Does it not serve as guidance for them, how many generations We destroyed before them, amid whose dwellings they walk? Truly in that are signs for those possessed of intelligence
And were it not for a Word that had already gone forth from thy Lord and a term appointed, it would be inevitable
So bear patiently that which they say, and hymn the praise of thy Lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting, and in the hours of the night glorify [Him], and at the ends of the day, that haply thou mayest be content
Strain not thine eyes toward the enjoyments We have granted certain classes of them, as the splendor of the life of this world, that We may test them concerning it. The provision of thy Lord is better and more lasting
And bid thy family to prayer and be steadfast therein. We ask no provision of thee; We provide for thee. And the end belongs to reverence
They say, “Why has he not brought us a sign from his Lord?” Has there not come unto them the clear proof of that which is in the scriptures of old
Had We destroyed them with a punishment before it, they would have said, “Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent a messenger unto us, we would have followed Thy signs before being abased and disgraced.”
Say, “Each is waiting, so wait! For you shall come to know those who are the companions of the sound path, and those who are rightly guided.”
For mankind, their reckoning draws nigh, while they turn away heedless
No new Reminder came unto them from their Lord, but that they listened to it while they played
with their hearts diverted. And those who do wrong confide in secret converse, “Is this not but a human being like yourselves? Will you then yield to sorcery, while you see clearly?”
He said, “My Lord knows that which is spoken in Heaven and on earth, and He is the Hearing, the Knowing.”
Yet they said, “Confused dreams! Nay, he has fabricated it! Nay, he is a poet! Let him bring us a sign like those of old were sent!”
No town that We destroyed before them believed; will these, then, believe
And We sent no messenger before thee, but that they were men unto whom We revealed. So ask the people of the Reminder, if you know not
We did not make them bodies that ate not food; nor were they immortal
Then We fulfilled the promise unto them, and saved them and whomsoever We willed, and We destroyed the prodigal
We have indeed sent down unto you a Book wherein is your Reminder. Do you not understand
How many a town engaged in wrongdoing have We shattered, and then brought into being another people after them
And when they felt Our Might, behold, they ran away from it
“Do not run away! But return to the luxury you have been given and to your dwellings, that haply you may be questioned.”
They said, “Oh, woe unto us! Truly we have been wrongdoers.”
And that did not cease to be their cry, till We made them a mown field, stilled
And We did not create Heaven and earth and whatsoever is between them in play
Had We desired to take up a diversion, We would surely have taken it from that which was with Us, were We to do so
Nay, but We cast truth against falsehood, and it crushes it, and, behold, it vanishes. And woe unto you for that which you describe
Unto Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth. Those who are with Him are not too arrogant to worship Him; nor do they weary
They glorify night and day, without tiring
Or have they taken gods from the earth who resurrect
Were there gods other than God in them, they would surely have been corrupted. So glory be to God, Lord of the Throne, above that which they ascribe
He shall not be questioned about what He does, but they shall be questioned
Or have they taken gods apart from Him? Say, “Bring me your proof! This is the Reminder for those who are with me, and the Reminder for those before me. Nay, but most of them do not know the truth; so they turn away.”
And We sent no messenger before thee, save that We revealed unto him, “Verily, there is no god but I; so worship Me!”
And they say, “The Compassionate has taken a child.” Glory be to Him! Nay, but they are honored servants
They precede Him not in speech, and they act according to His Command
He knows that which is before them and that which is behind them, and they intercede not, save for one with whom He is content. They are wary, for fear of Him
And whosoever among them would say, “Truly I am a god apart from Him,” such will We requite with Hell. Thus do We requite the wrongdoers
Have those who disbelieve not considered that the heavens and the earth were sewn together and We rent them asunder? And We made every living thing from water. Will they not, then, believe
And We placed firm mountains in the earth, lest it shake beneath them, and We made wide tracts between them as paths, that haply they may be guided
And We made the sky a canopy preserved; yet they turn away from its signs
He it is Who created the night and the day, the sun and the moon, each gliding in an orbit
We have not ordained perpetual life for any human being before thee. So if thou diest, will they abide forever
Every soul shall taste death. We try you with evil and with good, as a test, and unto Us shall you be returned
And whenever those who disbelieve see thee, they take thee in naught but mockery, “Is this the one who makes mention of your gods?” And it is they who are disbelievers in the remembrance of the Compassionate
Man was created of haste. Soon shall I show you My signs; so seek not to hasten Me
And they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
If those who disbelieved but knew of the time when they shall not be able to hold back the Fire from their faces or from their backs, nor be helped
Nay, but it will come upon them suddenly, and confound them. Then they will not be able to repel it, nor will they be granted respite
Messengers were certainly mocked before thee. Then those who scoffed at them were beset by that which they used to mock
Say, “Who will protect you, night and day, from the Compassionate?” Nay, but they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord
Or do they have gods to defend them apart from Us? They cannot help themselves; nor are they given protection against Us
Nay, but We granted enjoyment to them and their fathers till life grew long for them. Do they not consider how We come upon the land, reducing it of its outlying regions? Is it they who shall prevail
Say, “I only warn you through a revelation.” But the deaf do not hear the call however much they are warned
And if but a breath of thy Lord’s Punishment were to touch them, they would surely say, “Oh, woe unto us. Truly we were wrongdoers.”
We shall set the just scales for the Day of Resurrection, and no soul shall be wronged in aught. Even if it be the weight of a mustard seed, We shall bring it. And We suffice as Reckoner
We indeed gave unto Moses and Aaron the Criterion, and a radiant light and a reminder for the reverent
who fear their Lord unseen, and who are wary of the Hour
This is a blessed Reminder that We have sent down. Will you then deny it
And We indeed gave unto Abraham his sound judgment aforetime, and We knew him
when he said unto his father and his people, “What are these images to which you are cleaving?”
They said, “We found our fathers worshipping them.”
He said, “Certainly you and your fathers have been in manifest error.”
They said, “Have you brought us the truth, or are you among those who jest?”
He said, “Nay, but your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who originated them. And I am among those who bear witness unto this
And by God, I shall scheme against your idols after you have turned your backs.”
So he broke them into pieces—save the largest of them—that haply they may have recourse to it
They said, “Who has done this to our gods? Verily he is among the wrongdoers!”
They said, “We heard a young man mention them; he is called Abraham.” a They said, “So bring him before the eyes of the people, that haply they may bear witness.”
They said, “Was it you who did this to our gods
Abraham?”
He said, “Nay, but it was the largest of them that did this. So question them, if they speak!”
So they consulted among themselves and said, “Verily it is you who are the wrongdoers!”
Then they reverted, “Certainly you know that these speak not!”
He said, “Do you worship, apart from God, that which benefits you not in the least, nor harms you
Fie upon you, and upon that which you worship apart from God. Do you not understand?”
They said, “Burn him, and help your gods, if you would take action!”
We said, “O Fire! Be coolness and peace for Abraham.”
They desired to scheme against him, but We made them the greatest losers
And We delivered him and Lot to the land that We blessed for all peoples
And We bestowed upon him Isaac, and Jacob as an added gift. And each of them We made righteous
And We made them imams, guiding according to Our Command. And We revealed unto them the doing of good deeds, the performance of prayer, and the giving of alms. And they were worshippers of Us
And as for Lot, We gave unto him judgment and knowledge, and We saved him from the town that was committing vile deeds. Truly they were an evil people, iniquitous
And We caused him to enter Our Mercy; verily, he was among the righteous
And [remember] Noah, when he cried out aforetime, We answered him and saved him and his family from great distress
And We helped him against those people who denied Our signs. Truly they were an evil people; so We drowned them all together
And [remember] David and Solomon, when they rendered judgment regarding the tillage, when the people’s sheep strayed therein by night. And We were Witness to their judgment
We made Solomon to understand it, and unto both We gave judgment and knowledge. We compelled the mountains and the birds to glorify along with David; We did this
And We taught him how to make garments for you to protect you against your own might, but are you thankful
And unto Solomon, the wind blowing violently: it ran by his command to the land that We had blessed. And We know all things
Among the satans are those who dove deep for him, and performed other deeds besides this. And We guarded them
And [remember] Job, when he cried unto his Lord, “Truly affliction has befallen me! And Thou art the most Merciful of the merciful.”
So We answered him and removed the affliction that was upon him, and We gave him his family, and the like thereof along with them, as a mercy from Us and a reminder to the worshippers
And [remember] Ishmael, Idris, and Dhu’l-Kifl—each was among the patient
We caused them to enter Our Mercy; truly they are among the righteous
And [remember] Dhu’l-Nun, when he went away in anger, and thought We had no power over him. Then he cried out in the darkness, “There is no god but Thee! Glory be to Thee! Truly I have been among the wrongdoers.”
So We answered him, and saved him from grief. Thus do We save the believers
And [remember] Zachariah, when he cried out to his Lord, “My Lord! Leave me not childless, though Thou art the best of inheritors.”
So We answered him, and bestowed John upon him, and We set his wife aright for him. Truly they vied in good deeds. They called upon Us with desire and with fear, and they were humble before Us
And as for she who preserved her chastity, We breathed into her of Our Spirit, and made her and her son a sign for the worlds
Truly this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord. So worship Me
But they have fragmented their affair among themselves. Each is returning unto Us
And whosoever performs righteous deeds and is a believer, there shall be no ingratitude for his endeavor, and surely We shall write [it] down for him
And it is forbidden unto any town We have destroyed that they should ever return
till the time when Gog and Magog are unleashed, and they rush down from every hill
and the true promise draws nigh. And, behold, there shall be the fixed stare of those who disbelieved, “Oh, woe unto us! We have certainly been heedless of this! Indeed, we have been wrongdoers.”
Surely you and that which you worship apart from God shall be fuel for Hell. Unto it you shall come
Had these been gods, they would not have come unto it. But each shall abide therein
Theirs shall be groaning therein, and therein they shall hear not
Surely those for whom what is most beautiful has already gone forth from Us; they shall be kept far from it
They hear not the slightest sound thereof, while they abide in that which their souls desire
The greatest terror will not grieve them, and the angels will receive them. “This is your Day, which you were promised.”
That Day We shall roll up the sky like the rolling of scrolls for writings. As We began the first creation, so shall We bring it back—a promise binding upon Us. Surely We shall do it
And We have indeed written in the Psalms, after the Reminder, that My righteous servants shall inherit the earth
Truly in this is a proclamation for a worshipful people
And We sent thee not, save as a mercy unto the worlds
Say, “It is only revealed unto me that your God is one God. So will you be submitters?”
But if they turn away, say, “I have proclaimed to you all equally. I know not whether that which you are promised is nigh or far off
Verily He knows that which is spoken openly and He knows that which you conceal
And I know not; perhaps it is a trial for you, and an enjoyment for a while.”
He said, “My Lord, judge with truth! Our Lord is the Compassionate, the One Whose help is sought against that which you ascribe.”
O mankind! Reverence your Lord. Truly the quaking of the Hour is a tremendous thing
On the day you see it, every nursing woman will forget what she nurses, and every pregnant woman will deliver her burden, and you will see mankind drunk, though drunk they will not be. Rather, the Punishment of God is severe
And among mankind are those who dispute concerning God, without knowledge, and follow every defiant satan
for whom it is decreed that, should anyone take him as a protector, he will cause him to go astray and guide him unto the punishment of the Blaze
O mankind! If you are in doubt concerning the Resurrection, [remember] We created you from dust, then from a drop, then from a blood clot, then from a lump of flesh, formed and unformed, that We may make clear for you. And We cause what We will to remain in the wombs for a term appointed. Then We bring you forth as an infant, then that you may reach maturity. And some are taken in death, and some are consigned to the most abject life, so that after having known they may know nothing. And thou seest the earth desiccated, but when We send down water upon it, it stirs and swells and produces every delightful kind
That is because God is the Truth, and because He gives life to the dead, and because He is Powerful over all things
and because the Hour is coming, in which there is no doubt, and because God will resurrect whosoever is in the graves
And among mankind are those who dispute concerning God without knowledge, without guidance, and without an illuminating Book
turning aside to cause others to stray from the way of God. Such shall have disgrace in this world, and We shall make him taste the punishment of the burning on the Day of Resurrection
That is because of what your hands have sent forth, and because God wrongs not His servants
And among mankind some worship God upon a brink: if good befalls him, he is content thereby, but if a trial befalls him, he is turned over upon his face, losing this world and the Hereafter. That is the manifest loss
He calls, apart from God, upon that which neither harms him nor benefits him. That is extreme error
He calls upon one whose harm is likelier than his benefit. What an evil ally, and what an evil friend
Truly God will cause those who believe and perform righteous deeds to enter Gardens with rivers running below. Truly God does whatsoever He desires
Whosoever thinks that God will not help him in this world and the Hereafter, let him stretch out a rope to Heaven. Then let him sever it and see if his scheming removes that which enrages
Thus do We send it down as clear signs, and thus does God guide whomsoever He desires
As for those who believe, and those who are Jews, the Sabeans, the Christians, the Magians, and the idolaters, indeed God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection. Truly God is Witness over all things
Hast thou not considered that unto God prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, and the beasts, and many among mankind? But for many the punishment has come due. Whomsoever God disgraces, none can ennoble. Truly God does whatsoever He will
These two adversaries dispute concerning their Lord. As for those who disbelieve, garments of fire shall be cut for them, and boiling liquid shall be poured over their heads
by which their innards and their skin will be melted
And for them shall be hooked iron rods
Whensoever they desire, in their grief, to leave it, they shall be returned unto it, while [being told], “Taste the punishment of the burning!”
Truly God will cause those who believe and perform righteous deeds to enter Gardens with rivers running below, adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearl, and therein their clothes will be of silk
And they shall be guided unto that which is good in speech, and be guided unto the path of the Praised
Truly those who disbelieve and turn from the way of God, and the Sacred Mosque which We have appointed for mankind—equal are those who dwell there and those who come from abroad—whosoever desires to deviate wrongfully therein, We shall cause him to taste a painful punishment
And [remember] when We assigned for Abraham the place of the House, [saying], “Ascribe no partners unto Me, and purify My House for those who circumambulate, and those who stand, and those who bow and prostrate
And proclaim the ?ajj among mankind: they shall come to thee on foot and upon all [manner of] lean beast, coming from all deep and distant mountain highways
that they may witness benefits for them and mention the Name of God, during known days, over the four-legged cattle He has provided them. So eat thereof, and feed the wretched poor
Then let them be done with their untidiness, and fulfill their vows, and circumambulate the Ancient House.”
Thus it is. And whosoever magnifies the sacred things of God, that is better for him in the eyes of his Lord. Cattle are permitted you, save that which is recited unto you. So shun the filth of idols, and shun false speech
as ?anifs before God, not ascribing partners unto Him. And whosoever ascribes partners unto God, it is as if he fell from the sky and the birds snatched him, or the wind swept him away to a place far off
Thus it is. And whosoever magnifies the rituals of God, truly that comes from the reverence of hearts
You shall have benefits in them, for a term appointed. Thereafter their lawful place of sacrifice shall be at the Ancient House
For every community We have appointed a rite, that they might mention the Name of God over the four-legged cattle He has provided them. Your God is one God; so submit unto Him, and give glad tidings to the humble
whose hearts quiver when God is mentioned, and who bear patiently what befalls them, who perform the prayer, and who spend of that which We have provided them
And We have placed the sacrificial camels for you among God’s rituals. There is good for you in them. So mention the Name of God over them as they line up. Then when they have fallen upon their flanks, eat of them, and feed the needy who solicit and those who do not. Thus have We made them subservient unto you, that haply you may give thanks
Neither their flesh nor their blood will reach God, but the reverence from you reaches Him. Thus has He made them subservient unto you, that you might magnify God for having guided you. And give glad tidings to the virtuous
Truly God defends those who believe. Truly God loves not any ungrateful traitor
Permission is granted to those who are fought, because they have been wronged—and truly God is able to help them—
who were expelled from their homes without right, only for saying, “Our Lord is God.” Were it not for God’s repelling people, some by means of others, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, wherein God’s Name is mentioned much, would have been destroyed. And God will surely help those who help Him—truly God is Strong, Mighty—
who, were We to establish them upon the earth, would perform the prayer, give the alms, and enjoin right and forbid wrong. And unto God is the end of all affairs
And if they deny thee, the people of Noah denied before them, as did ?Ad and Thamud
and the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot
and the inhabitants of Midian, and Moses too was denied. But I granted the disbelievers a respite; then I seized them in punishment. And how, then, was the change I wrought
How many a town have We destroyed while it did wrong, laying thus fallen upon their roofs! And [how many] an abandoned well and lofty palace
Have they not journeyed upon the earth, that they might have hearts by which to understand or ears by which to hear? Truly it is not the eyes that go blind, but it is hearts within breasts that go blind
They bid thee to hasten the punishment, though God will not fail His Promise. And truly a day with your Lord is as a thousand years of that which you reckon
And how many a town did I grant respite while it did wrong. Then I seized it [in punishment], and unto Me is the journey’s end
Say, “O mankind! I am only a clear warner unto you!”
And as for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision
But those who endeavor to thwart Our signs, they shall be the inhabitants of Hellfire
And no messenger or prophet did We send before thee, but that when he had a longing, Satan would cast into his longing, whereupon God effaces what Satan cast. Then God makes firm His signs—and God is Knowing, Wise—
that He might make what Satan casts to be a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease, and those whose hearts are hard—and truly the wrongdoers are in extreme schism—
and so that those who have been given knowledge might know that it is the truth from thy Lord, and thus believe in it, and that their hearts be humbled before Him. And truly God guides those who believe unto a straight path
Yet those who disbelieve remain in doubt over it, till the Hour comes upon them suddenly or there comes upon them the punishment of a barren day
Sovereignty that Day shall be God’s; He will judge between them, and those who believe and perform righteous deeds shall be in Gardens of bliss
And as for those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, theirs shall be a humiliating punishment
And as for those who emigrate in the way of God and are then slain or die, God will surely provide them with a beautiful provision. And truly God is the best of providers
He will surely cause them to enter an entrance with which they shall be content. And truly God is Knowing, Clement
Thus it is. And whosoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered, and is then aggressed upon, God will surely help him. Truly God is Pardoning, Forgiving
That is because God makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night, and because God is Hearing, Seeing
That is because God is the Truth and what they call upon apart from Him is false, and because God is the Exalted, the Great
Hast thou not considered that God sends down water from Heaven, and then the earth becomes green? Truly God is Subtle, Aware
To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. And God is truly the Self-Sufficient, the Praised
Hast thou not considered that God has made whatsoever is on the earth subservient unto you—and the ship sails upon the sea—by His Command? And He maintains the sky lest it fall upon the earth, save by His Leave. Truly God is Kind and Merciful unto mankind
And He it is Who gave you life; then He causes you to die; then He gives you life. Truly man is ungrateful
For every community We have appointed a rite they are to perform; so let them not argue with thee over the matter. And call to thy Lord. Truly thou art following straight guidance
And if they dispute with thee, say, “God knows best what you do
God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein you used to differ.”
Knowest thou not that God knows whatsoever is in Heaven and on earth? Truly that is in a Book. Truly that is easy for God
And they worship, apart from God, that for which He has sent down no authority, and that whereof they have no knowledge. And the wrongdoers shall have no helpers
And when Our signs are recited unto them as clear proofs, thou seest denial upon the faces of those who disbelieve. They well-nigh pounce upon those who recite Our signs unto them. Say, “Shall I inform you of what is worse than that? The Fire God has promised to those who disbelieve. What an evil journey’s end!” s
O mankind! A parable is set forth, so hearken unto it! Truly those upon whom you call apart from God will never create a fly, even if they gathered together to do so. And if the fly should rob them of aught, they could not rescue it from it. Feeble are the seeker and the sought
And they did not measure God with His true measure. Truly God is Strong, Mighty
God chooses messengers from among the angels and from among mankind. Truly God is Hearing, Seeing
He knows that which is before them and that which is behind them. And unto God are all matters returned. w
you who believe! Bow, prostrate, and worship your Lord! And do good, that haply you may prosper
And strive for God as He should be striven for. He has chosen [for] you—and has placed no hardship for you in the religion—the creed of your father Abraham. He named you muslims aforetime, and herein, that the Messenger may be a witness for you, and that you may be witnesses for mankind. So perform the prayer and give the alms, and hold fast to God. He is your Master. How excellent a Master, and how excellent a Helper
Truly the believers have prospered
who are humble in their prayers
and who turn away from idle talk
and who give the alms
and who guard their private parts
save from their spouses or those whom their right hands possess, for then they are not blameworthy—
and as for those who seek beyond that, it is they who are transgressors—
and who keep their trusts and their covenant
and who are mindful of their prayers
It is they who are the heirs
who shall inherit Paradise, abiding therein
And indeed We created man from a draught of clay
Then We made him a drop in a secure dwelling place
Then of the drop We created a blood clot, then of the blood clot We created a lump of flesh, then of the lump of flesh We created bones and We clothed the bones with flesh; then We brought him into being as another creation. Blessed is God, the best of creators
Then indeed you shall die thereafter
Then surely you shall be raised up on the Day of Resurrection
And indeed We created above you seven paths, and We were not heedless of creation
And We sent down water from Heaven in due measure, and settled it in the earth, and We are able to make it disappear
And thereby We brought into being for you gardens of date palms and grapevines, wherein you have many fruits and whereof you eat
and a tree issuing forth from Mount Sinai that produces oil and a seasoning for eating
And truly in cattle there is a lesson for you: We give you to drink from that which is in their bellies, and in them you have many uses, and some of them you eat
And upon them, and upon ships, are you carried
And We indeed sent Noah to his people, and he said, “O my people! Worship God! You have no god other than Him. Will you not be reverent?”
But the notables who disbelieved among his people said, “This is only a human being like yourselves, desiring to set himself above you. And had God willed, He would have sent down angels. We heard not of this from our fathers of old
He is but a man possessed. So wait concerning him, for a time.”
He said, “My Lord! Help me, for they deny me.”
So We revealed unto Him, “Build the Ark before Our eyes and by Our Revelation. Then when Our Command comes and the oven gushes forth, place therein two of every kind, and thy family except those against whom the word has already gone forth. And address Me not concerning those who did wrong; surely they shall be drowned
And when thou mountest the Ark, thou and those with thee, say, ‘Praise be to God, who has saved us from the wrongdoing people.’
And say, ‘My Lord! Harbor me in a blessed harbor, for Thou art the best of harborers.’
Truly in that are signs, and truly We put [mankind] to the test.”
Then after them We brought into being another generation
And We sent among them a messenger from among themselves, [saying], “Worship God! You have no god other than Him. Will you not be reverent?”
And the notables of his people who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the Hereafter, and unto whom We had given luxury in the life of this world, said, “This is but a human being like you, eating of what you eat, and drinking from what you drink
So if you obey a human being like yourselves, then surely you will be losers
Does he promise you that when you are dead and are dust and bones, you shall indeed be brought forth
Far-fetched, far-fetched is that which you are promised
There is naught but our life in this world: we die and we live, and we will not be resurrected
He is but a man fabricating lies against God, and we do not believe him.”
He said, “My Lord! Help me, for they deny me.”
He said, “In a little while they shall become remorseful.”
So the Cry seized them rightly, and We made them into dross; so away with the wrongdoing people
Then after them We brought into being other generations
No community can hasten its term, nor delay it
Then We sent Our messengers in succession. Whenever there came unto a community its messenger, they would deny him. So We caused them to follow one another, and made them the objects of stories. So away with a people who believe not
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a manifest authority
to Pharaoh and his notables. But they waxed arrogant and were a haughty people
They said, “Shall we believe in two human beings like us, while their people are slaves we possess?”
But they denied them, and so were among the destroyed
And indeed We gave unto Moses the Book, that haply they may be guided
And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and We gave them refuge in a high place of stillness and a flowing spring
O messengers! Eat of the good things and work righteousness. Truly I know what you do
And truly this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord, so reverence Me
But they made their affair to be founded upon different scriptures, each party exulting in what it had
So leave them in their heedlessness for a time
Do they reckon that, [on account of] the wealth and the children that We have provided them
We hasten unto good for them? Nay, but they are unaware
Truly those who are in awe for fear of their Lord
and those who believe in the signs of their Lord
and those who ascribe not partners unto their Lord
and those who give what they give while their hearts quake with fear that they shall return to their Lord—
it is they who hasten toward good deeds, and are foremost in them
And We task no soul beyond its capacity, and with Us is a Book that speaks in truth. And they shall not be wronged
Nay, indeed their hearts are engrossed away from this, and they have other deeds besides which they undertake
till, when We seize those of them who lived in luxury with the punishment, behold, they shall implore
Implore not today! Truly you will not be helped by Us
My signs were recited unto you, but you used to turn on your heels
waxing arrogant on account thereof, talking foolishly by night
Have they not contemplated the Word, or has there come unto them that which came not unto their forefathers
Or do they not know their Messenger, and so deny him
Or do they say, “He is possessed?” Rather, he has brought them the truth, but most of them are averse to the truth
Were the truth to follow their caprices, the heavens and the earth and those therein would have been corrupted. Nay, We gave them their reminder, but they turned away from their reminder
Dost thou ask any recompense of them? For thy Lord’s recompense is better, and He is the best of providers
Surely thou callest them unto a straight path
And truly those who believe not in the Hereafter are deviating from the path
And were We to show them mercy and remove whatever evil was upon them, they would surely persist, wandering confused in their rebellion
And We already seized them with the punishment, but they did not yield to their Lord, nor are they humble
till, when We open upon them a gate of severe punishment, behold, they despair therein
He it is Who brought into being for you hearing, sight, and hearts. Little do you give thanks
He it is Who created you on the earth, and unto Him shall you be gathered
And He it is Who gives life and causes death, and unto Him belongs the variation of the night and the day. Will you not, then, understand
Nay, but they say the like of that which was said by those of old
They say, “What, when we have died and are dust and bones, are we to be resurrected
We and our fathers were certainly warned of this before. These are naught but fables of those of old.”
Say, “Whose is the earth and whosoever is upon it, if you know?”
They will say, “God’s.” Say, “Will you not, then, take heed?”
Say, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the great Throne?”
They will say, “God’s.” Say, “Will you not then be reverent?”
Say, “Who is it in Whose Hand lies the dominion of everything, who protects but is not protected against, if you know?”
They will say, “God’s.” Say, “How then are you bewitched?”
Nay, We brought them the truth, and indeed they are liars
God has not taken any child, and neither are there any gods with Him, for then each god would take away what he created, and some of them would overcome others. Glory be to God above that which they ascribe
Knower of the Unseen and the seen! Exalted is He above the partners they ascribe
Say, “My Lord! If Thou showest me what they are promised
my Lord, then place me not among the wrongdoing people!”
And surely We are able to show you what We promise them
Repel evil by that which is better. We know best what they ascribe
And say, “My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the incitements of the satans
And I seek refuge in Thee, my Lord, lest they should be present with me.”
Till, when death comes to one of them, he says, “My Lord! Return me
that haply I may work righteousness with regard to that which I left.” Nay, indeed these are words that he speaks. And behind them is a barrier till the Day they are resurrected
And when the trumpet is blown, there shall be no kinship between them that Day, nor will they question one another
As for those whose scales are heavy, it is they who shall prosper
And as for those whose scales are light, it is they who shall lose their souls, abiding in Hell
The Fire will smite their faces, and they shall grimace therein
“Were not My signs recited unto you, and you used to deny them?”
They will say, “Our Lord! Our wretchedness overwhelmed us, and we were a people astray
Our Lord! Remove us from it! Then if we revert, we shall be wrongdoers.”
He will say, “Be gone therein, and speak not to Me.”
Verily there was a group of My servants who would say, “Our Lord! We believe; so forgive us and have mercy upon us, and Thou art the best of those who are merciful.”
But you took them in mockery, till it made you forget My remembrance, and you used to laugh at them
Truly today I have rewarded them for having been patient. Truly they are the triumphant
He will say, “How many years did you tarry on earth?”
They will say, “We tarried a day or part of a day. But ask those who keep count.”
He will say, “You tarried but a little, if you but knew.”
“Did you suppose, then, that We created you frivolously, and that you would not be returned unto Us?”
So, exalted is God, the True Sovereign; there is no god but He, Lord of the noble Throne
Whosoever calls upon another god along with God, for which he has no proof, his reckoning is with God. Truly the disbelievers will not prosper
Say, “My Lord! Forgive and show mercy, for Thou art the best of those who are merciful.”
surah that We have sent down, and ordained, and in which We have sent down clear signs, that haply you may remember
As for the adulterer and the adulteress, flog them each one hundred lashes, and let not pity for them overcome you concerning God’s Judgment, if you believe in God and the Last Day. And let their punishment be witnessed by a group of the believers
The adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or idolatress, and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or idolater. And that is forbidden to the believers
And as for those who accuse chaste women, but then do not bring four witnesses, flog them eighty lashes, and never accept any testimony from them. And it is they who are the iniquitous
save those who repent thereafter and make amends, for truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses but themselves, then the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies, swearing by God that he is among the truthful
and the fifth shall be that the curse of God be upon him if he is among the liars
And the punishment shall be averted from her should she give four testimonies, swearing by God that he is among the liars
and the fifth that God’s Wrath shall come upon her if he is among the truthful
And were it not for God’s Bounty upon you, and His Mercy, and that God is Relenting, Wise
Truly those who brought forth the lie were a group among you. Do not suppose it to be an evil for you. Rather, it is a good for you. Unto each man among them is the sin he committed. And he among them who undertook the greater part of it, his shall be a great punishment
Why, when you heard it, did not the believing men and women think well of their own, and say, “This is a manifest lie”
Why did they not bring forth four witnesses thereto? For when they brought not the witnesses, it is they who were then liars in the Eyes of God
And were it not for God’s Bounty upon you, and His Mercy, in this world and the Hereafter, a great punishment would have befallen you for having engaged [in vain talk] concerning it
when you accepted it with your tongues, and spoke with your mouths that whereof you had no knowledge, supposing it to be slight, though it is great in the Eyes of God
And why, when you heard it, did you not say, “It is not for us to speak of this! Glory be to Thee! This is a tremendous calumny!”
God exhorts you, lest you ever return to the like of it, if you are believers
And God makes clear unto you the signs, and God is Knowing, Wise
Truly those who desire that indecency be spread among those who believe, theirs shall be a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter. God knows, and you know not
And were it not for God’s Bounty toward you, and His Mercy, and that God is Kind, Merciful
O you who believe! Follow not the footsteps of Satan! And whosoever follows the footsteps of Satan, truly he enjoins indecency and wrong. And were it not for God’s Bounty toward you, and His Mercy, not one of you would ever be pure. But God purifies whomsoever He will, and God is Hearing, Knowing
And let not the men of bounty and means among you forswear giving to kinsfolk and the indigent and those who emigrated in the way of God. And let them pardon and forbear. Do you not desire that God forgive you? And God is Forgiving, Merciful
Truly those who accuse chaste and heedless believing women are cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and theirs shall be a great punishment
on the day their tongues, their hands, and their feet bear witness against them as to that which they used to do
On that Day God will pay them their just due in full, and they will know that God is the Manifest Truth
Vile women are for vile men, and vile men are for vile women, and good women are for good men, and good men are for good women. They are innocent of what they say. Theirs is forgiveness and a generous provision
O you who believe! Enter not houses other than your own, until you inquire and greet the dwellers thereof. That is better for you, that haply you may remember
But if you find not anyone therein, then enter them not until permission is granted you. And if it is said to you, “Turn back,” then turn back. That is purer for you, and God knows what you do
There is no blame upon you for entering uninhabited houses wherein there is some good for you. And God knows what you disclose and what you conceal
Tell the believing men to lower their eyes and guard their private parts. That is purer for them. Surely God is Aware of whatsoever they do
And tell the believing women to lower their eyes and to guard their private parts, and to not display their adornment except that which is visible thereof. And let them draw their kerchiefs over their breasts, and not display their adornment except to their husbands, or their fathers, or their husbands’ fathers, or their sons, or their husbands’ sons, or their brothers, or their brothers’ sons, or their sisters’ sons, or their women, or those whom their right hands possess, or male attendants free of desire, or children who are innocent of the private areas of women. Nor let them stamp their feet such that the ornaments they conceal become known. And repent unto God all together, O believers, that haply you may prosper
And marry those who are single among you, and the righteous among your male slaves and your female slaves. If they are poor, God will enrich them from His Bounty. And God is All-Encompassing, Knowing
And let those who are unable to marry be chaste till God enriches them from His Bounty. And as for those among the ones whom your right hands possess who seek a contract [of emancipation] with you, contract with them if you know of any good in them, and give unto them from the Wealth of God, which He has given you. And compel not your female slaves into prostitution if they desire to be chaste, for the sake of seeking after the ephemeralities of the life of this world. And whosoever compels them, then truly God, after their having been compelled, will be Forgiving, Merciful
We have indeed sent down unto you clarifying signs and a description of those who have passed before you, and an exhortation for the reverent
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His Light is a niche, wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as a shining star kindled from a blessed olive tree, neither of the East nor of the West. Its oil would well-nigh shine forth, even if no fire had touched it. Light upon light. God guides unto His Light whomsoever He will, and God sets forth parables for mankind, and God is Knower of all things
[It is] in houses that God has permitted to be raised and wherein His Name is remembered. He is therein glorified, morning and evening
by men whom neither trade nor buying and selling distract from the remembrance of God, the performance of prayer, and the giving of alms, fearing a day when eyes and hearts will be turned about
that God may reward them for the best of that which they have done, and increase them from His Bounty. And God provides for whomsoever He will without reckoning
As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage upon a desert plain which a thirsty man supposes is water, till when he comes upon it, he does not find it to be anything, but finds God there. He will then pay him his reckoning in full, and God is swift in reckoning
Or like the darkness of a fathomless sea, covered by waves with waves above them and clouds above them—darknesses, one above the other. When one puts out one’s hand, one can hardly see it. He for whom God has not appointed any light has no light
Hast thou not considered that God is glorified by whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth, and by the birds spreading their wings? Each indeed knows its prayer and its glorification, and God knows that which they do
And unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and unto God is the journey’s end
Has thou not considered that God drives the clouds, then joins them together, then makes them as a heap, and then thou seest the rain come forth from amid them? And He sends down from the sky—from the mountains [of clouds] therein—hail, wherewith He smites whomsoever He will, and which He turns away from whomsoever He will. The flash of His lightning well-nigh takes away sight
God alternates the night and the day. Truly in that is a lesson for those possessed of sight
And God created every beast from water: among them are those that go upon their bellies, and among them are those that go upon two legs, and among them are those that go upon four. God creates whatsoever He will. Truly God is Powerful over all things
We have indeed sent down clarifying signs, and God guides whomsoever He will unto a straight path
And they say, “We believe in God and in the Messenger, and We obey.” Then a group of them turn away thereafter, and believers they are not
And when they are called to God and His Messenger, that He may judge between them, behold, a group of them turn away
But if the right is theirs, they come unto Him submissively
Is there a disease in their hearts? Or do they doubt, or fear that God and His Messenger will deal unjustly with them? Nay, but it is they who are the wrongdoers
The only words of the believers when they are called unto God and His Messenger, that he may judge between them, will be to say, “We hear and we obey.” And it is they who shall prosper
Whosoever obeys God and His Messenger, and who fears God and reverences Him, it is they who shall triumph
And they swear by God with their most solemn oaths that, wert thou to command them, they would surely go forth. Say, “Swear not! [But give] honorable obedience! Surely God is Aware of whatsoever you do.”
Say, “Obey God and obey the Messenger.” But if they turn away, he is only accountable for that wherewith he has been burdened, and you are accountable for that wherewith you have been burdened. But if you obey him, you will be rightly guided, and naught is incumbent upon the Messenger save the clear proclamation
God has promised those among you who believe and perform righteous deeds that He will surely make them vicegerents upon the earth, as He caused those before them to be vicegerents, and that He will establish for them their religion, which He has approved for them, and that He will surely change them from a state of fear to [one of] security. They will worship Me, not ascribing any partners unto Me. And whosoever disbelieves thereafter, it is they who are iniquitous
And perform the prayer, and give the alms, and obey the Messenger, that haply you may receive mercy
Do not suppose that the disbelievers thwart [aught] on the earth. The Fire will be their refuge—what an evil journey’s end
O you who believe! Let those whom your right hands possess and those who have not come of age ask your leave three times: before the dawn prayer, when you doff your garments at noon, and after the night prayer—three times of privacy for you. Beyond these, there is no blame upon you or upon them should you go about [visiting] one another. Thus does God make clear unto you the signs, and God is Knowing, Wise
And when the children among you come of age, let them ask leave as those before them asked leave. Thus does God make clear unto you His signs, and God is Knowing, Wise
As for elderly women who no longer anticipate marriage, there is no blame upon them to doff their garments without displaying any ornament. And it is better for them to be modest, and God is Hearing, Knowing
There is no fault against the blind, nor fault against the lame, nor fault against the sick, nor upon yourselves in that you eat from your houses, or your fathers’ houses, or your mothers’ houses, or your brothers’ houses, or your sisters’ houses, or your paternal uncles’ houses, or your paternal aunts’ houses, or your maternal uncles’ houses, or your maternal aunts’ houses, or those whose keys you possess, or [those of] your friends. There is no blame upon you whether you eat together or separately. So when you enter houses, greet each other with a salutation from God, blessed and good. Thus does God make clear unto you the signs, that haply you may understand
Only they are believers who believe in God and His Messenger and who, when they are with him in a collective affair, go not forth until asking his leave. Truly those who ask thy leave, it is they who believe in God and His Messenger. So when they ask thy leave in some matter of theirs, give leave unto whomsoever thou wilt, and seek forgiveness for them from God. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Do not deem the Messenger’s calling among you to be like your calling to one another. Indeed, God knows those among you who steal away under shelter. So let those who contradict his command be wary, lest a trial befall them or a painful punishment befall them
Behold! Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth. God certainly knows [the state] you are in. On the day they will be returned unto Him, He will inform them of that which they did. And God is Knower of all things
Blessed is He Who sent down the Criterion upon His servant that he may be a warner unto the worlds
He unto Whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and Who took not a child, and Who has no partner in sovereignty, and Who created everything, then measured it out with due measure
But they have taken gods apart from Him, who create naught and are themselves created, and who have no power over what harm or benefit may come to themselves, and who have no power over death, or life, or resurrection
And the disbelievers say, “This is naught but a lie that he has fabricated, and another people have helped him in it.” They have indeed produced a wrongdoing and a calumny
And they say, “They are fables of those of old which he has had written down, and they are recited to him morning and evening.”
Say, “He has sent it down Who knows what is secret in the heavens and on the earth. Truly He is Forgiving, Merciful.”
And they say, “What ails this Messenger, who eats food and walks in the markets? Why is there not an angel sent down unto him to be a warner with him
or no treasure cast unto him, or no garden for him from which to eat?” And the wrongdoers say, “You follow naught but a man bewitched.”
Look how they set forth descriptions of thee, and then go astray and cannot find a way
Blessed is He Who, if He will, shall appoint for thee what is better than that—Gardens with rivers running below, and He will appoint for thee palaces
Nay, but they deny the Hour, and We have prepared a Blaze for those who deny the Hour
When it sees them from a place far off, they will hear its raging and roaring
And when they are cast bound together into a narrow place thereof, they will, there and then, call to be destroyed
“Call not this Day for one destruction, but call for many destructions!”
Say, “Is that better, or the Garden of everlastingness which is promised to the reverent?” It is for them a reward and a journey’s end
Therein they shall have whatsoever they will, abiding. It is a binding promise upon your Lord
And on the Day He gathers them and that which they worship apart from God, He will say, “Was it you who caused these servants of Mine to go astray, or did they [themselves] go astray from the way?”
They will say, “Glory be to Thee! It does not befit us to take protectors apart from Thee! But Thou didst grant them and their fathers enjoyment until they forgot the Reminder. And they were a people ruined
They have denied you in what you say; so you cannot avert [it] or [find] help.” And whosoever among you does wrong, We shall make him taste a great punishment
And We sent not any messengers before thee but that they ate food and walked in the markets. And We made some of you a trial for others; will you be patient? And thy Lord is Seeing
And those who hope not to meet Us say, “Why have not the angels been sent down unto us, or why have we not seen our Lord?” Indeed, they have waxed arrogant in their souls and were greatly insolent
On the Day they see the angels, there shall be no glad tidings for the guilty that Day. And they will say, “A barrier, forbidden!”
And We shall turn to whatever work they have done, and make it scattered dust
That Day the inhabitants of the Garden shall have the best dwelling place and the most beautiful rest
And the Day when the heavens are split open with clouds and the angels are sent down in a descent
that Day the true sovereignty will belong to the Compassionate, and that will be a difficult Day for the disbelievers
And that Day the wrongdoer will bite his hands, saying, “Would that I had taken a way with the Messenger
Oh, woe unto me! Would that I had not taken so-and-so for a friend
He did indeed cause me to go astray from the Reminder after its having come to me, and Satan is a forsaker of man.”
And the Messenger will say, “O my Lord! Truly my people have taken this Quran for foolishness.”
Thus did We make for every prophet an enemy from among the guilty, and thy Lord suffices as a Guide and a Helper
And the disbelievers say, “Why was the Quran not sent down upon him as a single whole?” It is so, that We may make firm thine heart thereby. And We have recited it unto thee in a measured pace
And they come not to thee with any parable, but that We bring to thee the truth and a better explanation
[As for] those who are gathered upon their faces to Hell, their place is worse and they are further astray from the way
And indeed We gave unto Moses the Book and placed with him his brother as a helper
Then We said, “Go to the people who have denied Our signs.” Then We destroyed them completely
And Noah’s people: when they denied the messengers, We drowned them and made of them a sign for mankind. And We have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment
And ?Ad and Thamud and the inhabitants of al-Rass, and many generations between them
for each We set forth parables, and each We ruined utterly
And indeed they passed by the town upon which fell the evil rain. Have they not seen it? Nay, but they hope not for a resurrection
And when they see thee they do naught but take thee in mockery: “Is this the one whom God sent as a messenger
He would indeed have nearly led us astray from our gods, had we not been steadfast to them.” They will know, when they see the punishment, who is further astray from the way
Hast thou considered the one who takes his caprice as his god? Wouldst thou be a guardian over him
Or do you suppose that most of them hear or understand? Truly they are but as cattle. Nay, they are further astray from the way
Hast thou not considered thy Lord, how He spreads out the shade—and had He willed, He could have made it still—and then We make the sun an indicator of it
then We withdraw it unto Ourselves, a gentle withdrawal
And He it is Who made the night a garment for you, and made sleep repose, and made day a resurrection
And He it is Who sends the winds as glad tidings ahead of His Mercy. And We send down from Heaven pure water
that We may revive a dead land thereby and give drink to many cattle and men We created
And indeed We have distributed it among them, that they may reflect. But most of mankind refuse to be aught but ungrateful
And had We willed, We would have sent a warner to every town
So obey not the disbelievers, but strive against them by means of it with a great striving
And He it is Who mixed the two seas, one sweet, satisfying, the other salty, bitter, and set between them a divide and a barrier, forbidden
And He it is Who created a human being from water, and made of him lineages and [kinships through] marriages. And thy Lord is Powerful
And they worship apart from God that which neither benefits them nor harms them. And the disbeliever is a partisan against his Lord
And We sent thee not, save as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner
Say, “I ask not of you any reward for it, save that whosoever will may take a way unto his Lord.”
And trust in the Living, Who dies not, and hymn His praise. And God suffices as One Aware of the sins of His servants
He Who created the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them in six days, then mounted the Throne, the Compassionate [is He]. So ask, regarding Him, One Who is aware
And when it is said unto them, “Prostrate before the Compassionate,” they say, “And what is the Compassionate? Shall we prostrate before that [to] which you command us?” And it increases them in aversion
Blessed is He Who placed constellations in the sky and placed therein a lamp and a shining moon
And He it is Who made the night and the day successive, for whosoever desires to reflect or desires to be thankful
The servants of the Compassionate are those who walk humbly upon the earth, and when the ignorant address them, say, “Peace,”
and who pass the night before their Lord, prostrating and standing [in prayer]
and who say, “Our Lord! Avert the punishment of Hell from us! Truly its punishment is inescapable
What an evil dwelling place and station!”
and who, when they spend, are neither prodigal nor miserly—and between them is a just mean—
and who call not upon another god along with God, and slay not the soul that God has made inviolable, save by right, and who fornicate not—for whosoever does that shall meet requital
and the punishment shall be multiplied for him on the Day of Resurrection. He shall abide therein, humiliated
save for those who repent and believe and perform righteous deeds. For them, God will replace their evil deeds with good deeds, and God is Forgiving, Merciful
And whosoever has repented and works righteousness does indeed repent to God with true repentance
As for those who do not bear false witness, and who, when they pass by some idle talk, pass by with dignity
and who, when they are reminded of the signs of their Lord, fall not deaf and blind against them
and who say, “Our Lord! Grant us comfort in our spouses and our progeny, and make us imams for the reverent,”
it is they who shall be rewarded with the lofty abode for having been patient, and they will be met therein with salutations and [greetings of] peace
abiding therein. What a beautiful dwelling place and station
Say, “What weight would my Lord give you, were it not for your supplication? But you have denied, and it will be inevitable.”
Sin. Mim
These are the signs of the clear Book
Perhaps thou dost torment thyself that they are not believers
If We will, We will send down a sign from Heaven and their heads would remain bowed before it in humility
Yet no new reminder comes to them from the Compassionate, but that they turn away from it
Indeed, they have denied it, but there shall come to them the tidings of that which they used to mock
Have they not considered the earth, how much of every noble kind We have caused to grow therein
Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful
And [remember] when thy Lord called out to Moses, “Go to the wrongdoing people
the people of Pharaoh. Will they not be reverent?”
He said, “My Lord, truly I fear that they will deny me
And my breast will be straitened, and my tongue will not be unfettered; so send unto Aaron
And they have a crime against me; thus I fear that they will slay me.”
He said, “Nay! Go forth, then, with Our signs. We shall be with you, listening
So go to Pharaoh and say, ‘Verily we are sent by the Lord of the worlds
that you may send with us the Children of Israel.’”
He said, “Did we not raise you among us as a child, and did you not stay among us for years of your life
And you did your deed which you did, and you are one of the ingrates.”
He said, “I did it then, when I was one of those who are astray
So I fled from you when I was afraid of you. Then my Lord granted me judgment and placed me among the messengers
And that blessing you recount to me is that you have enslaved the Children of Israel.”
Pharaoh said, “And what is the Lord of the worlds?”
He said, “The Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them—would that you were certain.”
He said to those around him, “Do you not hear?”
He said, “Your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers of old.”
He said, “Truly your messenger who has been sent to you is possessed!”
He said, “The Lord of the East and the West and whatsoever is between them, if you understand.”
He said, “Truly if you take a god apart from me, I shall place you among the imprisoned!”
He said, “And if I bring you something manifest?”
“Bring it, then, if you are among the truthful.”
So Moses cast his staff, and behold, it was a serpent manifest
Then he drew out his hand, and behold, it was white to the beholders
He said to the notables around him, “Truly this is a knowing sorcerer
who desires to expel you from your land with his sorcery. What would you command?”
They said, “Leave him and his brother a while, and send marshalers to the cities
to bring to you every knowing sorcerer.”
So the sorcerers were brought together for the tryst of an appointed day
And it was said unto the people, “Will you gather
that haply we may follow the sorcerers if they are the victors?”
Then, when the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, “Shall we truly have a reward if we are the victors?”
He said, “Yes, and you shall then be among those brought nigh.”
Moses said to them, “Cast what you would cast!”
So they cast their ropes and staffs and said, “By the might of Pharaoh, we shall surely be the victors!”
Then Moses cast his staff, and behold, it devours what they make falsely
Then were the sorcerers cast down, prostrating
They said, “We believe in the Lord of the worlds
the Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
He said, “Do you believe in Him before I give you leave? He is indeed your chief, who has taught you sorcery. You will surely know! I shall surely cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, and I shall surely crucify you all!”
They said, “It is no harm. Truly unto our Lord do we turn
Truly we hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins for our having been the first of the believers.”
Then We revealed unto Moses, “Set forth with My servants by night; you shall indeed be pursued.”
Then Pharaoh sent marshalers to the cities [saying]
“These indeed are a small band
and indeed they have enraged us
and we are a host at the ready!”
So We expelled them from gardens and springs
and treasures and a noble station
So it was, and We made the Children of Israel to inherit them
Then they pursued them at sunrise
And when the two hosts saw one another, the companions of Moses said, “We are overtaken!”
He said, “Nay! Truly my Lord is with me; He will guide me.”
Then We revealed unto Moses, “Strike the sea with thy staff!” and it parted, and each part was as a great mountain
And thither We brought the others nigh
And We delivered Moses and those with him all together
Then We drowned the others
Truly in that is a sign, though most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful
And recite unto them the story of Abraham
when he said to his father and his people, “What are you worshipping?”
They said, “We worship idols, and we remain ever devoted to them.”
He said, “Do they hear you when you call
Or do they benefit or harm you?”
They said, “Nay, but we found our fathers doing so.”
He said, “Have you considered what you worship
you and your ancestors
For they are all enemies unto me, save the Lord of the worlds
Who created me, and guides me
and Who feeds me and gives me drink
and Who, when I am ill, heals me
and Who causes me to die, then gives me life
and Who I hope will forgive me my sins on the Day of Judgment
My Lord! Grant me judgment, and bind me to the righteous
And make for me faithful renown among later generations
And place me among the heirs of the Garden of bliss
And forgive my father—he is one of those who are astray
And disgrace me not on the Day they are resurrected
the Day when neither wealth nor children avail
save for him who comes to God with a sound heart.”
And the Garden will be brought nigh unto the reverent
and Hellfire will become apparent to the errant
And it will be said unto them, “Where is that which you worshipped
apart from God? Are they helping you or helping themselves?”
Then they shall be toppled into it, they and the errant
and the hosts of Iblis all together
They will say, as they dispute with one another therein
“By God, indeed we were in manifest error
when we made you equal with the Lord of the worlds
And none caused us to go astray but the guilty
So now we have no intercessors
nor any loyal friend
If we had another turn, we would be among the believers.”
Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
The people of Noah denied the messengers
when their brother Noah said unto them, “Will you not be reverent
Truly I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
So reverence God and obey me
And I ask not of you any reward for it; my reward lies only with the Lord of the worlds
So reverence God and obey me.”
They said, “Shall we believe you, when the lowliest follow you?”
He said, “What knowledge have I of what they used to do
Their reckoning is only by my Lord, were you but aware
And I shall not drive away the believers
I am but a clear warner.”
They said, “Truly if you cease not, O Noah, you shall indeed be among the stoned.”
He said, “My Lord, verily my people have denied me
So decide between me and them, and deliver me and the believers who are with me!”
So We delivered him and those who were with him in the full-laden Ark
Then afterwards We drowned those who remained
Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
Ad denied the messengers
when their brother Hud said unto them, “Will you not be reverent
Truly I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
So reverence God and obey me
And I ask not of you any reward for it; my reward lies only with the Lord of the worlds
Do you frivolously build on every high place a sign
And do you occupy castles, that haply you may ever abide
And when you strike, do you strike as tyrants
So reverence God and obey me
And reverence Him who has succored you with what you know
succored you with cattle and children
and gardens and springs
Truly I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day!”
They said, “It is the same to us whether you exhort us or whether you are not among those who exhort
This is naught but the ethos of those of old
and we shall not be punished.”
So they denied him, and We destroyed them. Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is, indeed, the Mighty, the Merciful
The Thamud denied the messengers
when their brother ?ali? said unto them, “Will you not be reverent
Truly I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
So reverence God and obey me
And I ask not of you any reward for it; my reward lies only with the Lord of the worlds
Will you be left among that which is here, secure
amid gardens and springs
sown fields, date palms with ripe stalks
And you skillfully hew dwellings in the mountains
So reverence God and obey me
And obey not the commands of the prodigal
who work corruption upon the earth, and do not set matters aright.”
They said, “You are but one of the bewitched
You are naught but a human being like us; so bring a sign, if you are among the truthful.”
He said, “This is a she-camel; she shall have drink and you shall drink on an appointed day
And touch her not with harm, lest you be taken by the punishment of a tremendous day.”
But they hamstrung her, and then became remorseful
So the punishment seized them. Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful
The people of Lot denied the messengers
when their brother Lot said unto them, “Will you not be reverent
Truly I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
so reverence God and obey me
And I ask not of you any reward for it; my reward lies only with the Lord of the worlds
Among all creatures do you come unto males
leaving your spouses your Lord created for you? Nay, but you are a transgressing people.”
They said, “If you cease not, O Lot, you will be among those who are expelled.”
He said, “Truly I am of those who detest what you do
My Lord! Deliver me and my family from what they do.”
So We delivered him and his family all together
save for an old woman among those who lagged behind
Then We destroyed the others
And We rained a rain upon them. Evil was the rain of the warned
Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
The inhabitants of the thicket denied the messengers
when Shu?ayb said unto them, “Will you not be reverent
Truly I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
So reverence God and obey me
And I ask not of you any reward for it; my reward lies only with the Lord of the worlds
Give full measure, and be not among those who fall short
Weigh with the right balance
and diminish not people’s goods, nor behave wickedly upon the earth, working corruption
And reverence Him Who created you and the generations of old.”
They said, “You are but one of the bewitched
You are naught but a human being like us, and indeed we deem you to be among the liars
so make fragments from the sky fall upon us, if you are among the truthful.”
He said, “My Lord knows best what you do.”
So they denied him, and the punishment of the day of gloom seized them. Truly it was the punishment of a tremendous day
Truly in that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And truly thy Lord is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
And truly it is a revelation of the Lord of the worlds
brought down by the Trustworthy Spirit
upon thine heart—that thou mayest be among the warners—
in a clear, Arabic tongue
It is indeed in the scriptures of those of old
Is it not a sign for them that the learned of the Children of Israel know it
And had We sent it down upon some non-Arab
and he recited it unto them, they would not have believed in it
Thus do We place it into the hearts of the guilty
they will not believe in it till they see the painful punishment
so it will come upon them suddenly, while they are unaware
Then they will say, “Will we be granted respite?”
Do they seek to hasten Our Punishment
Consider: if We grant them enjoyment for years
and there comes upon them that which they were promised
of what avail to them will be that which they were made to enjoy
And never did We destroy a town save that it had warners
as a reminder; and We did no wrong
And the satans did not descend with it
nor is it fitting for them, nor are they able
Indeed, they are debarred from hearing [it]
So call not upon another god along with God, lest thou be among the punished
And warn thy tribe, thy nearest kin
and lower thy wing to the believers who follow thee
And should they disobey thee, say, “Truly I am quit of that which you do.”
And trust in the Mighty, the Merciful
Who sees thee when thou standest [to pray]
and thy movement amid those who prostrate
Truly He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Shall I inform thee of those upon whom the satans descend
They descend upon every sinful liar
eavesdropping, and most of them are liars
And as for the poets, the errant follow them
Hast thou not considered that they wander in every valley
and that they say what they do not do
Not so those who believe and perform righteous deeds, and remember God much, and help one another after having been wronged. And those who do wrong shall know to what homecoming they will return
Sin. These are the signs of the Quran and a clear Book
a guidance and glad tidings for the believers
who perform the prayer and give the alms, and of the Hereafter are certain
Truly those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made their deeds seem fair unto them, while they wander confused
It is they who shall have a terrible punishment, and in the Hereafter it is they who are the greatest losers
Truly thou dost receive the Quran from the Presence of One who is Wise, Knowing
[Remember] when Moses said unto his family, “Verily, I perceive a fire. I shall bring you some news therefrom, or a brand, that haply you may warm yourselves.”
Then when he came to it, a call came unto him, “Blessed is the One in the fire, and the one around it. And glory be to God, Lord of the worlds
O Moses! Verily, it is I, God, the Mighty, the Wise!”
And, “Cast thy staff!” Then when he saw it quivering like a serpent, he turned in retreat without returning. “O Moses! Fear not! Verily the messengers fear not in My Presence
save one who did wrong, then replaced evil with good. For truly I am Forgiving, Merciful
And insert thy hand in thy bosom; it will come forth white, without blemish—among nine signs to Pharaoh and his people. Truly they have been an iniquitous people.”
And when Our signs came to them as a clear portent, they said, “This is manifest sorcery!”
They rejected them—though their souls were convinced of them—wrongfully and exultantly. So behold how the workers of corruption fared in the end
And indeed We gave unto David and Solomon knowledge. And they said, “Praise be to God, Who has favored us above many of His believing servants.”
Solomon inherited from David and said, “O mankind, we have been taught the language of the birds, and we have been given of all things. Truly this is clear bounty!”
And gathered for Solomon were his hosts of jinn and men and birds, and they were marshaled [in ordered ranks]
till when they came to the valley of the ants, an ant said, “O ants! Enter your dwellings, lest Solomon and his hosts crush you, while they are unaware.”
And he smiled, laughing at her words, and said, “My Lord! Inspire me to give thanks for Thy blessing wherewith Thou hast blessed me and my parents and to work righteousness pleasing to Thee, and cause me to enter, through Thy Mercy, among Thy righteous servants!”
And he surveyed the birds and said, “How is it that I do not see the hoopoe? Or is he among those who are absent
I will surely punish him with a severe punishment, or I shall slaughter him, unless he brings me a clear warrant.”
But he tarried not long, and said, “I have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended, and I bring you a sure report from Sheba
Verily, I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given of all things, and hers is a mighty throne
I found her and her people prostrating to the sun, apart from God, and Satan has made their actions seem fair unto them, and turned them from the way, such that they are not rightly guided
Will they not prostrate unto God, Who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and on the earth, and Who knows what you hide and what you disclose
God, there is no god but He, Lord of the mighty Throne!”
He said, “We shall see if you have spoken the truth or if you are among the liars
Go with this letter of mine and deliver it unto them. Then turn away from them and observe what they send back.”
She said, “O notables! Truly a noble letter has been delivered unto me
Verily, it is from Solomon and verily it is, ‘In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Do not exalt yourselves against me, but come unto me in submission.’”
She said, “O notables! Give me your opinion in this matter of mine. I am not one to decide on any matter unless you are present.”
They said, “We are possessed of strength and possessed of great might. But the command is thine; so consider what thou wouldst command.”
She said, “Verily, kings, when they enter a town, corrupt it, and make the most honorable of its people the most abased. They will do likewise
I will send a gift to them, and observe what the envoys bring back.”
But when it came to Solomon, he said, “Do you offer me wealth? What God has given me is better than what He has given you. Nay, but it is you who exult in your gift!”
“Return unto them, for we shall come upon them with hosts they cannot withstand, and we shall expel them hence, abased, and they shall be humbled.”
He said, “O notables! Which of you will bring me her throne before they come unto me in submission?”
An ?ifrit among the jinn said, “I will bring it to thee before thou risest from thy place. Truly I have the strength for it, [and] am trustworthy.”
The one who had knowledge of the Book said, “I will bring it to thee in the blink of an eye.” Then when he saw it set before him, he said, “This is of the Bounty of my Lord, to try me whether I will give thanks or be ungrateful. And whosoever give thanks, he gives thanks only for his own soul; and whosoever is ungrateful, truly my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Generous.”
He said, “Disguise her throne for her. We shall see if she is rightly guided or if she is among those who are not rightly guided.”
Then when she came, it was said, “Is your throne like this?” She said, “It seems the same.” [Solomon said], “And we were given knowledge before her and we were submitters
while that which she worshipped apart from God barred her; verily she was from a disbelieving people.”
It was said unto her, “Enter the pavilion.” But when she saw it, she supposed it to be an expanse of water and bared her legs. He said, “Verily it is a pavilion paved with crystal.” She said, “My Lord! Surely I have wronged myself, and I submit with Solomon to God, Lord of the worlds.”
And indeed We sent to Thamud their brother ?ali?, [saying], “Worship God!” And behold, they were two groups, quarreling
He said, “O my people! Why do you seek to hasten evil before good? Why do you not seek Forgiveness of God, that haply you may be shown mercy?”
They said, “We augur ill of you and of those with you.” He said, “Your auguring ill is with God. Rather, you are a people being tried.”
And in the city there were nine persons working corruption in the land and not setting matters aright
They said, “Swear by God to each other that we shall attack him and his family by night. Then we shall surely say to his heir that we were not present at the destruction of his family and that surely we are truthful.”
And they devised a plot, and We devised a plot, while they were not aware
So behold how their plot fared in the end; truly We destroyed them and their people all together
And those are their houses, lying desolate for their having done wrong. Surely in this is a sign for a people who know
We saved those who believed and were reverent
And [We sent] Lot, when he said to his people, “Do you commit indecency, though you see
Do you really come with desire unto men instead of women? Nay, but you are an ignorant people!”
Yet the reply of his people was naught but to say, “Expel the family of Lot from your town! Truly they are people who keep themselves pure!”
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife. We decreed that she should be among those who lagged behind
And We poured down upon them a rain—evil is the rain of those who were warned
Say, “Praise be to God, and peace be upon His servants whom He has chosen.” Is God better, or the partners they ascribe
He, Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down water for you from the sky, through which We make grow beautiful gardens, whose trees it is not for you to make grow? Is there a god alongside God? Nay, but they are a people who ascribe equals
He, Who made the earth a dwelling place, and made rivers to run through it, and made firm mountains for it, and made between the two seas a barrier? Is there a god alongside God? Nay, but most of them know not
He, Who answers the one in distress when he calls upon Him and removes the evil, and Who makes you vicegerents of the earth? Is there a god alongside God? Little do you reflect
He, Who guides you in the darkness of land and sea, and sends the winds as glad tidings ahead of His Mercy? Is there a god alongside God? Exalted is God above the partners they ascribe
He, Who brings creation into being, then brings it back, and Who provides for you from Heaven and the earth? Is there a god alongside God? Say, “Bring your proof, if you are truthful.”
Say, “None in the heavens or on the earth know the Unseen, save God. And they are not aware of when they will be resurrected.”
Nay, but does their knowledge reach to the Hereafter? Nay, but they are in doubt concerning it; indeed, they are blind to it
And those who disbelieve say, “What? When we and our fathers are dust, shall we indeed be brought forth
Indeed, we were promised this, we and our fathers, before. This is naught but fables of those of old!”
Say, “Journey upon the earth and behold how the guilty fared in the end!”
And grieve not for them, and be not distressed by what they plot
And they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
Say, “It may be that some of what you seek to hasten is close behind you.”
And truly thy Lord is Possessed of Bounty toward mankind, but most of them do not give thanks
And surely thy Lord knows that which their breasts conceal and that which they disclose
And there is nothing hidden in Heaven or on the earth, but that it is in a clear Book
Verily, this Quran recounts unto the Children of Israel most of that wherein they differ
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers
Verily thy Lord shall judge between them by His Judgment, and He is the Mighty, the Knowing
So trust in God; truly thou standest upon the manifest truth
Surely thou dost not make the dead hear; nor dost thou make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs
nor canst thou guide the blind away from their error. Thou canst only make hear those who believe in Our signs and are submitters
And when the Word comes upon them, We shall bring forth for them a beast from the earth who will speak to them of how mankind was not certain of Our signs
And on that Day We shall gather from every community a group of those who denied Our signs, and they shall be marshaled [in ordered ranks]
till, when they come, He will say, “Did you deny My signs, though you encompassed them not in knowledge? What is it that you used to do?”
And the Word will come upon them for their having done wrong, and they shall not speak
Have they not considered that We made the night that they might rest therein, and the day by which to see? Truly in that are signs for a people who believe
And on that Day the trumpet will be blown, and whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth will be terrified, save whom God wills, and all will come to Him in abject humility
And thou seest the mountains that thou dost suppose are solid pass away like clouds—the Work of God, Who perfects all things. Truly He is Aware of whatsoever you do
Whosoever brings a good deed, he will have that which is better than it. And that Day they will be secure from terror
And whosoever brings an evil deed, their faces shall be cast down into the Fire. Are you recompensed for aught save that which you used to do
Truly I am commanded to worship the Lord of this city, Who has made it sacred. And unto Him belong all things. And I am commanded to be among those who submit
and to recite the Quran. So whosoever is rightly guided, he is guided only for his own soul. And [as for] whosoever is astray, say, “Verily, I am but a warner.”
And say, “Praise be to God! He will show you His signs, and you will know them.” And thy Lord is not heedless of what you do
Sin. Mim
These are the signs of the clear Book
We recite unto thee in truth some of the account of Moses and Pharaoh, for a people who believe
Indeed, Pharaoh exalted himself in the land, and made its people into factions, oppressing a party among them, slaying their sons and sparing their women. Verily he was among those who work corruption
Yet We desired to be gracious to those who were oppressed in the land, and to make them imams, and to make them the heirs
and to establish them in the land, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts that which they dreaded from them
So We revealed to the mother of Moses, “Nurse him. But if you fear for him, then cast him into the river, and fear not, nor grieve. Surely We shall bring him back to you and make him one of the messengers.”
Then the House of Pharaoh picked him up, such that he would become unto them an enemy and a sorrow. Truly Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts were sinners
And the wife of Pharaoh said, “A comfort for me and for you! Slay him not; it may be that he will bring us some benefit, or that we may take him as a son.” Yet they were unaware
But the heart of Moses’ mother became empty, and she would have disclosed it, had We not fortified her heart, that she might be among the believers
And she said to his sister, “Follow him.” So she watched him from afar; yet they were unaware
And We forbade him to be suckled by foster mothers before that; so she said, “Shall I direct you to the people of a house who will take care of him for you and treat him with good will?”
Thus We returned him to his mother, that she might be comforted and not grieve, and that she might know that God’s Promise is true. But most of them know not
When he reached maturity and was firmly established [in life], We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We recompense the virtuous
He entered the city at a time of heedlessness among its people. And he found therein two men fighting—one from among his own faction and the other from among his enemies. Then the one from among his own faction sought his aid against the one who was from among his enemies; so Moses struck him with his fist and put an end to him. He said, “This is the work of Satan! Truly he is a manifest enemy, leading astray.”
He said, “My Lord! Truly I have wronged my own soul. Forgive me.” So He forgave him. Verily He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
He said, “My Lord! Because Thou hast blessed me, I shall never be a supporter of the guilty.”
Morning found him in the city, fearful and vigilant, and behold, the one who had sought his help the day before cried out to him for help! Moses said to him, “Truly you are clearly in error.”
But when he desired to strike him who was an enemy unto them both, he said, “O Moses! Do you desire to slay me, as you slew a soul yesterday? You desire naught but to be a tyrant on the earth, and you desire not to be among the workers of righteousness.”
Then from the outskirts of the city a man came running. He said, “O Moses! Truly the notables are conspiring against you, that they might slay you. So leave! Truly I am among your sincere advisers.”
So he left from there, fearful and vigilant. He said, “My Lord! Save me from the wrongdoing people!”
And when he turned his face toward Midian, he said, “Perhaps my Lord will guide me to the right way.”
And when he arrived at the wells of Midian, he found there a community of people watering [their flocks]. And he found beside them two women holding back [their flocks]. He said, “What is your errand?” They said, “We water not [our flocks] until the shepherds have driven [theirs] away, and our father is a very old man.”
So he watered [their flocks] for them. Then he turned toward the shade and said, “My Lord! Truly I am in need of any good that Thou mayest send down upon me.”
Then one of the two came to him, walking bashfully. She said, “Truly my father summons you, that he might render unto you a reward for having watered [our flocks] for us.” When he came and recounted his story unto him, he said, “Fear not. You have been saved from the wrongdoing people.”
One of the two said, “O my father! Hire him. Surely the best [man] you can hire is the strong, the trustworthy.”
He said, “I desire to marry you to one of these two daughters of mine, on condition that you hire yourself to me for eight years. But if you complete ten, that will be of your own accord. And I desire not to be hard upon you. You shall find me, if God wills, to be among the righteous.”
He said, “So let it be between you and me. Whichever of the two terms I complete, let there be no enmity toward me. And God is Guardian over what we say.”
Then when Moses had completed the term and set out with his family, he perceived a fire on the side of the Mount. He said to his family, “Stay here. I perceive a fire. Perhaps I will bring you some news therefrom, or a firebrand, that haply you may warm yourselves.”
And when he came upon it, he was called from the right bank of the valley, at the blessed site, from the tree, “O Moses! Truly I am God, Lord of the worlds!”
and, “Cast thy staff!” Then when he saw it quivering like a serpent, he turned in retreat without returning. “O Moses! Approach and fear not! Truly, thou art of those who are secure
Insert thy hand in thy bosom; it will come forth white, without blemish. And draw thine arms to thyself against fear. These are two proofs from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his notables. Verily they are an iniquitous people.”
He said, “My Lord! Verily I have killed a soul among them, and I fear that they will slay me
And my brother, Aaron, is more eloquent than me in speech. So send him with me as a helper to confirm me, for I fear they will deny me.”
He said, “We shall strengthen thine arm through thy brother, and We shall grant an authority for both of you, such that they shall not reach you. With Our signs, you and those who follow you shall be the victors.”
But when Moses brought them Our clear signs, they said, “This is naught but fabricated sorcery. We heard this not among our fathers of old.”
Moses said, “My Lord knows best who brings guidance from Him, and whose end is the Abode. Truly the wrongdoers will not prosper.”
Pharaoh said, “O notables! I know of no god for you other than myself. So kindle for me a fire, O Haman, for clay, and make me a tower, that haply I may behold the God of Moses, though truly I think he is among the liars.”
And he and his hosts waxed arrogant upon the earth, without right, and they thought they would not be returned unto Us
So We seized him and his hosts, and cast them into the sea. So behold how the wrongdoers fared in the end
And We made them imams calling unto the Fire. And on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped
And We caused them to be pursued by a curse in this world. And on the Day of Resurrection they will be among the repugnant
And indeed We gave unto Moses the Book—after We had destroyed the former generations—as a [source of] insight for mankind, and guidance and mercy, that haply they may reflect
And thou wast not on the western side when We decreed unto Moses the Commandment, and thou wast not among the witnesses
But it is We Who brought into being the generations, and lives grew long for them. And thou dwelt not among the people of Midian, reciting unto them Our signs. But it is We Who sent
And thou wast not on the side of the Mount when We called out. But [thou art sent as] a mercy from thy Lord that thou mayest warn a people unto whom no warner has come before thee, that haply they may remember
And [We did so] lest there be an affliction that would befall them because of that which their hands have sent forth at which they should say, “Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent a messenger unto us, we would have followed Thy signs and been among the believers!”
But when the truth came to them from Us, they said, “Why was he not given the like of that which was given to Moses?” Did they not disbelieve in that which was given to Moses aforetime? They said, “Two sorceries, supporting one another.” And they said, “Truly we are disbelievers in each.”
Say, “So bring a book from God that provides better guidance than these two, that I may follow it, if you are truthful.”
And if they respond not to thee, then know that they follow only their caprices. And who is more astray than one who follows his caprice without guidance from God? Surely God guides not wrongdoing people
And indeed We have caused the Word to reach them, that haply they may reflect
Those unto whom We gave the Book before it, they are believers in it
And when it is recited unto them, they say, “We believe in it; verily it is the truth from our Lord. Truly we were submitters even before it.”
It is they who will be given their reward twice over for their having been patient. And they repel evil with good, and spend from that which We have provided them
And when they hear idle talk, they turn away therefrom and say, “Unto us our deeds, and unto you your deeds. Peace be upon you! We do not seek out the ignorant.”
Surely thou dost not guide whomsoever thou lovest, but God guides whomsoever He will. And He knows best those who are rightly guided
And they say, “If we follow guidance along with thee, we shall be snatched away from our land.” Have We not established for them a secure Sanctuary, to which the fruits of all things are brought, as a provision from Our Presence? But most of them know not
And how many a town have We destroyed who exulted in their life of ease. There are their dwellings, uninhabited after them save for a few. And We, truly, are the Inheritor
And thy Lord never destroys towns until He sends a messenger to their mother city to recite unto them Our signs. And We never destroy towns, save when their people are wrongdoers
And whatsoever you have been given, it is an enjoyment of the life of this world, and its ornament. But that which lies with God is better and more lasting. Will you not understand
And is he unto whom We made a goodly promise and who receives it, like unto him whom We granted enjoyment in the life of this world and who then, on the Day of Resurrection, will be among those arraigned
And on the Day when he shall call out to them, and say, “Where are My partners, those whom you claimed?”
Those against whom the Word has already come due will say, “Our Lord! These are those whom we perverted. We perverted them as we ourselves were perverse. We disavow [them] before Thee; it was not us whom they worshipped.”
It will be said, “Call upon your partners.” So they will call upon them, but they will not answer them. And they will see the punishment—if only they had been rightly guided
And on the Day when He will call out to them and say, “What answer gave you to the message bearers?”
the tidings shall be obscured for them on that Day, and they shall not question one another
But for he who repented, believed, and worked righteousness, perchance he will be among those who prosper
And thy Lord creates what He will, and chooses; no choice have they. Glory be to God and exalted is He above the partners they ascribe
And thy Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they disclose
And He is God; there is no god but He! To Him belongs praise at the beginning and at the end. To Him belongs judgment, and unto Him shall you be returned
Say, “Have you considered: if God should make night come over you unceasingly until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than God would bring you light? Will you not, then, listen?”
Say, “Have you considered: if God should make day come over you unceasingly until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than God would bring you night, that you might rest therein? Will you not, then, see?”
Out of His Mercy He made for you night and day, that you may rest therein, and that you may seek of His Bounty, and that haply you may give thanks
And on the Day when He shall call out to them, He will say, “Where are My partners, those whom you claimed?”
And We shall draw forth from every community a witness, and say, “Bring your proof.” Then they will know that the truth belongs to God. And that which they used to fabricate will forsake them
Truly Korah was of the people of Moses, but he transgressed against them. And We gave him such treasure that the keys to it would be a heavy burden for a group of strong men. [Remember] when his people said to him, “Exult not! Surely God loves not the exultant
And with what God has given you, seek after the Abode of the Hereafter, and forget not your portion in this world. And be good, as God has been good to you. Seek not to work corruption upon the earth. Surely God loves not the workers of corruption.”
He said, “I have only been given it on account of knowledge I possess.” Did he not know that God has destroyed generations before him who were mightier in strength and greater in what they had amassed? And the guilty will not be questioned about their sins
And he came forth unto his people in his adornment. Those who desired the life of this world said, “Would that we had the like of that which has been given to Korah. Truly he is a possessor of great fortune!”
But those who had been given knowledge said, “Woe unto you! The Reward of God is better for those who believe and work righteousness, and none shall receive it save the patient.”
Then We caused the earth to engulf him and his house. And he had no party who could help him against God, nor could he help himself
And morning found those who had longed to be in his place the day before saying, “Alas! It seems God outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will among His servants. Had God not been gracious to us, He would have caused us to be engulfed [as well]. Alas! It seems the disbelievers will not prosper!”
That is the Abode of the Hereafter, which We ordain for those who desire neither dominance upon the earth, nor corruption. And the end belongs to the reverent
Whosoever brings a good deed, he shall have better than it; and whosoever brings an evil deed, those who perform evil deeds shall only be recompensed for that which they have done
Truly the One Who ordained the Quran for thee shall surely bring thee back to the place of return. Say, “My Lord knows best those who bring guidance, and those who are in manifest error.”
And thou didst not hope that the Book would be delivered unto thee; rather, it was a mercy from thy Lord. So be not a support for the disbelievers
And let them not turn thee from the signs of God after they have been sent down unto thee. But call [others] to thy Lord and be not among those who ascribe partners unto God
And call not upon another god along with God. There is no god but He! All things perish, save His Face. Judgment belongs to Him, and unto Him will you be returned
Alif. Lam. Mim
Does mankind suppose that they will be left to say, “We believe,” and that they will not be tried
though We have indeed tried those who were before them? Surely God knows those who are truthful, and surely He knows the liars
Or do those who commit evil deeds suppose that they will outstrip Us? Evil indeed is the judgment they make
Whosoever hopes for the meeting with God, God’s term is coming. And He is the Hearing, the Knowing
And whosoever strives, strives only for himself. Truly God is beyond need of the worlds
And those who believe and perform righteous deeds, We shall surely absolve them of their evil deeds, and We shall surely recompense them according to the best of that which they used to do
And We have enjoined man to be good unto his parents. But if they urge thee to ascribe as partner unto Me that whereof thou hast no knowledge, then obey them not. Unto Me is your return, whereupon I shall inform you of that which you used to do
And those who believe and perform righteous deeds, We shall surely cause them to enter among the righteous
Among mankind are those who say, “We believe in God”; but if he is harmed for the sake of God, he takes persecution from men to be as God’s Punishment. Yet if help comes from thy Lord, he will surely say, “We were indeed with you.” Does God not know best what lies within the breasts of all creatures
Surely God knows those who believe, and surely He knows the hypocrites
Those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “Follow our path and we shall bear your sins.” But they bear not aught of their sins. Truly they are liars
Surely they will bear their own burdens, and others’ burdens along with their own, and on the Day of Resurrection they will surely be questioned concerning that which they used to fabricate
And indeed We sent Noah unto his people and he remained among them a thousand years, less fifty; and the flood seized them, for they were wrongdoers
Then We saved him and the companions of the ship, and We made it a sign for the worlds
And [We sent] Abraham, when he said to his people, “Worship God and reverence Him. That is better for you, if you but knew
You only worship idols apart from God, and you only create perversion. Truly those whom you worship apart from God have no power over what provision may come to you. So seek your provision with God, worship Him, and be thankful to Him; unto Him shall you be returned
But if you deny, then communities have certainly denied before you; and naught is incumbent upon the Messenger but the clear proclamation.”
Have they not considered how God originates creation, then brings it back? Truly that is easy for God
Say, “Journey upon the earth and observe how He originated creation. Then God shall bring the next genesis into being. Truly God is Powerful over all things.”
He punishes whomsoever He will and has mercy upon whomsoever He will, and unto Him will you be returned
You thwart not on earth, nor in Heaven; and apart from God you have no protector or helper
Those who disbelieve in God’s signs and in the meeting with Him, they despair of My Mercy, and for them there shall be a painful punishment
Yet the answer of his people was but to say, “Slay him, or burn him!” Then God saved him from the fire. Truly in that are signs for a people who believe
And Abraham said, “You have taken idols apart from God on account of affection between you in the life of this world. Then on the Day of Resurrection you will disown one another, and you will curse one another; your refuge will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers.”
And Lot believed him and said, “Truly I am fleeing unto my Lord. Truly He is the Mighty, the Wise.”
And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob, and We established prophethood and scripture among his progeny. We gave him his reward in this world, and in the Hereafter he shall truly be among the righteous
And [We sent] Lot, when he said to his people, “Truly you commit indecency such as none in the worlds committed before you
What! Do you come unto men, cut off the way, and commit reprehensible deeds in your gatherings?” Yet the answer of his people was but to say, “Bring us God’s Punishment, if you are among the truthful.”
He said, “My Lord, help me against the people who work corruption.”
And when Our envoys came unto Abraham with glad tidings, they said, “We shall surely destroy the people of this town; truly its people are wrongdoers.”
He said, “Verily, Lot is in it.” They said, “We know better who is in it. Assuredly We shall save him and his family, save for his wife; she is among those who lagged behind.”
And when Our envoys came unto Lot, he was distressed on their account; yet he was constrained from helping them. And they said, “Be not afraid, nor grieve. We shall surely save thee and thy family, save for thy wife; she is among those who lagged behind
Truly we shall bring down upon the people of this town a torment from Heaven for having been iniquitous.”
And We indeed have left of it a manifest sign for a people who understand
And unto Midian, [We sent] their brother Shu?ayb; he said, “O my people! Worship God and hope for the Last Day, and behave not wickedly upon the earth, working corruption.”
But they denied him, and so the earthquake seized them, and morning found them lying lifeless in their abode
and ?Ad, and Thamud; [their fate] is certainly evident to you from their dwellings. Satan made their deeds seem fair unto them and thus turned them from the way, though they had been discerning
and Korah, and Pharaoh, and Haman! Indeed, Moses brought them clear proofs, but they waxed arrogant upon the earth, and outstripped [Us] not
Each We seized for his sin. Among them are some upon whom We sent a torrent of stones, and among them are some whom the Cry seized, and among them are some whom We caused the earth to engulf, and among them are some whom We drowned. God wronged them not, but themselves did they wrong
The parable of those who take protectors apart from God is that of the spider that makes a house. Truly the frailest of houses is the spider’s house, if they but knew
Truly God knows whatsoever they call upon apart from Him. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
These are the parables; We set them forth for mankind. But none understand them, save those who know
God created the heavens and the earth in truth. Surely in that is a sign for believers
Recite that which has been revealed unto thee of the Book, and perform the prayer. Truly prayer prevents against indecency and abomination, but the remembrance of God is surely greater. And God knows whatsoever you do
And dispute not with the People of the Book, save in the most virtuous manner, unless it be those of them who have done wrong. And say, “We believe in that which was sent down unto us and was sent down unto you; our God and your God are one, and unto Him are we submitters.”
Thus have We sent down unto thee the Book. So those unto whom We have given the Book believe in it. Among them are some who believe in it; and none reject Our signs, save the disbelievers
And thou didst not recite before this any Book; nor didst thou write it with thy right hand, for then those who make false claims would have doubted
Nay, it is but clear signs in the breasts of those who have been given knowledge, and none reject Our signs, save the wrongdoers
And they say, “Why have signs not been sent down unto him from his Lord?” Say, “Signs are with God alone, and I am only a clear warner.”
Does it not suffice them that We have sent down unto thee the Book that is recited unto them? Surely in that is a mercy and a reminder for a people who believe
Say, “God suffices as a Witness between you and me. He knows whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth.” And those who believe in what is false and disbelieve in God, it is they who are the losers
And they bid thee hasten the punishment. Yet were it not for a term appointed, the punishment would have come upon them. And it will surely come upon them suddenly, while they are unaware
And they bid thee hasten the punishment. Truly Hell shall encompass the disbelievers
on the Day when the punishment will cover them from above and from beneath their feet, and We shall say, “Taste that which you used to do!”
O My servants who believe! Truly My earth is vast. So worship Me
Every soul shall taste death. Then unto Us shall you be returned
And those who believe and perform righteous deeds, We shall surely settle them in lofty abodes of the Garden with rivers running below, therein to abide. Excellent indeed is the reward of the workers [of righteousness]
those who are patient and trust in their Lord
And how many a beast bears not its own provision, yet God provides for it and for you? And He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Wert thou to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth and made the sun and the moon subservient?” They would surely say, “God.” How, then, are they perverted
God outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will among His servants. Truly God is Knower of all things
And wert thou to ask them, “Who sends down water from the sky and revives thereby the earth after its death?” They would surely say, “God.” Say, “Praise be to God!” Nay, but most of them understand not
The life of this world is naught but diversion and play. And surely the Abode of the Hereafter is life indeed, if they but knew
And when they board a ship, they call upon God, devoting religion entirely to Him, but when He delivers them to land, behold, they ascribe partners [unto Him]
So let them be ungrateful for that which We have given them, and let them enjoy themselves, for soon they will know
Or have they not considered that We have made a secure sanctuary while people are snatched away all around them? Do they believe in that which is false? And are they ungrateful for God’s Blessing
Who does greater wrong than one who fabricates a lie against God or denies the truth when it comes unto him? Is there not within Hell an abode for the disbelievers
But as for those who strive for Us, We shall surely guide them in Our ways. Truly God is with the virtuous
Alif. Lam. Mim
The Byzantines have been defeated
in a land nearby. Yet after being defeated they will prevail
within a few years—unto God belongs the affair, before and after, and on that day the believers shall rejoice
in God’s Help. He helps whomsoever He will, and He is the Mighty, the Merciful
[This is] God’s Promise—God fails not His Promise, but most of mankind know not
They know some outward aspect of the life of this world, but of the Hereafter they are heedless
Do they not reflect upon their souls? God did not create the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, save in truth and for a term appointed. Yet truly many among mankind believe not in the meeting with their Lord
Have they not journeyed upon the earth and observed how those before them fared in the end? They were greater than them in strength. They tilled the earth and built upon it more than have they, and their messengers brought them clear proofs. For God would never wrong them, but themselves did they wrong
Then the end of those who committed evil deeds was most evil, for they denied God’s signs and mocked them
God originates creation, then brings it back; then unto Him shall you be returned
And on the Day when the Hour is come, the guilty shall despair
They have no intercessors from among those they ascribed as partners, and they will then disbelieve in those they ascribed as partners
And on the Day when the Hour is come, that Day they will be separated
As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, they will be made joyous in a Garden
But as for those who disbelieved and denied Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, they will be arraigned unto the punishment
So glory be to God when you enter upon the eve and when you rise at morn
His is the praise in the heavens and on the earth—when the sun declines and when you reach noontide
He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living, and He revives the earth after its death. Even so shall you be brought forth
Among His signs is that He created you from dust. Then, behold, you are human beings ranging far and wide
And among His signs is that He created mates for you from among yourselves, that you might find rest in them, and He established affection and mercy between you. Truly in that are signs for a people who reflect
And among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth and the variation in your tongues and colors. Truly in that are signs for those who know
And among His signs is your sleep by night and day and your seeking His Bounty. Truly in that are signs for a people who hear
And among His signs is that He shows you lightning, arousing fear and hope, and that He sends down water from the sky, then revives thereby the earth after its death. Truly in that are signs for a people who understand
And among His signs is that the sky and the earth stand fast by His Command. Then, when He calls you forth from the earth with a single call, behold, you will come forth
Unto Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth; all are devoutly obedient unto Him
He it is Who originates creation, then brings it back, and that is most easy for Him. Unto Him belongs the loftiest description in the heavens and on the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
He sets forth for you a parable from yourselves: have you, among those whom your right hands possess, partners in what We have provided for you, such that you are equal with respect to it, with you fearing them as you fear each other? Thus do We expound the signs for a people who understand
Nay, those who do wrong follow their caprices without knowledge. So who will guide those whom God has led astray? And they shall have no helpers
Set thy face to religion as a ?anif, in the primordial nature from God upon which He originated mankind—there is no altering the creation of God; that is the upright religion, but most of mankind know not—
turning unto Him. And reverence Him and perform the prayer; and be not among the idolaters
among those who have divided their religion and become factions, each party rejoicing in that which it has
And when harm befalls the people, they call upon their Lord, turning to Him in repentance. Then, when He lets them taste of His Mercy, behold, a group among them ascribe partners unto their Lord
Let them be ungrateful for that which We have given them: “So enjoy yourselves! For soon you will know.”
Or have We sent down upon them any authority that speaks of that which they ascribe as partners unto Him
And when We cause the people to taste some mercy, they rejoice in it. But should an evil befall them because of that which their hands have sent forth, behold, they despair
Have they not considered that God outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will? Truly in that are signs for a people who believe
So give unto the kinsman his right, and unto the indigent and the traveler. That is better for those who desire the Face of God. It is they who shall prosper
That which you give in usury that it might increase through other people’s wealth does not increase with God. But that which you give in alms, desiring the Face of God—it is they who receive a manifold increase
God it is Who created you, then nourished you; then He causes you to die; then He gives you life. Is there anyone among those you ascribe as partners who does aught of that? Glory be to Him and exalted is He above the partners they ascribe
Corruption has appeared on land and sea because of that which men’s hands have earned, that He may let them taste some of that which they have done, that haply they might return
Say, “Journey upon the earth and observe how those before fared in the end, most of whom were idolaters.”
And set thy face to the upright religion before there comes a day from God that none can repel. That Day they will be spread asunder
Whosoever disbelieves, his disbelief is to his own detriment. And whosoever works righteousness, they make provision for their souls
that from His Bounty He may recompense those who believe and perform righteous deeds. Truly He loves not the disbelievers
And among His signs is that He sends the winds as bearers of glad tidings to let you taste of His Mercy, that the ships may sail by His Command, and that you may seek of His Bounty, and that haply you may give thanks
We have indeed sent messengers unto their people before thee, and they brought them clear proofs. Then We took vengeance upon those who were guilty; and it is incumbent upon Us to help the believers
God is He Who sends the winds, then they cause clouds to rise, and He spreads them in the sky as He will and makes them into fragments, whereupon you see the rain emerging from their midst. Then when He bestows it upon whomsoever He will among His servants, behold, they rejoice
though previously, before it was sent down upon them, they had been in despair
So observe the vestiges of God’s Mercy, how He revives the earth after its death. Truly that is the Reviver of the dead, and He is Powerful over all things
And were We to send a wind and they were to see it turn yellow, after that they would surely disbelieve
Surely thou dost not make the dead to hear; nor dost thou make the deaf to hear the call when they turn their backs
nor dost thou guide the blind from their straying. Thou makest none to hear, save those who believe in Our signs and are submitters
God is He Who created you from weakness, then ordained strength after weakness, then ordained weakness and old age after strength. He creates whatsoever He will, and He is the Knowing, the Powerful
And on the Day when the Hour is come, the guilty will swear that they had tarried naught but an hour; thus were they perverted
And those who have been given knowledge and belief will say, “Indeed, you tarried in God’s Book until the Day of Resurrection; and this is the Day of Resurrection! But you knew not.”
On that Day the excuses of those who do wrong will benefit them not; nor can they make amends
And indeed We have set forth for mankind in this Quran every kind of parable. And if thou bringest them a sign, those who disbelieve will surely say, “You make naught but false claims.”
Thus does God seal the hearts of those who know not
So be patient. God’s Promise is indeed true. And let not those without certainty disquiet thee
Alif. Lam. Mim
These are the signs of the Wise Book
guidance and mercy for the virtuous
who perform the prayer and give the alms and who are certain of the Hereafter
It is they who are upon guidance from their Lord, and it is they who shall prosper
And among mankind are those who purchase idle discourse to lead astray from the way of God without knowledge and who take it in mockery; for them there shall be a humiliating punishment
And when Our signs are recited unto him, he turns away arrogantly as if he did not hear them, as if there were deafness in his ears. So give him glad tidings of a painful punishment
Truly those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be Gardens of bliss
therein to abide—God’s Promise in truth. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
He created the heavens without pillars that you see, and cast into the earth firm mountains, lest it shake beneath you, and spread about all manner of beast therein. And We sent down water from the sky and caused every noble kind to grow therein
This is the creation of God; so show me that which those apart from Him have created. Nay, the wrongdoers are in manifest error
And indeed We gave Luqman wisdom: “Give thanks to God!” And whosoever gives thanks, he gives thanks for his own sake. And whosoever is ungrateful, truly God is Self-Sufficient, Praised
And behold, Luqman said to his son, admonishing him, “O my son! Do not ascribe partners unto God. Truly ascribing partners is a tremendous wrong.”
And We have enjoined man concerning his parents—his mother bore him, weakness upon weakness, and his weaning was two years—give thanks unto Me and unto your parents. Unto Me is the journey’s end
But if they strive to make you ascribe as a partner unto Me that of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not. Consort with them in the world in a kindly manner, and follow the way of those who turn in repentance unto Me. Then unto Me is your return, and I shall inform you of that which you used to do
“O my son! If it be but the weight of a mustard seed, be it in a rock, in the heavens, or on the earth, God will bring it forth. Truly God is Subtle, Aware
O my son! Perform the prayer, enjoin right and forbid wrong, and bear patiently whatever may befall you. That is indeed a course worthy of resolve
And turn not your cheek at men in scorn, nor walk exultantly upon the earth. Surely God loves not any vainglorious boaster
And be moderate in thy pace and lower thy voice. Truly the vilest of voices are those of asses.”
Have you not considered that God has made whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth subservient unto you and has poured His Blessings upon you, both outwardly and inwardly? Among mankind are those who dispute concerning God without knowledge, without guidance, and without an illuminating Book
When it is said unto them, “Follow that which God has sent down,” they respond, “Nay, but we follow that which we found our fathers following. "What! Even though Satan is calling them to the punishment of the Blaze
And whosoever submits his face to God and is virtuous has indeed grasped the most unfailing handhold, and unto God is the end of all affairs
And whosoever does not believe, let not his disbelief grieve thee. Unto Us is their return; then We shall inform them of that which they did. Truly God knows what lies within breasts
We grant them enjoyment a little, then We compel them toward a grave punishment
And wert thou to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” they would surely say, “God.” Say, “Praise be to God.” Nay, but most of them know not
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and on the earth. Truly God is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised
And if all the trees on earth were pens, and if the sea and seven more added to it [were ink], the Words of God would not be exhausted. Truly God is Mighty, Wise
Your creation and your resurrection are as naught but a single soul. Truly God is Hearing, Seeing
Hast thou not considered that God makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night, and that He made the sun and the moon subservient, each running for a term appointed, and that God is Aware of whatsoever you do
That is because God, He is the Truth, and whatsoever they call upon other than Him is false, and God is the Exalted, the Great
Hast thou not considered that the ships sail upon the sea by God’s Blessing, that He may show you His signs? Truly in that are signs for all who are patient, thankful
And when waves enshroud them like awnings, they call upon God, devoting religion entirely to Him. Then when He has delivered them safely to land, some of them take a middling course. And none reject Our signs, save all who are perfidious, ungrateful
O mankind! Reverence your Lord and fear a day on which no parent will avail his child aught and no child will avail his parent aught. Surely God’s Promise is true. So let not the life of this world delude you, nor let the Deluder delude you concerning God
Truly with God lies knowledge of the Hour, and He sends down the rain and knows what lies in wombs. And no soul knows what it will earn on the morrow, and no soul knows in what land it will die. Truly God is Knowing, Aware
Alif. Lam. Mim
The revelation of the Book in which there is no doubt, from the Lord of the worlds
Or do they say, “He has fabricated it”? Nay, it is the truth from thy Lord, that thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner has come before thee, that haply they may be guided
God it is Who created the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them in six days. Then He mounted the Throne. Apart from Him you have neither protector, nor intercessor. Will you not, then, remember
He directs the affair from Heaven unto earth; then it ascends unto Him in a day whose measure is as a thousand years of that which you reckon
Such is the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Merciful
Who made beautiful all that He created, and Who began the creation of man from clay
Then He made his seed from a draught of base fluid
Then He fashioned him, and breathed into him of His Spirit, and endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts. Little do you give thanks
And they say, “What, when we have become lost in the earth, shall we indeed be created anew?” Nay, they believe not in the meeting with their Lord
Say, “The Angel of death, who has been entrusted with you, will take you; then unto your Lord shall you be returned.”
Couldst thou but see when the guilty bend their heads low before their Lord: “Our Lord! We have seen and we have heard; so send us back that we may work righteousness. Truly we are certain.”
And had We willed, We would have given every soul its guidance. But the Word from Me comes due: “I shall surely fill Hell with jinn and men all together!”
So taste [the punishment] for having forgotten the meeting with this your Day! Verily, We have forgotten you! And taste the punishment everlasting for that which you used to do
Truly they believe in Our signs who when reminded of them fall prostrate and hymn the praise of their Lord and do not wax arrogant
whose sides shun [their] beds, calling upon their Lord out of fear and hope, and who spend from that which We have provided them
No soul knows what comfort is kept hidden for it as a recompense for that which they used to do
Is one who believes like one who is iniquitous? They are not equal
As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be Gardens of refuge, as a welcome for that which they used to do
And as for those who are iniquitous, their refuge is the Fire. Whenever they desire to go forth therefrom, they are returned unto it, and it is said unto them, “Taste the punishment of the Fire that you used to deny!”
And We make them taste the lesser punishment before the greater punishment, that they might turn back
And who does greater wrong than one who has been reminded of the signs of his Lord, then turns away from them? Truly We shall take vengeance upon the guilty
And indeed We gave unto Moses the Book; so be not in doubt regarding the meeting with Him. And We made him a guide for the Children of Israel
And We appointed leaders from among them who guided by Our Command when they were patient and were certain of Our signs
Truly thy Lord will distinguish between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding that wherein they used to differ
Does it not serve as guidance for them, how many generations We destroyed before them, amidst whose dwellings they walk? Truly in that are signs. Will they not listen
Have they not considered how We drive the water to the barren earth and bring forth crops thereby, whereof they and their cattle eat? Will they not see
And they say, “When is this victory, if you are truthful?”
Say, “On the Day of Victory, faith will not benefit those who disbelieved; nor shall they be granted respite.”
Then turn away from them and wait; they, too, are waiting
Prophet! Reverence God and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Truly God is Knowing, Wise
And follow that which is revealed unto thee from thy Lord. Truly God is Aware of whatsoever you do
And trust in God; God suffices as a Guardian
God has not placed two hearts in the breast of any man. Nor has He made your wives whom you repudiate with the practice of ?ihar your mothers. Nor has He made those whom you claim [as sons] your sons. Those are mere words from your mouths. But God speaks the Truth and guides upon the way
Call them after their fathers. That is more equitable before God. And if you do not know their fathers, then they are your brethren in religion and your clients. There is no blame upon you for being mistaken therein, but only for that which your hearts intend. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
The Prophet is closer to the believers than they are to themselves, and his wives are their mothers. Family relations are closer to one another, according to the Book of God, than are the believers and the emigrants. Nonetheless, you should act rightly toward your friends. That is inscribed in the Book
And [remember] when We made with the prophets their covenant, and with thee, and with Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus the son of Mary; We made with them a solemn covenant
that the truthful may be questioned concerning their truthfulness. And for the disbelievers He has prepared a painful punishment
O you who believe! Remember the Blessing of God upon you when the hosts came upon you and We sent against them a wind and hosts that you saw not—and God sees whatsoever you do—
when they came upon you from above you and below you, and when eyes swerved and hearts reached into throats, and you thought many things regarding God
It was there that the believers were tried and shaken in a manner most severe
And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said, “God and His Messenger promised us naught but delusion.”
And when a group among them said, “O people of Yathrib! There is no stand for you; so turn back.” And a group among them sought permission from the Prophet, saying, “Truly our houses are exposed,” though they were not exposed. They wanted naught but to flee
Had they been entered upon from the sides of the city, then were exhorted to treachery, they would have committed it and would not have hesitated, save a little
though previously they had made a pact with God that they would not turn their backs; and the pact with God is called to account
Say, “Fleeing will not benefit you if you flee from death or killing, for you will not be granted enjoyment, save a little.”
Say, “Who is it who will protect you from God if He desires evil for you or desires mercy for you?” They will find no protector or helper for themselves apart from God
Surely God knows those among you who hinder and those who say unto their brethren, “Come hither unto us”; yet they come not to the battle, save a little
greedy toward you. But when fear comes, thou seest them looking at thee with their eyes rolling like one whom death overwhelms. Then when fear subsides, they assail thee with their sharp tongues, greedy for good things. Such as these have not believed; so God made their deeds come to naught, and that is easy for God
They suppose that the parties have not withdrawn, and if the parties were to come, they would wish they were in the desert among the Bedouin, seeking news of you. And were they among you, they would not fight, save a little
Indeed, you have in the Messenger of God a beautiful example for those who hope for God and the Last Day, and remember God much
When the believers saw the parties, they said, “This is what God and His Messenger promised; God and His Messenger spoke true.” And it increased them in naught but faith and submission
Among the believers are men who have been true to that which they pledged unto God. Among them are those who have fulfilled their vow, and among them are those who wait, and they have not changed in the least
that God may recompense the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if He will, or relent unto them. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
And God turned back those who disbelieved in their rage; they attained no good. God sufficed the believers in battle; and God is Strong, Mighty
He brought the People of the Book who supported them down from their strongholds and cast terror into their hearts—some you slew and some you took captive
And He bequeathed unto you their land, their homes, their property, and a land you have not trodden. And God is Powerful over all things
O Prophet! Say unto thy wives, “If you desire the life of this world and its ornament, then come! I shall provide for you and release you in a fair manner
But if you desire God and His Messenger and the Abode of the Hereafter, then truly God has prepared a great reward for the virtuous among you.”
O wives of the Prophet! Whosoever among you commits a flagrant indecency, her punishment will be doubled; and that is easy for God
And whosoever among you is devoutly obedient to God and His Messenger and works righteousness, We shall give her her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her a generous provision
O wives of the Prophet! You are not like other women. If you are reverent, then be not overly soft in speech, lest one in whose heart is a disease be moved to desire; and speak in an honorable way
Abide in your homes and flaunt not your charms as they did flaunt them in the prior Age of Ignorance. Perform the prayer, give the alms, and obey God and His Messenger. God only desires to remove defilement from you, O People of the House, and to purify you completely
And remember that which is recited unto you in your homes from among the signs and Wisdom of God. Truly God is Subtle, Aware
For submitting men and submitting women, believing men and believing women, devout men and devout women, truthful men and truthful women, patient men and patient women, humble men and humble women, charitable men and charitable women, men who fast and women who fast, men who guard their private parts and women who guard [their private parts], men who remember God often and women who remember [God often], God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward
And it is not for a believing man or a believing woman, when God and His Messenger have decreed a matter, to have a choice regarding the matter. Whosoever disobeys God and His Messenger has strayed into manifest error
And [remember] when thou said unto him whom God has blessed and whom thou hast blessed, “Retain your wife for yourself and reverence God,” thou wast hiding in thyself that which God was to disclose; and thou didst fear the people, though God has more right to be feared by thee. Then when Zayd relinquished his claim upon her, We wed her to thee, so that there should be no restriction for the believers in respect to the wives of their adopted sons when the latter have relinquished their claims upon them. And the Command of God shall be fulfilled
There is no restriction for the Prophet in what God has ordained for him. [That is] the wont of God with those who passed away before—and God’s Command is a decree determined
those who convey God’s messages and fear Him, and fear none but God. And God suffices as a Reckoner
Muhammad is not the father of any man among you; rather, he is the Messenger of God and the Seal of the prophets. And God is Knower of all things. A
you who believe! Remember God with frequent remembrance
and glorify Him morning and evening
He it is Who blesses you, as do His angels, that He may bring you out of darkness into light. And He is Merciful unto the believers
Their greeting on the day they meet Him will be “Peace.” And He has prepared for them a generous reward
O Prophet! Truly We have sent thee as a witness, as a bearer of glad tidings, and as a warner
as one who calls unto God by His Leave, and as a luminous lamp
Give glad tidings to the believers that there will be for them a great bounty from God
Obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites; disregard their affront, and trust in God. God suffices as a Guardian. I
you who believe! If you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them, there shall be no waiting period for you to reckon against them. But provide for them and release them in a fair manner
O Prophet! We have made lawful for thee thy wives to whom thou hast given their bridewealth, as well as those whom thy right hand possesses of those whom God has granted thee as spoils of war, and the daughters of thy paternal uncles and the daughters of thy paternal aunts, and the daughters of thy maternal uncles and the daughters of thy maternal aunts who emigrated with thee, and any believing woman if she gives herself [in marriage] to the Prophet and if the Prophet desires to marry her—for thee alone, not for [the rest of] the believers. We know well what We have enjoined upon them with respect to their wives and those whom their right hands possess, that there may be no blame upon thee. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
Thou mayest put off whomsoever of them thou wilt and receive whomsoever thou wilt. And as for whomsoever thou mightest desire of those whom thou hast set aside, there is no blame upon thee. Thus is it likelier that they will be comforted, that they will not grieve, and that they will be content with that which thou hast given all of them. God knows what is in your hearts. And God is Knowing, Clement
Women are not lawful for thee beyond that, nor [is it lawful] for thee to exchange them for other wives, though their beauty impresses thee, save those whom thy right hand possesses. And God is Watcher over all things
O you who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without waiting for its time to come, unless leave be granted you. But if you are invited, enter; and when you have eaten, disperse. Linger not, seeking discourse. Truly that would affront the Prophet, and he would shrink from telling you, but God shrinks not from the truth. And when you ask anything of [his wives], ask them from behind a veil. That is purer for your hearts and their hearts. And you should never affront the Messenger of God, nor marry his wives after him. Truly that would be an enormity in the sight of God
Whether you disclose something or conceal it, surely God is Knower of all things
There is no blame upon them with regard to their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers’ sons, or their sisters’ sons, or their own women, or those whom their right hands possess. And reverence God. Truly God is Witness over all things
Truly God and His angels invoke blessings upon the Prophet
you who believe! Invoke blessings upon him, and greetings of peace
Truly those who affront God and His Messenger, God has cursed them in this life and the Hereafter, and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment
As for those who affront believing men and believing women for other than what they may have committed, they bear the burden of calumny and manifest sin
O Prophet! Tell your wives and daughters, and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over themselves. Thus is it likelier that they will be known and not be disturbed. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
If the hypocrites do not desist, and likewise those in whose hearts is a disease, as well as those who spread false rumors in the city, We shall surely spur thee against them; then they will not be your neighbors therein, save for a short while. a Accursed! They will be seized wheresoever they are found and utterly slain
[That is] the wont of God with those who passed before; and you will find no alteration in the wont of God
People question thee concerning the Hour. Say, “Knowledge thereof lies only with God. And what will apprise thee, perhaps the Hour is nigh.”
Truly God curses the disbelievers and prepares for them a blazing flame
therein to abide forever; they will find no protector or helper
On the Day when their faces are turned about in the Fire, they will say, “Oh, would that we had obeyed God and obeyed the Messenger!”
They will say, “Our Lord! Truly we obeyed our leaders and elders, and they caused us to stray from the way
Our Lord! Give them a twofold punishment, and curse them with a great curse.” i
you who believe! Be not as those who affronted Moses, whereat God declared him innocent of what they alleged, and he was honored with God. p
you who believe! Reverence God and speak justly
that He may set your deeds aright for you, and forgive you your sins. And whosoever obeys God and His Messenger has achieved a great triumph
Truly We offered the Trust unto the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear it, and were wary of it—yet man bore it; truly he has proved himself an ignorant wrongdoer
That God may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, and that God may relent unto the believing men and the believing women. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
Praise be to God, unto Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. His is the praise in the Hereafter, and He is the Wise, the Aware
He knows that which enters the earth and that which issues therefrom, that which descends from Heaven and that which ascends thereto. And He is the Merciful, the Forgiving
Those who disbelieve say, “The Hour will never come upon us.” Say, “Nay! By my Lord, by the Knower of the Unseen, it will surely come unto you.” Not a mote’s weight evades Him in the heavens or on the earth, nor smaller than that, nor larger, but that it is in a clear Book
that He may recompense those who believe and perform righteous deeds; theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision
But those who endeavor to thwart Our signs, for them there shall be a painful punishment of torment
Those who have been given knowledge see that what is sent down upon thee from thy Lord is the truth and that it guides to the path of the Mighty, the Praised
And those who disbelieve say, “Shall we show you a man who will inform you that, when you have been completely torn to pieces, you shall be in a new creation
Has he fabricated a lie against God, or is he possessed?” Nay, but those who believe not in the Hereafter shall be in punishment and extreme error
Have they not considered that which is before them and that which is behind them of the sky and the earth? If We will, We cause the earth to engulf them or fragments from the sky to fall upon them. Truly in that is a sign for every penitent servant
And indeed We gave David bounty from Us: “O mountains! Echo God’s praises with him, likewise you birds!” And We made iron supple for him
[saying], “Make coats of mail, and measure well the links thereof, and work righteousness. Truly I see whatsoever you do.”
And unto Solomon the wind, whose morning course was a month and whose evening course was a month. And We caused a fount of molten copper to flow for him. And of the jinn some worked before him by the leave of his Lord—and those of them that deviated from Our Command, We would cause them to taste the punishment of the Blaze
making for him whatsoever he willed: places of worship, statues, basins like reservoirs, and cauldrons firmly anchored. “Work, O family of David, in thankfulness, though few of My servants are thankful.”
And when We decreed death for him, naught showed his death to them save a creeping creature of the earth eating his staff. And when he fell down, the jinn saw clearly that, had they known the Unseen, they would not have tarried in humiliating punishment
For Sheba too there was certainly a sign in their dwelling—two gardens, one to the right and one to the left: “Eat of the provision of your Lord and give thanks to Him—a good land, and a forgiving Lord.”
But they turned away. So We sent the flood of ?Arim upon them and exchanged their two gardens for two gardens bearing bitter fruit, tamarisks, and a few lote trees
Thus did We recompense them for having disbelieved. And do We recompense any but the disbeliever
And We set between them and the towns that We had blessed towns easily seen, and We measured the distance between them: “Journey between them in security by night and by day.”
But they said, “Our Lord, increase the distance of our journeys.” And they wronged themselves; so We made them as tales [of old] and tore them completely to pieces. Truly in that are signs for all who are patient, thankful
And Iblis did indeed prove his opinion of them to be true; and they followed him, save for a group among the believers
And yet he had no authority over them, save that We might know one who believes in the Hereafter from one who is in doubt thereof. And thy Lord guards over all things
Say, “Call upon those whom you claim apart from God; they have not a mote’s weight of power in the heavens or on the earth, and they have no share in either; nor has He a helper among them.”
And intercession will benefit none with Him, save whomsoever He gives leave, such that when terror is banished from their hearts, they will ask, “What did your Lord say?” They will reply, “The truth, and He is the Exalted, the Great.”
Say, “Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?” Say, “God. And surely either we or you are upon guidance or in manifest error.”
Say, “You will not be questioned concerning that of which we were guilty; nor will we be questioned concerning what you do.”
Say, “Our Lord will gather us together; then He will decide between us with truth; and He is the Arbiter, the Knower.”
Say, “Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners. Nay! Rather, He is God, the Mighty, the Wise.”
And We sent thee not, save as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to mankind entire. But most of mankind know not
And they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
Say, “Yours shall be the tryst of a Day that you cannot delay by a single hour, nor advance.”
The disbelievers say, “We shall not believe in this Quran, nor in that which was before it.” Couldst thou but see when the wrongdoers are made to stand before their Lord, hurling reproach upon one another! Those who had been weak and oppressed will say to those who had waxed arrogant, “If not for you, we would have been believers.”
Those who waxed arrogant will say to those who had been weak and oppressed, “Did we turn you away from guidance after it had come unto you? Nay! But you were guilty.”
Those who had been weak and oppressed will say to those who waxed arrogant, “Nay! But there was plotting by night and day when you ordered us to disbelieve in God, and to set up equals unto Him.” And they will hide their remorse when they see the punishment, and We put shackles upon the necks of those who disbelieve. Will they be requited for aught but what they used to do
And We sent no warner unto a town, but that those living in luxury therein said, “We disbelieve in that wherewith you have been sent.”
And they say, “We are greater in wealth and children, and we shall not be punished.”
Say, “Truly my Lord outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will, but most of mankind know not.”
It is not your wealth or your children that bring you nigh in nearness unto Us, save those who believe and work righteousness—theirs is a manifold reward for what they did, and they will be secure in lofty chambers
And those who endeavor to thwart Our signs, they will be arraigned unto the punishment
Say, “Truly my Lord outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will among His servants. Whatsoever you have spent, He will replace; and He is the best of providers.”
Upon the Day when He will gather them all together, then He shall say unto the angels, “Were these the ones worshipping you?”
They will reply, “Glory be to Thee! Thou art our Protector, apart from them!” Nay, they worshipped jinn, most of them believing in them
And on that Day no one of you will have power over what benefit or harm may come to the other, and We shall say to those who do wrong, “Taste the punishment of the Fire that you used to deny!”
And when Our signs are recited unto them as clear proofs, they say, “This is naught but a man who desires to turn you from that which your fathers used to worship.” And they say, “This is naught but a fabricated perversion.” And those who disbelieve say to the Truth when it comes to them, “This is naught but manifest sorcery,”
though We have not given them any books that they study; nor have We sent them a warner before thee
And those before them denied; and these have not attained a tenth of that which We gave them; yet they denied My messengers. How, then, was the change I wrought
Say, “I exhort you unto one thing only, that you stand for God in pairs or singly and then reflect. There is no madness in your companion. He is naught but a warner unto you before a severe punishment.”
Say, “I ask not of you any reward; that shall be yours. My reward lies only with God, and He is Witness over all things.”
Say, “Truly my Lord doth cast the truth, Knower of things unseen.”
Say, “Truth has come, and falsehood originates naught, nor restores.”
Say, “If I have gone astray, I have only gone astray to my own loss. And if I am rightly guided, it is through that which my Lord reveals unto me. Truly He is Hearing, Near.”
Couldst thou but see when they are terrified and there is no escape, and they are seized from a place near at hand
And they will say, “We believe in it.” But how can they attain from a place far off
when they had disbelieved in it beforehand, while impugning the unseen from a place far off
And a barrier is set between them and that which they desire, as was done with the likes of them before. Truly they were confounded by doubt
Praise be to God, Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who appoints the angels as messengers, of wings two, three, and four, increasing creation as He will. Truly God is Powerful over all things
Whatsoever mercy God opens unto mankind, none shall withhold. And whatsoever He withholds, none shall release thereafter. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
O mankind! Remember God’s Blessing upon you. Is there a creator other than God who provides for you from Heaven and earth? There is no god but He. How, then, are you perverted
If they deny thee, messengers before thee were denied, and unto God are all matters returned
O mankind! Surely God’s Promise is true. So let not the life of this world delude you, nor let the Deluder delude you concerning God
Truly Satan is an enemy unto you; so take him as an enemy. He only calls upon his party that they may be among the inhabitants of the Blaze
Those who disbelieve, theirs shall be a severe punishment. And those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward
And what of one, the evil of whose deeds has been made to seem fair to him, such that he thinks it beautiful? Truly God leads astray whomsoever He will and guides whomsoever He will; so let not thy soul be expended in regrets over them. Truly God knows that which they do
And God is He Who sends the winds; then they cause clouds to rise. Then We drive them to a land that is dead, and thereby revive the earth after its death. Thus shall be the Resurrection
Whosoever desires might—to God belongs might altogether. Unto Him ascends the good word, and He uplifts the righteous deed. As for those who plot evil deeds, theirs shall be a severe punishment, and their plotting shall come to ruin
God created you from dust, then from a drop, then He made you pairs; and no female bears or brings forth save with His Knowledge. And none who grows old grows old, nor has aught lessened of his life, but that it is in a Book. Truly that is easy for God
Not equal are the two seas: one sweet, satisfying, pleasant to drink, and the other salty, bitter. Yet from each you eat fresh meat, and bring out ornaments that you wear. And you see the ships therein plowing through, that you may seek of His Bounty, and that haply you may give thanks
He makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night, and He has made the sun and the moon subservient, each running for a term appointed. That is God, your Lord; to Him belongs sovereignty. As for those upon whom you call apart from Him, they do not possess so much as the husk of a date stone
If you call upon them, they hear not your call, and even if they heard, they would not respond to you; and on the Day of Resurrection they will disown your ascribing partners unto God. And none informs you like one who is Aware
O mankind! You are needful of God; and He is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised
If He will, He could remove you and bring a new creation
That is no great matter for God
And none shall bear the burden of another. And though one burdened heavily calls for his burden to be borne, naught of it will be borne, even if it be kin. Thou warnest only those who fear their Lord unseen and perform the prayer. And whosoever purifies himself purifies himself only for his own soul. And unto God is the journey’s end
Not equal are the blind and the seeing
nor the darkness and the light
nor the shade and the scorching heat
Not equal are the living and the dead. Truly God causes whomsoever He will to hear, but thou canst not cause those in graves to hear
Thou art naught but a warner
Truly We have sent thee with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner. And there has been no community but that a warner has passed among them
If they deny thee, those before them also denied: their messengers brought them clear proofs, scriptures, and the luminous Book
Then I seized those who disbelieved. How, then, was the change I wrought
Hast thou not considered that God sends down water from the sky, wherewith We bring forth fruits of diverse colors? And in the mountains are streaks of white and red, of diverse hues, and others pitch-black
And of mankind, beasts, and cattle there are, likewise, those of diverse colors. [Yet] only those among His servants who know fear God. Truly God is Mighty, Forgiving
Truly those who recite the Book of God, perform the prayer, and spend from that which We have provided them secretly and openly hope for a commerce that will never perish
that He may pay them their rewards in full and increase them from His Bounty. Truly He is Forgiving, Thankful
And that which We have revealed unto thee from the Book is the truth, confirming what came before it. Verily God is of His servants Aware, Seeing
Then We bequeathed the Book to those of Our servants whom We had chosen. Among them are those who wrong themselves, those who take a middle course, and those who are foremost in good deeds, by God’s Leave. That is the great bounty
Gardens of Eden which they will enter, adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments therein will be of silk
And they will say, “Praise be to God, Who has dispelled grief from us. Truly our Lord is Forgiving, Thankful
Who, of His Bounty, has caused us to dwell in the Abode of Everlasting Life, wherein no weariness shall touch us, nor fatigue befall us.”
As for those who disbelieve, theirs shall be the Fire of Hell. They will neither be done away with so as to die; nor will aught of its punishment be lightened for them. Thus do We requite every disbeliever
They will cry out therein, “Our Lord! Remove us, that we may work righteousness other than that which we used to do.” “Did We not give you long life, enough for whosoever would reflect to reflect therein? And the warner came unto you, so taste [the punishment]! The wrongdoers shall have no helpers.”
Truly God knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth. Truly He knows what lies within breasts
He it is Who appointed you vicegerents upon the earth. So whosoever disbelieves, his disbelief is to his detriment. The disbelief of the disbelievers increases them with their Lord in naught but odium. And the disbelief of the disbelievers increases them in naught but loss
Say, “Have you considered your partners upon whom you call apart from God? Show me what they have created of the earth. Do they have a share in the heavens, or did We give them a book, such that they stand upon a clear proof from it?” Nay, the wrongdoers promise one another naught but delusion
Truly God maintains the heavens and the earth, lest they fall apart. And were they to fall apart, none would maintain them after Him. Truly He is Clement, Forgiving
And they swore by God their most solemn oaths that, were a warner to come unto them, they would be more rightly guided than any of the communities. Yet when a warner came unto them, it increased them in naught but aversion
waxing arrogant upon the earth and plotting evil; yet evil plotting besets none but its authors. So do they await aught but the wont of those of old? Thou shalt find no alteration in the wont of God, and thou shalt find no change in the wont of God
Have they not journeyed upon the earth and observed how those before them fared in the end, though they were greater than them in strength? Naught in the heavens or upon the earth can thwart God. Truly He is Knowing, Powerful
Were God to take mankind to task for that which they have earned, He would not leave a single creature upon the surface of the earth. But He grants them reprieve till a term appointed. And when their term comes, truly God sees His servants
Ya. Sin
By the Wise Quran
truly thou art among the message bearers
upon a straight path
a revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful
that thou mayest warn a people whose fathers were not warned; s0 they were heedless
The Word has indeed come due for most of them, for they do not believe
Truly We have put shackles upon their necks, and they are up to their chins, so that they are forced up
And We placed a barrier before them and a barrier behind them and veiled them; so they see not
It is the same for them whether thou warnest them or warnest them not; they do not believe
Thou only warnest whomsoever follows the Reminder and fears the Compassionate unseen. So give such a one glad tidings of forgiveness and a generous reward
Truly We give life to the dead and record that which they have sent forth and that which they have left behind. And We have counted all things in a clear registry
And set forth for them as a parable the people of the town, when the message bearers came unto it
When We sent two unto them, they denied them. So We strengthened them with a third, and they said, “Verily, we have been sent unto you!”
They said, “You are but human beings like us, and the Compassionate has not sent down anything. You are but lying.”
They said, “Our Lord knows. Verily we have indeed been sent unto you
And naught is incumbent upon us save the clear proclamation.”
They said, “Truly we augur ill of you. If you cease not, we shall certainly stone you, and a painful punishment will certainly befall you from us.”
They said, “Your auguring ill is upon yourselves though you have been reminded? Nay, you are a prodigal people!”
And from the outskirts of the city, a man came running. He said, “O my people! Follow the message bearers
Follow those who ask not of you any reward and who are guided
Why should I not worship Him who originated me, and unto Whom you will be returned
Shall I take gods apart from Him? If the Compassionate desired harm for me, their intercession would avail me naught, nor would they save me
Truly would I then be in manifest error
Truly I believe in your Lord, so listen to me.”
It was said unto him, “Enter the Garden!” He said, “Would that my people knew
how my Lord forgave me and placed me among the honored.”
And after him We did not send down a host from Heaven against his people; nor would We send down
It was but a single cry. Then, behold, they were extinguished
Alas for the servants! Never did a messenger come unto them, but that they mocked him
Have they not considered how many generations before them We destroyed, such that they return not unto them
Each of them shall be a group arraigned before Us
A sign unto them is the dead earth: We revive it and bring forth grain therefrom, that they may eat thereof
And We place gardens of date palms and grapevines therein and make springs flow forth
that they may eat of its fruit and of that which their hands have worked. Will they not then give thanks
Glory be unto Him, Who has created the pairs, all of them, from what the earth makes grow, and from themselves, and from what they know not
And a sign unto them is the night: We strip the day therefrom, and behold, they are in darkness
And the sun runs to a dwelling place of its own. That is the decree of the Mighty, the Knowing
And for the moon, We have decreed mansions, till it returns like an old palm stalk
It befits not the sun to overtake the moon, nor the night to outstrip the day. Each glides in an orbit
And a sign unto them is that We carried their progeny in the full-laden Ark
And We created for them the like thereof upon which they ride
And if We will, We drown them, such that they would have none to call upon and would not be saved
save as a mercy from Us and an enjoyment for a while
And when it is said unto them, “Be mindful of that which is before you and of that which is behind you, that haply you may receive mercy.”
Never did a sign from among the signs of their Lord come unto them but that they turned away from it
And when it is said unto them, “Spend of that wherewith God has provided you,” those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “Are we to feed one whom, if God willed, He would feed him? You are in naught but manifest error.”
And they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
They await naught but a single cry that will seize them while they dispute among themselves
and then they can make no bequest, nor return to their people
And the trumpet will be blown. Then, behold, they will rush forth from their graves unto their Lord
They will say, “Oh, woe unto us! Who has raised us from our place of sleep?” “This is that which the Compassionate did promise; and the message bearers spoke true.”
There shall be but a single cry. Then, behold, they will all be arraigned before Us
This day no soul will be wronged in any way, and you will not be recompensed, save for that which you used to do
Truly the inhabitants of the Garden on that Day will be busy rejoicing
they and their spouses reclining upon couches in the shade
Therein they have fruit and whatsoever they call for
“Peace!” a word from a Lord most Merciful
Stand apart this Day, O guilty ones
Did I not enjoin upon you
Children of Adam, that you not worship Satan—truly he is a manifest enemy unto you— a and that you worship Me? This is a straight path
For indeed he has led many among you astray. Did you not understand
This is the Hell that you were promised
Burn therein today for having disbelieved
On that Day We shall seal their mouths. Their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness to that which they used to earn
And had We willed, We would have blotted out their eyes. Then they would race to the path; yet how would they see
And had We willed, We would have transformed them in their places. Then they could neither advance nor go back
And whomsoever We give long life, We cause him to regress in creation. Do they not understand
And We have not taught him poetry; nor would it befit him. It is but a reminder and a clear Quran
to warn whomsoever is alive, and so that the Word may come due for the disbelievers
Have they not considered that among that which Our Hands have wrought We created cattle for them, and that they are their masters
and that We have subdued these for them, such that some are a mount for them and of some they eat
And they have benefits and drinks therein. Will they not then give thanks
Yet they have taken gods other than God, that perhaps they might be helped
They cannot help them, though they be a host made ready for them
So let not their speech grieve thee. Truly We know what they hide and what they disclose
Has not man seen that We created him from a drop, and behold, he is a manifest adversary
And he has set forth for Us a parable and forgotten his own creation, saying, “Who revives these bones, decayed as they are?”
Say, “He will revive them Who brought them forth the first time, and He knows every creation
Who made for you fire from the green tree, and, behold, you kindle from it.”
Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like thereof
Yea, indeed, He is the knowing Creator. His Command when He desires a thing is only to say to it, “Be!” and it is
So glory be to Him in Whose Hand lies the dominion of all things, and unto Whom you shall be returned
By those ranged in ranks
and the drivers driving
and the reciters of a reminder
truly your God is One
Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, and Lord of the easts
Truly We adorned the lowest heaven with an ornament, the stars
and a guard against every defiant satan
They listen not to the Highest Assembly, for they are repelled from every side—
cast out, and theirs shall be a punishment everlasting—
save one who snatches a fragment as a piercing flame pursues him
So ask them, are they more difficult to create, or those whom We created? Truly We created them from a viscous clay
Indeed, but thou dost marvel, while they scoff
And when they are reminded, they do not remember
And when they see a sign, they seek to scoff
and say, “This is naught but manifest sorcery
What! When we have died and are dust and bones are we to be resurrected
and our fathers of old?”
Say, “Yes, and debased will you be.”
Then there will be but a single cry. And they will then behold
They will say, “Oh, woe unto us! This is the Day of Judgment.”
This is the Day of Division that you used to deny
Gather those who did wrong together with their spouses and that which they used to worship
apart from God, and guide them unto the path of Hellfire
And stop them. Surely they are to be questioned
“What ails you that you do not help one another?”
Nay, but this Day they will surrender
And they will turn to one another, questioning each other
saying, “Truly you used to come to us from the right.”
They reply, “Nay, but you were not believers
And we had no authority over you. Rather, you were a rebellious people
So the Word of our Lord has come due for us; truly we shall taste [it]
We caused you to err for truly we were errant.”
Verily that Day they will share in the punishment
Thus do We deal with the guilty
Indeed, when it was said unto them, “There is no god but God,” they waxed arrogant
saying, “Are we to forsake our gods for a poet possessed?”
Nay! He has come with the truth and confirmed the messengers
Truly you shall taste the painful punishment
And you shall not be requited, save for that which you used to do
Not so for God’s sincere servants
For them there shall be a known provision
fruits. And they will be honored
in Gardens of bliss
upon couches, facing one another
with a cup from a gushing spring brought round
white, delicious to those who drink thereof
No headiness lies therein; nor are they intoxicated by it
And theirs shall be maidens of modest gaze with lustrous eyes
as if they were hidden eggs
And they will turn to one another, questioning each other
One among them will say, “I had a companion
who would say, ‘Are you among those who confirm
What! When we have died and are dust and bones, are we to be requited?’”
He will say, “Will you look?”
So he will look and see him in the midst of Hellfire
He will say, “By God! You did well-nigh destroy me
and if not for the blessing of my Lord, I would have been among the arraigned
Are we then not to die
but our first death, and are we not to be punished
This indeed is the great triumph!”
For the like of this, then, let the laborers labor
Is this a better welcome or the tree of Zaqqum
Truly We have made it a trial for the wrongdoers
Truly it is a tree that emerges in the depths of Hellfire
Its spathes are as the heads of satans
They will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith
Then on top of it they will have a brew of a boiling liquid
Then their return shall be unto Hellfire
Truly they found their fathers astray
yet they hasten in their footsteps
And before them most of those of old had indeed gone astray
though We had indeed sent warners among them
So behold how those who were warned fared in the end
Not so for God’s sincere servants
And indeed Noah cried out to Us. How excellent are those who respond
We saved him and his people from great distress
and We made his progeny endure
and We left [a blessing] upon him among later generations
“Peace be upon Noah throughout the worlds.”
Thus do We recompense the virtuous
Truly he was among Our believing servants
Then We drowned the others
And surely among his party was Abraham
when he came unto his Lord with a sound heart
when he said unto his father and his people, “What do you worship
Is it a perversion, gods apart from God, that you desire
What, then, think you of the Lord of the worlds?”
Then he cast a glance at the stars
and said, “Truly I am sick.”
But they turned their backs on him
Then he went quietly to their gods and said, “Will you not eat
What ails you that you speak not?”
Then he turned upon them, striking with his right hand
Then they came to him rushing
He said, “Do you worship that which you carve
while God created you and that which you make?”
They said, “Erect a building for him and cast him into the fire.”
They desired to scheme against him, so We made them the lowest
And he said, “Truly I am going unto my Lord. He will guide me
My Lord, give unto me from among the righteous.”
So We gave him glad tidings of a gentle son
When he had become old enough to partake of his father’s endeavors, Abraham said, “O my son! I see while dreaming that I am to sacrifice you. So consider, what do you see?” He replied, “O my father! Do as you are commanded. You will find me, God willing, among those who are patient.”
But when they had submitted and Abraham had laid him upon his forehead
We called unto him, “O Abraham
Thou hast been true to the vision.” Thus indeed do We recompense the virtuous
Truly this was the manifest trial
Then We ransomed him with a great sacrifice
And We left [a blessing] upon him among later generations
“Peace be upon Abraham.”
Thus do We recompense the virtuous
Truly he was among Our believing servants
And We gave him glad tidings of Isaac, a prophet from among the righteous
And We blessed him and Isaac. And among their progeny are the virtuous and those who clearly wrong themselves
And We were gracious unto Moses and Aaron
We saved them and their people from great distress
and helped them, so that they were the victors
And We gave the two of them the Book that makes clear
and guided the two of them upon the straight path
And We left [a blessing] upon them among later generations
“Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.”
Thus indeed do We recompense the virtuous
Truly they were among Our believing servants
And truly Elias was among the message bearers
when he said to his people, “Will you not reverence
Do you call upon Baal and leave the most beautiful of creators
God is your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old.”
But they denied him; so they are surely to be arraigned
Not so for God’s sincere servants
And We left [a blessing] upon him among later generations
“Peace be upon Elias.”
Thus indeed do We recompense the virtuous
Truly he was among Our believing servants
And truly Lot was among the message bearers
Behold! We saved him and his family all together
save for an old woman who was among those who lagged behind
Then We destroyed the others
And truly you pass by them in the morning
and at night. Do you not understand
And truly Jonah was among the message bearers
Behold! He fled to the full-laden ship
and then cast lots and was among those rejected
Then the fish swallowed him, for he was blameworthy
And had he not been among those who glorify
he would have tarried in its belly till the Day they are resurrected
So We cast him, sick, upon the barren shore
And We caused a gourd tree to grow over him
Then We sent him unto a hundred thousand or more
And they believed; so We granted them enjoyment for a while
So ask them, does your Lord have daughters while they have sons
Or did We create the angels female, while they were witnesses
Behold! It is of their own perversion that they say
“God has begotten,” while truly they are liars
Has He chosen daughters over sons
What ails you? How do you judge
Do you not reflect
Or have you a manifest authority
Bring your Book, then, if you are truthful
They have made kinship between Him and the jinn—yet the jinn know that they will surely be arraigned
Glory be to God above that which they ascribe
Not so for God’s sincere servants
For truly neither you nor that which you worship
can tempt any against Him
save he who is to burn in Hellfire
There is none among us, but that he has a known station
And truly we are those who are ranged [in ranks]
Truly we are those who glorify
Indeed, they used to say
“If only we had a reminder from those of old
then we would indeed be God’s sincere servants.”
But they disbelieved in it. So soon they will know
for indeed Our Word has already gone forth unto Our message bearers
that they will surely be helped
and that Our host will surely be victorious
So turn away from them for a time
and observe them; for they will soon observe
Do they seek to hasten Our Punishment
When it alights in their very midst, evil will be the morning of those who were warned
So turn away from them for a time
and observe; for they will soon observe
Glory be to thy Lord, the Lord of Might, above that which they ascribe
Peace be upon the message bearers
And praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
ad. By the Quran possessed of remembrance
Nay, but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and schism
How many a generation before them have We destroyed? And they called out when the time for escape had passed
Now they marvel that a warner from among themselves has come unto them, and the disbelievers say, “This is a lying sorcerer
Has he made the gods one God? Truly this is an astounding thing!”
And the notables among them set out, [saying], “Go! Be steadfast to your gods. Truly this is a thing desired
We did not hear of this in the creed of latter days. This is naught but an invention
Has the Reminder been sent down upon him among all of us?” Nay, but they are in doubt regarding My Reminder! Nay, they have not yet tasted My Punishment
Or have they the treasuries of thy Lord’s Mercy, the Mighty, the Bestower
Or have they sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them? Then let them ascend by some means
a host among the parties yonder routed
The people of Noah denied before them, as did ?Ad and Pharaoh of the tent poles
Thamud, the people of Lot, and the inhabitants of the thicket; they are the parties
Each of them did naught but deny the messengers; so My Retribution came due
They await naught but a single cry for which there is no delay
And they say, “Our Lord, hasten our share unto us before the Day of Reckoning.”
Bear patiently that which they say, and remember Our servant David, possessed of might; truly he turned oft [unto God]
Truly We compelled the mountains to join him in glorifying at eventide and at the break of day
And the birds gathered, each turning oft unto Him
And We strengthened his sovereignty and gave him wisdom and decisive speech
Has the report of the dispute come unto thee, when they scaled the sanctuary
When they entered upon David, he was frightened of them. They said, “Fear not! We are two disputants: one of us has transgressed against the other; so judge between us with truth. Be not unjust, and guide us unto the right path
Behold, this, my brother, has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe. Yet he has said, ‘Place her under my care,’ and has overpowered me in speech.”
He said, “He has indeed wronged you in asking that your ewe be added to his ewes. Truly many associates transgress against one another, save those who believe and perform righteous deeds. Yet how few are they!” And David understood that We had tried him; so he sought forgiveness from his Lord, fell down kneeling, and repented
Thus did We forgive him that. Truly nearness unto Us shall be his, and a beautiful return
O David! Truly We have appointed thee as a vicegerent upon the earth; so judge among the people with truth and follow not caprice, lest it lead thee astray from the way of God. Truly those who stray from the way of God, theirs shall be a severe punishment for having forgotten the Day of Reckoning
And We did not create Heaven and earth and whatsoever is between them in vain; that is the conjecture of those who disbelieve. So woe unto those who disbelieve in the Fire
Or shall We make those who believe and perform righteous deeds like those who work corruption upon the earth? Or shall We make the reverent like the profligate
A blessed Book that We have sent down upon thee, that they may contemplate His signs and that those possessed of intellect may reflect
And We bestowed Solomon upon David; how excellent a servant! Truly he turned oft [unto God]
When at eventide noble steeds swift of foot were displayed before him
he said, “I have loved the love of good things over the remembrance of my Lord, until [the sun] was taken behind the veil
Bring them back unto me!” Then he began to stroke their legs and necks
And We did indeed try Solomon, and We cast a corpse upon his throne. He then repented
saying, “My Lord, forgive me and bestow a kingdom upon me such as shall not befit anyone after me. Truly Thou art the Bestower.”
So We made the wind subservient unto him, coursing gently by his command whither he wished
as well as the satans, every builder and diver
and others, bound together in fetters
“This is Our Gift; so bestow graciously or withhold without reckoning.”
Truly nearness unto Us shall be his, and a beautiful return
And remember Our servant Job, when he called upon his Lord, “Truly Satan has afflicted me with weariness and punishment.”
“Strike with thy foot; this is cool water wherewith to wash and to drink.”
And We bestowed upon him his family and their like along with them as a mercy from Us and a reminder for possessors of intellect
And, “Take with thy hand a bundle of rushes and strike therewith, and break not thine oath.” Truly We found him to be steadfast. What an excellent servant! Truly he turned oft [unto God]
And remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, possessed of strength and sight
Truly We purified them with that which is pure—remembrance of the Abode
And truly in Our Sight they are among the chosen, the elect
And remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhu’l-Kifl; each is among the excellent
This is a reminder. And for the reverent there will surely be a beautiful return
Gardens of Eden, the gates whereof are open unto them
reclining therein, they call therein for abundant fruit and drink
And theirs shall be maidens of modest gaze, of like age
This is that which you are promised for the Day of Reckoning
This indeed is Our provision which shall never be spent
This it shall be! Yet for the rebellious there will surely be a most evil return
Hell, wherein they will burn. What an evil resting place
This it shall be! So let them taste it, a boiling liquid and a cold, murky fluid
coupled with other [punishments] similar in kind
This troop rushing in with you—no greeting for them! They will surely burn in the Fire
They will say, “Nay, but no greeting for you! You have sent it forth for us. What an evil dwelling place!”
They will say, “O Lord! Whosoever has sent this forth for us, increase him twofold in punishment in the Fire.”
And they will say, “How is that we do not see men here whom we had counted among the evil
Did we take them in mockery? Or have our eyes swerved away from them?”
Surely that is true: the disputing of the people of the Fire
Say, “I am only a warner, and there is no god but God, the One, the Paramount
Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, the Mighty, the Forgiving.”
Say, “It is a great tiding
from which you turn away
I have no knowledge of the Highest Assembly, when they dispute
Naught is revealed unto me but that I am only a clear warner.”
[Remember] when thy Lord said unto the angels, “Behold! I am creating a human being from clay
When I have proportioned him and breathed into him of My Spirit, fall down before him prostrating.”
Then the angels prostrated, all of them together
Not so Iblis. He waxed arrogant, and was among the disbelievers
[God] said, “O Iblis! What has prevented thee from prostrating unto that which I created with My two Hands? Dost thou wax arrogant, or art thou among the exalted?”
He said, “I am better than him. Thou hast created me from fire, while Thou hast created him from clay.”
He said, “Go forth from it! Surely thou art outcast
And surely My Curse shall be upon thee till the Day of Judgment.”
He said, “My Lord! Grant me respite till the Day they are resurrected.”
He said, “Then verily thou art among those granted respite
till the Day of the Moment Known.”
He said, “Then, by Thy Might, I shall cause them to err all together
save Thy sincere servants among them.”
He said, “This is the truth, and the truth I speak
‘I shall surely fill Hell with thee and with such of them as follow thee, all together.’”
Say, “I ask not of you any reward for it, nor am I among the pretenders
It is naught but a reminder for the worlds
and you will certainly know its tiding after a time.”
The revelation of the Book from God, the Mighty, the Wise
Indeed, We have sent down unto thee the Book in truth; so worship God, devoting religion entirely to Him
Behold! Unto God belongs the pure religion, and those who take protectors apart from Him [say], “We do not worship them, save to bring us nigh in nearness unto God.” Truly God will judge between them regarding that wherein they differ. Truly God does not guide one who is a disbelieving liar
Had God wanted to take a child, He would have chosen whatsoever He willed from that which He created. Glory be to Him; He is the One, the Paramount
He created the heavens and the earth in truth. He rolls the night up into the day and rolls the day up into the night, and He made the sun and the moon subservient, each running for a term appointed. Is He not the Mighty, the Forgiving
He created you from a single soul, then made from it its mate, and sent down for you of cattle eight pairs. He creates you in your mothers’ wombs, creation after creation, in threefold darkness. That is God, your Lord; to Him belongs sovereignty. There is no god but He. How, then, are you turned away
If you do not believe, surely God is beyond need of you. He is not pleased with disbelief for His servants. And if you are grateful, He is pleased therewith for you; and none shall bear the burden of another. Then unto your Lord is your return, and He shall inform you of that which you used to do. Truly He knows what lies within breasts
And when harm befalls man, he calls upon his Lord, turning unto Him. Then when He bestows a blessing from Himself upon him, he forgets the One upon whom he called before and sets up equals unto God to lead astray from His path. Say, “Enjoy your disbelief a little; truly you shall be among the inhabitants of the Fire.”
What of one who is devoutly obedient during the watches of the night, prostrating and standing [in prayer], wary of the Hereafter and hoping for the Mercy of his Lord? Say, “Are those who know and those who do not know equal? Only possessors of intellect reflect.”
Say, “O My servants who believe, reverence your Lord. For those who do good in this world there is good; and God’s earth is vast.” Surely those who are patient shall be paid their reward in full without reckoning
Say, “Truly I have been commanded to worship God, devoting religion entirely to Him
And I have been commanded to be the first of those who submit.”
Say, “Truly I fear, should I disobey my Lord, the punishment of a tremendous day.”
Say, “God do I worship, devoting my religion entirely to Him
So worship whatsoever you will apart from Him.” Say, “Truly the losers are those who lose their souls and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Yea! That is the manifest loss.”
Above them they shall have canopies of fire and below them canopies; with that does God strike fear into His servants. My servants! Reverence Me
And as for those who shun false deities and worshipping them, and turn unto God, unto them glad tidings. So give glad tidings to My servants
who listen to the Word, then follow what is most beautiful of it. It is they whom God has guided; it is they who are the possessors of intellect
What of one for whom the Word of punishment comes due? Wilt thou save one who is in the Fire
But as for those who reverence their Lord, they will have lofty abodes above which are lofty abodes, and rivers running below. That is God’s Promise; God will not fail the tryst
Hast thou not considered that God sends down water from the sky, conducts it as springs in the earth, then brings forth crops of diverse colors? Then they wither and thou seest them yellowing. Then He turns them to chaff. Truly in that is a reminder for possessors of intellect
What of one whose breast God has expanded for submission, such that he follows a light from his Lord? Woe unto those whose hearts are hardened to the remembrance of God! They are in manifest error
God has sent down the most beautiful discourse, a Book consimilar, paired, whereat quivers the skin of those who fear their Lord. Then their skin and their hearts soften unto the remembrance of God. That is God’s Guidance, wherewith He guides whomsoever He will; and whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he
What of one who guards with his face against the evil punishment on the Day of Resurrection? And it shall be said unto the wrongdoers, “Taste that which you used to earn.”
Those before them denied, and the punishment came upon them whence they were not aware
Thus God had them taste disgrace in the life of this world; yet the punishment of the Hereafter is surely greater, if they but knew
And indeed We have set forth for mankind in this Quran every kind of parable, that haply they may remember
an Arabic Quran, bearing no crookedness, that haply they may be reverent
God sets forth a parable: a man in whom quarreling partners share, and a man belonging to one man: are the two equal in likeness? Praise be to God! Nay, but most of them know not
Surely thou wilt die, and surely they will die
Then on the Day of Resurrection, before thy Lord will you dispute
So who does greater wrong than one who lies against God and denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not within Hell an abode for the disbelievers
And whosoever comes with the truth and confirms it, it is they who are reverent
With their Lord they shall have whatsoever they will—that is the recompense of the virtuous—
that God may absolve them of the worst of that which they have done and render unto them their reward for the best of that which they used to do
Does God not suffice His servant? Yet they would frighten thee with those apart from Him; and whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he
And whomsoever God guides, none shall lead him astray. Is not God Mighty, Possessor of Vengeance
And wert thou to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They would surely say, “God.” Say, “Then have you considered those upon whom you call, apart from God? If God desires some harm for me, could they remove His Harm, or if He desires some mercy, could they withhold His Mercy?” Say, “God suffices me; in Him trust those who trust.”
Say, “O my people! Act according to your position; I, too, am acting. Soon you shall know
upon whom there comes a punishment that disgraces him and upon whom there falls a punishment enduring.”
Truly We have sent down unto thee the Book for mankind in truth. Whosoever is rightly guided, it is for the sake of his own soul. And whosoever goes astray only goes astray to the detriment thereof. And thou art not a guardian over them
God takes souls at the moment of their death, and those who die not, during their sleep. He withholds those for whom He has decreed death, and sends forth the others till a term appointed. Truly in that are signs for a people who reflect
Or do they take intercessors apart from God? Say, “Even though they have not any power and do not understand?”
Say, “Unto God belongs intercession altogether. To Him belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. Then unto Him shall you be returned.”
And when God is mentioned alone, the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter recoil. But when those apart from Him are mentioned, behold, they rejoice
Say, “O God! Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the Unseen and the seen, Thou judgest between Thy servants regarding that wherein they differ.”
Were those who work evil to possess all that is on the earth and the like of it besides, they would seek to ransom themselves with it from the terrible punishment on the Day of Resurrection. And there will appear unto them from God that which they had not reckoned
The evils of that which they have earned will appear unto them, and that which they used to mock will beset them
And when harm befalls man, he calls upon Us. Then, when We confer upon him a blessing from Us, he says, “I was only given it because of knowledge.” Nay, it is a trial, but most of them know not
Those before them did say the same; yet that which they used to earn availed them not
So the evils of that which they earned befell them. And as for those who do wrong among these, the evils of that which they have earned will befall them, and they cannot thwart [it]
Do they not know that God outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will? Truly in that are signs for a people who believe
Say, “O My servants who have been prodigal to the detriment of their own souls! Despair not of God’s Mercy. Truly God forgives all sins. Truly He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
Turn unto your Lord and submit to Him before the punishment comes upon you, whereupon you will not be helped
And follow the most beautiful of that which has been sent down unto you from your Lord, before the punishment comes suddenly upon you while you are unaware,”
lest any soul should say, “Alas for me, for what I neglected of my duty to God! Indeed, I was among the scoffers.”
Or lest it say, “If only God had guided me, I would have been among the reverent.”
Or lest it say, when it sees the punishment, “If only I had another chance, I would be among the virtuous.”
Nay, My signs did indeed come unto you; yet you denied them, waxed arrogant, and were among the disbelievers
And on the Day of Resurrection thou wilt see those who lied against God having blackened faces. Is there not in Hell an abode for the arrogant
And God saves those who are reverent by their triumph; evil will not befall them; nor will they grieve
God is the Creator of all things, and He is Guardian over all things
Unto Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. And those who disbelieve in the signs of God, it is they who are the losers
Say, “Do you bid me to worship other than God, O ignorant ones?”
Surely it has been revealed unto thee and unto those before thee that if thou dost ascribe partners [unto God], thy work will surely come to naught and thou shalt be among the losers
Rather, worship God and be among the thankful
They did not measure God with His true measure. The whole earth shall be but a handful to Him on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be enfolded in His right Hand. Glory be to Him, exalted is He above the partners they ascribe
And the trumpet will be blown, whereupon whosoever is in the heavens and on the earth will swoon, save those whom God wills. Then it will be blown again, and, behold, they will be standing, beholding
The earth will shine with the Light of its Lord, the Book will be set down, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forth. Judgment will be made between them in truth, and they shall not be wronged
Every soul will be paid in full for that which it has done, and He knows best what they do
And those who disbelieve will be driven unto Hell in throngs, till when they reach it, its gates will be opened and its keepers will say unto them, “Did not messengers from among you come to you, reciting unto you the signs of your Lord and warning you of the meeting with this your Day?” They will say, “Yea, indeed!” But the Word of punishment has come due for the disbelievers
It will be said, “Enter the gates of Hell, to abide therein.” How evil is the abode of the arrogant
And those who reverence their Lord will be driven to the Garden in throngs, till when they reach it, its gates will be opened and its keepers will say unto them, “Peace be upon you; you have done well; so enter it, to abide [therein].”
They will say, “Praise be to God, Who was faithful to us in His Promise, and has caused us to inherit the land, that we may settle in the Garden wheresoever we will.” How excellent is the reward of the workers
And thou shalt see the angels encircling all around the Throne, hymning the praise of their Lord. Judgment shall be made between them in truth, and it will be said, “Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds.”
Mim
The revelation of the Book from God, the Mighty, the Knower
Forgiver of sins, Accepter of Repentance, severe in retribution, Possessed of Bounty. There is no god but He; unto Him is the journey’s end
None but those who disbelieve dispute concerning the signs of God. So let it not delude thee that they are free to come and go in the land
The people of Noah denied before them, as did the parties after them. And every community contrived against its messenger, to take him. They disputed by means of falsehood in order to refute the truth thereby; so I seized them. How, then, was My Retribution
Likewise did the Word of thy Lord come due for those who disbelieve, that they are the inhabitants of the Fire
Those who bear the Throne and those who dwell nigh unto it hymn the praise of their Lord and believe in Him and seek forgiveness for those who believe: “Our Lord, Thou dost encompass all things in Mercy and Knowledge. Forgive those who repent and follow Thy way, and shield them from the punishment of Hellfire
Our Lord, make them enter Gardens of Eden that Thou hast promised them and those among their fathers, their spouses, and their progeny who were righteous. Truly Thou art the Mighty, the Wise
And protect them from evil deeds. Whosoever Thou shieldest from evil deeds on that Day, upon him hast Thou had mercy. And that indeed is the great triumph.”
Truly those who disbelieve shall be addressed: “God’s odium is greater than your odium for yourselves when you were called to belief, but then disbelieved.”
They will say, “Our Lord, Thou hast caused us to die twice over, and given us life twice over; so we admit our sins. Is there any way out?”
That is because when God was invoked as One, you disbelieved, and when partners were ascribed unto Him, you believed. Judgment lies with God, the Exalted, the Great
He it is Who shows you His signs and sends down provision for you from Heaven. And none reflect, save those who turn in repentance
So call upon God, devoting religion entirely to Him, though the disbelievers be averse
The Raiser of degrees, the Possessor of the Throne, He casts the Spirit from His Command upon whomsoever He will among His servants to warn of the Day of the Meeting
the Day when they come forth with naught concerning them hidden from God. Whose is the sovereignty this Day? It is God’s, the One, the Paramount
On that Day every soul shall be recompensed for that which it has earned. No wrong will be done that Day. Truly God is swift in reckoning
So warn them of the Day of the Imminent Event, when hearts will be in throats, choking in agony. The wrongdoers shall have no loyal friend, nor any intercessor to be obeyed
He knows the treachery of eyes and that which breasts conceal
God decrees with truth, and those upon whom they call apart from Him do not decree by means of aught. Truly God is the Hearer, the Seer
Have they not journeyed upon the earth and observed how those before them fared in the end? They were greater than them in strength and left firmer traces upon the earth; yet God seized them for their sins, and they had none to shield them from God
That is because their messengers brought them clear proofs, yet they disbelieved; so God seized them. Truly He is Strong, severe in retribution
And indeed We sent Moses with Our signs and a manifest authority
unto Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah. And they said, “A lying sorcerer.”
So when he came unto them with the truth from Us, they said, “Slay the sons of those who believe with him and spare their women.” The scheming of the disbelievers is naught but astray
And Pharaoh said, “Leave me to kill Moses, and let him call upon his Lord. Truly I fear that he will alter your religion or that he will cause corruption to appear in the land.”
And Moses said, “Truly I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord from everyone who is arrogant and believes not in the Day of Reckoning.”
And a believing man from the House of Pharaoh who was concealing his belief said, “Will you kill a man for saying, ‘My Lord is God,’ though he has brought you clear proofs from your Lord? If he is a liar, then his lying is to his own detriment. But if he is truthful, some of that which he promises you will befall you. Truly God guides not one who is a prodigal liar
O my people! Sovereignty is yours this day, while you prevail over the land. But who will help us against God’s Might should it come upon us?” Pharaoh said, “I show you naught but what I see, and I guide you unto naught but the way of rectitude.”
And he who believed said, “O my people! Truly I fear for you [a day] like the day of the parties [of old]
like the plight of the people of Noah, ?Ad, and Thamud, and those after them. Yet God does not desire wrong for His servants
O my people! Truly I fear for you the Day of Mutual Calling
the Day you will turn away to flee, having none to protect you from God. And whomsoever God leads astray, no guide has he
And Joseph brought you clear proofs before; yet still you were in doubt regarding that which he brought unto you, so much so that when he perished, you said, ‘God will not send a messenger after him.’ Thus does God lead astray whosoever is a prodigal doubter
those who dispute concerning God’s signs without any authority having come to them, grievously odious is it in the sight of God and in the sight of those who believe. Thus does God put a seal upon the heart of every arrogant tyrant.”
And Pharaoh said, “O Haman! Build for me a tower, that perhaps I may attain the means—
the means to reach the heavens—that I may look upon the God of Moses. Truly I deem him a liar.” Thus was the evil of his conduct made to seem fair unto Pharaoh, and he was turned from the way. Pharaoh’s scheming led to naught but ruin
And he who believed said, “O my people! Follow me; I shall guide you unto the way of rectitude
O my people! The life of this world is but fleeting enjoyment, whereas the Hereafter is truly the Abode of Permanence
Whosoever commits an evil deed will not be requited, save with the like thereof; but whosoever, whether male or female, performs a righteous deed and is a believer shall enter the Garden wherein they will be provided for without reckoning. A
my people! How is it that I call you unto salvation while you call me unto the Fire
You call upon me to disbelieve in God and to ascribe as a partner unto Him that whereof I have no knowledge, whereas I call you unto the Mighty, the Forgiving
There is no doubt that that unto which you call me has no call in this world or in the Hereafter, and that our return will be unto God, and that the prodigal are the inhabitants of the Fire
You will soon remember what I have said to you. I entrust my affair to God. Truly God sees His servants.”
So God shielded him from the evils of that which they had plotted, while a terrible punishment beset the House of Pharaoh—
the Fire, to which they are exposed morning and evening. And on the Day when the Hour is come, [it will be said], “Cause the House of Pharaoh to enter the punishment most severe!”
And when they are arguing with one another in the Fire, the weak will say to those who waxed arrogant, “Truly we were your followers; so can you avail us against any portion of the Fire?”
Those who waxed arrogant will say, “Truly we are all in it. God has indeed judged between His servants.”
And those who are in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, “Call upon your Lord to relieve us from a day of the punishment.”
They will reply, “Did not your messengers bring you clear proofs?” They will say, “Yea, indeed.” They will say, “Then make supplications!” But the supplication of the disbelievers is naught but astray
Truly We shall help Our messengers and those who believe during the life of this world and on the Day when the witnesses arise
the Day when the excuses of the wrongdoers will not benefit them, and theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode
And indeed We gave Moses guidance, and We bequeathed the Book unto the Children of Israel
as a guidance, and as a reminder for possessors of intellect
So be patient. Surely God’s Promise is true. And ask forgiveness for thy sin, and hymn the praise of thy Lord at eventide and at dawn
Truly those who dispute concerning the signs of God without any authority having come to them, there is naught in their breasts but a sense of greatness that they will never attain. So seek refuge in God. Truly He is the Hearer, the Seer
Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind. But most of mankind know not
And the blind and the seer are not equal; nor are those who believe and perform righteous deeds and the evildoer. Little do you reflect
Surely the Hour is coming; in it there is no doubt. But most of mankind believe not
And your Lord has said, “Call upon Me, and I shall respond to you. Truly those who are too arrogant to worship Me shall enter Hell debased.”
God it is Who made the night for you, that you might rest therein, and the day by which to see. Truly God is Possessed of Bounty for mankind, but most of mankind does not give thanks
That is God, your Lord, Creator of all things; there is no god but He. How, then, are you perverted
In this way were those who used to reject the signs of God perverted
God it is Who made the earth a dwelling place for you and the sky a canopy. And He formed you and made beautiful your forms, and provided you with good things. That is God, your Lord; so blessed is God, Lord of the worlds
He is the Living; there is no god but He. So call upon Him, devoting religion entirely to Him. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Say, “I have been forbidden to worship those upon whom you call apart from God, since clear proofs have come unto me from my Lord, and I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds.”
He it is Who created you from dust, then from a drop, then from a blood clot. Then He brings you forth as infants, that you may then reach maturity, then that you may grow old—though some of you are taken earlier—that you may reach a term appointed, and that haply you may understand
He it is Who gives life and causes death. So when He decrees a thing, He only says to it, “Be!” and it is
Hast thou not considered those who dispute concerning the signs of God, how they are turned away
those who deny the Book, and that wherewith We have sent Our messengers? But soon they will know
since they will be dragged, with shackles and chains around their necks
into boiling liquid; then they will be set aflame in the Fire
Then it will be said unto them, “Where are those whom you used to ascribe as partners
apart from God?” They will reply, “They have forsaken us. Nay, but we were not calling upon aught before.” Thus does God lead astray the disbelievers
“That is because you used to exult upon the earth without right and because you were insolent
Enter the gates of Hell, therein to abide.” How evil is the abode of the arrogant
So be patient. Surely God’s Promise is true. And whether We show thee a part of that which We promise them, or We take thee, unto Us will they be returned
Indeed We have sent messengers before thee. Among them are those whom We have recounted unto thee, and among them are those whom We have not recounted unto thee. And it was not for a messenger to bring a sign, save by God’s Leave. So when God’s Command comes, judgment is passed in truth; and those who make false claims will then be losers
God it is Who made cattle for you, that some of them you may ride and some of them you may eat—
and there are benefits for you therein—and that through them you may attain any need that is in your breasts. And upon them and upon ships are you carried
And He shows you His signs. So which of God’s signs do you reject
Have they not journeyed upon the earth and observed how those before them fared in the end? They were more numerous than them, greater than them in strength, and left firmer traces upon the earth. But that which they used to earn availed them not
And when their messengers brought them clear proofs, they exulted in the knowledge they possessed, and that which they used to mock beset them
Then, when they saw Our Might, they said, “We believe in God alone, and we disavow that which we used to ascribe as partners unto Him.”
But their believing benefited them not when they saw Our Might. [That is] the wont of God which has passed among His servants; and the disbelievers were then lost
Mim
A revelation from the Compassionate, the Merciful
a Book whose signs have been expounded as an Arabic Quran for a people who know
as a bringer of glad tidings, and as a warner. But most of them have turned away, such that they hear not
They say, “Our hearts are under coverings from that to which you call us, and in our ears there is deafness, and between us and you there is a veil. So do [as you will]; we shall do [as we will].”
Say, “I am only a human being like you. It is revealed unto me that your God is only one God. So go straight unto Him and seek forgiveness from Him.” Woe unto the idolaters
those who do not give alms and who disbelieve in the Hereafter
Truly those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be a reward unceasing
Say, “Do you indeed disbelieve in the One Who created the earth in two days, and do you set up equals unto Him? That is the Lord of the worlds.”
He placed firm mountains therein rising above it, blessed it, and apportioned its means of sustenance therein in four days, alike for all who ask
Then He turned to heaven while it was smoke and said unto it and unto the earth, “Come willingly or unwillingly!” They said, “We come willingly.”
Then He decreed that they be seven heavens in two days and revealed to each heaven its command. And We adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and a guard. That is the Decree of the Mighty, the Knowing
So if they turn away, then say, “I warned you of a thunderbolt, like the thunderbolt of ?Ad and Thamud
when messengers came unto them from before them and behind them, [saying], ‘Worship none but God,’ they said, ‘Had our Lord willed, He would have sent down angels; so truly we disbelieve in that wherewith you have been sent.’”
As for ?Ad, they waxed arrogant upon the earth without right and said, “Who is greater than us in strength?” Have they not considered that God, Who created them, is greater than them in strength? Yet they rejected Our signs
So We sent a howling wind against them in days of ill fortune, that they might taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world; yet the punishment of the Hereafter is more disgraceful, and they will not be helped
As for Thamud, We guided them, but they preferred blindness to guidance; so the thunderbolt of humiliating punishment overtook them for that which they used to earn
And We saved those who believed and were reverent
And on that Day the enemies of God are gathered unto the Fire and are marshaled in [ordered ranks]
till, when they come upon it, their ears, their eyes, and their skins will bear witness against them for that which they used to do
They will say to their skins, “Why did you bear witness against us?” They will reply, “God, Who makes all things speak, made us speak. He created you the first time, and unto Him shall you be returned
You did not seek to conceal, lest your ears, your eyes, and your skins bear witness against you. But you thought that God knew not much of that which you did
That thought which you thought about your Lord has destroyed you, such that you have come to be among the losers.”
Then if they are patient, the Fire shall be an abode for them. And if they seek favor, they will not be granted favor
We assigned to them companions, and they made that which is before them and that which is behind them seem fair to them. So the Word among the communities of jinn and men that have passed away before them came due for them. Truly they were lost
And those who disbelieve will say, “Listen not to this Quran, but speak dismissively of it, that haply you might prevail.”
We shall surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment, and We shall surely requite them for the worst of that which they used to do
That is the recompense of the enemies of God—the Fire. The Abode of Perpetuity shall be theirs therein, a recompense for their having rejected Our signs
And those who disbelieve will say, “Our Lord, show us those who led us astray among jinn and men. Let us put them under our feet, that they might be among the lowliest.”
Truly those who say, “Our Lord is God,” then stand firm, the angels will descend upon them, [saying], “Fear not, nor grieve, and rejoice in the Garden that you have been promised
We are your protectors in the life of this world and in the Hereafter; therein you shall have whatsoever your souls desire, and therein you shall have whatsoever you call for
a welcome from One Forgiving, Merciful.”
And who is more beautiful in speech than one who calls unto God, works righteousness, and says, “Truly I am among those who submit”
The good deed and the evil deed are not equal. Repel by that which is better; then behold, the one between whom and thee there is enmity shall be as if he were a loyal, protecting friend
Yet none shall receive it, save those who are patient; and none shall receive it, save those who possess great fortune
And should a temptation from Satan provoke thee, seek refuge in God. Truly He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Among His signs are the night and the day, the sun and the moon. Prostrate not unto the sun, nor unto the moon. Prostrate unto God, Who created them, if it is He Whom you worship
And if they wax arrogant, then those who are with thy Lord glorify Him night and day, and they never weary
Among His signs is that thou seest the earth diminished; then, when We send down water upon it, it quivers and swells. He Who gives it life is surely the One Who gives life to the dead. Truly He is Powerful over all things
Truly those who deviate with regard to Our signs are not hidden from Us. Is one who is cast in the Fire better, or one who comes in security on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you will; truly He sees whatsoever you do
Truly those who disbelieve in the Reminder when it comes unto them And truly it is a mighty Book
Falsehood comes not upon it from before it or from behind it; a revelation from One Wise, Praised
Naught has been said unto thee save that which has been said unto the messengers before thee. Truly thy Lord is Possessed of Forgiveness and Possessed of a Painful Retribution
Had We made it a Quran in a foreign tongue, they would say, “If only its signs were expounded. What! A foreign tongue and an Arab [messenger]?” Say, “It is a guidance and a healing for those who believe, and those who do not believe have a deafness in their ears, and it is a blindness for them. Such are called from a place far off.”
Indeed, We gave Moses the Book; then difference arose concerning it. And were it not for a Word that had already gone forth from thy Lord, judgment would have been made between them. Yet truly they are confounded by doubt regarding it
Whosoever works righteousness, it is for his own soul. And whosoever commits evil, it is to the detriment thereof. It is not for thy Lord to wrong His servants
Unto Him is knowledge of the Hour referred. No fruits come forth from their sheaths, nor does any female bear or bring forth, save by His Knowledge. And on the Day when He will call unto them, “Where are My partners?” they will say, “We admit unto Thee that none among us bears witness.”
That which they used to call upon before will forsake them, and they will know for certain that they have no refuge
Man wearies not of supplicating for good, and if evil befalls him, he is despondent, despairing
And if We make him taste some mercy from Us after hardship has befallen him, surely he will say, “This is mine; I think not that the Hour will come. If I am returned unto my Lord, surely with Him shall I have that which is most beautiful.” So We shall inform those who disbelieved of that which they have done, and We shall cause them to taste of a grave punishment
And when We bless man, he turns away and withdraws. Yet when evil befalls him, he is full of prolonged supplication
Say, “What think you, if it is from God, yet you disbelieve in it? Who is more astray than one in extreme schism?”
We shall show them Our signs upon the horizons and within themselves till it becomes clear to them that it is the truth. Does it not suffice that thy Lord is Witness over all things
Behold! They are in doubt regarding the meeting with their Lord. Behold! Truly He encompasses all things
Mim
Ayn. Sin. Qaf
Thus does He reveal unto thee and unto those before thee—God, the Mighty, the Wise
Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, and He is the Exalted, the Magnificent
The heavens are well-nigh rent asunder from above, while the angels hymn the praise of their Lord and seek forgiveness for those on earth. Yea! Truly God is the Forgiving, the Merciful
As for those who take protectors apart from Him, God is Keeper over them, and thou art not a guardian over them
Thus have We revealed unto thee an Arabic Quran that thou mayest warn the Mother of Cities and those around it, and that thou mayest warn of the Day of Gathering in which there is no doubt. A group shall be in the Garden and a group shall be in the Blaze
Had God willed, He would have made them all one community. But He causes whomsoever He will to enter into His Mercy. And the wrongdoers have no protector and no helper
Or have they taken protectors apart from Him? Yet God, He is the Protector; He gives life to the dead; and He is Powerful over all things
As for anything wherein you differ, judgment thereof lies with God. That is God, my Lord. In Him do I trust and unto Him do I turn
The Originator of the heavens and the earth, He has appointed for you mates from among yourselves, and has appointed mates also among the cattle. He multiplies you thereby; naught is like unto Him, yet He is the Hearer, the Seer
Unto Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He outspreads and straitens provision for whomsoever He will. Truly He is Knower of all things
He has prescribed for you as religion that which He enjoined upon Noah, and that which We revealed unto thee, and that which We enjoined upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, that you uphold religion and not become divided therein. Grievous for the idolaters is that to which thou callest them. God chooses for Himself whomsoever He will and guides unto Himself whosoever turns in repentance
They did not become divided till after knowledge had come unto them, out of envy among themselves. And were it not for a Word that had preceded from thy Lord unto a term appointed, judgment would have been made between them. Yet truly those who were bequeathed the Book after them are indeed confounded by doubt regarding it
Therefore, summon, and stand firm as thou hast been commanded. Follow not their caprices, and say, “I believe in that which God has sent down from a Book, and I have been commanded to establish justice among you. God is our Lord and your Lord. Unto us our deeds, and unto you your deeds; there is no argument between us and you. God will gather us together and unto Him is the journey’s end.”
As for those who argue about God after having responded to Him, their argument is baseless in the eyes of their Lord. Upon them shall be wrath, and theirs shall be a severe punishment
God it is Who sent down the Book in truth, and the Balance. And what will apprise thee? Perhaps the Hour is nigh
Those who believe not in it seek to hasten it, and those who believe are wary of it and know that it is the truth. Are not those who dispute the Hour far astray
God is kind unto His servants; He provides for whomsoever He will, and He is the Strong, the Mighty
Whosoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We shall increase for him his harvest. And whosoever desires the harvest of this world, We shall give him some thereof, but he will have no share in the Hereafter
Or have they partners who have prescribed for them as religion that which God did not permit? Were it not for the Word of Division, judgment would have been made between them. And truly the wrongdoers shall have a painful punishment
Thou seest the wrongdoers wary of that which they have earned; for it will fall upon them. And those who believe and perform righteous deeds shall be in flowering meadows of the Gardens. With their Lord they shall have whatsoever they will. That is the great bounty
This is that whereof God gives glad tidings to His servants, those who believe and perform righteous deeds. Say, “I ask not of you any reward for it, save affection among kinsfolk.” And whosoever accomplishes a good deed, We shall increase him in goodness thereby. Truly God is Forgiving, Thankful
Or do they say, “He has fabricated a lie against God?” If God willed, He would put a seal upon thy heart. God wipes out falsehood and verifies the truth through His Words. Truly He knows what lies within breasts
He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons evil deeds. And He knows whatsoever you do
He responds to those who believe and perform righteous deeds, and will increase them from His Bounty. Yet as for the disbelievers, theirs shall be a severe punishment
Had God outspread His provision for His servants, they would have behaved tyrannically upon the earth. But He sends down whatsoever He will according to a measure. Verily of His servants He is Aware, Seeing
He it is Who sends down the rain after they have despaired and spreads forth His Mercy. And He is the Protector, the Praised
And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and all moving creatures that He has scattered therein, and He is able to gather them together whensoever He will
Whatsoever misfortune befalls you is because of that which your hands have earned; and He pardons much
You thwart not on earth, and you have no protector or helper apart from God
Among His signs are the ships upon the sea like mountains
if He so wills, He stills the wind, and they lie motionless upon its surface. Truly in that are signs for all who are patient, thankful
Or He causes them to perish for that which they have earned—and He pardons much—
and so that those who dispute concerning Our signs will know that they have no refuge
Whatsoever you have been given, it is the enjoyment of the life of this world, and that which lies with God is better and more lasting for those who believe and trust in their Lord
who shun grave sins and indecencies and who when they are angry, they forgive
who respond to their Lord and perform the prayer, their affair being counsel among them, who spend from that which We have provided them
and who, when tyranny befalls them, they defend themselves
The recompense of an evil is an evil like unto it. Yet whosoever pardons and sets matters aright, his reward is with God. Truly He loves not the wrongdoers
And whosoever defends himself after having been wronged, for such there is no way against them
There is only a way against those who wrong people and behave tyrannically upon the earth without right. For them, there shall be a painful punishment
And whosoever is patient and forgives, that is indeed a course worthy of resolve
And whomsoever God leads astray has no protector beyond Him. Thou shalt see the wrongdoers, when they see the punishment, saying, “Is there any way of return?”
And thou shalt see them exposed to it, diminished through abasement, looking furtively. And those who believe will say, “Truly the losers are those who have lost themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.” Behold! Truly, the wrongdoers are in lasting punishment
They have no protectors to help them apart from God. And whomsoever God leads astray, no way has he
Respond to your Lord before there comes a day from God that none can repel. You will have no refuge that Day; nor shall you have any denial
And if they turn away, We sent thee not as a keeper over them. Naught is incumbent upon thee, save the proclamation. Truly when We cause man to taste mercy from Us, he rejoices in it. Yet if an evil befalls them because of that which their hands have sent forth, truly man is ungrateful
Unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth; He creates whatsoever He will, bestowing females upon whomsoever He will, and bestowing males upon whomsoever He will
or He couples males and females and causes whomsoever He will to be barren. Truly He is Knowing, Powerful
It is not for any human being that God should speak unto him, save by revelation, or from behind a veil, or that He should send a messenger in order to reveal what He will by His Leave. Truly He is Exalted, Wise
Thus have We revealed unto thee a Spirit from Our Command. Thou knewest not what scripture was, nor faith. But We made it a light whereby We guide whomsoever We will among Our servants. Truly thou dost guide unto a straight path
the path of God, unto Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth. Behold! All affairs are journeying unto God
Mim
By the clear Book
truly We have made it an Arabic Quran, that haply you may understand
and truly it is with Us in the Mother of the Book, sublime indeed, wise
Shall We withdraw the reminder from you altogether for your having been a prodigal people
How many a prophet did We send among those of old
Yet never did a prophet come unto them, but that they mocked him
So We destroyed those of greater prowess than them, and the example of those of old has passed
Wert thou to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” they would surely say, “The Mighty, the Knowing created them.”
He it is Who made the earth a cradle for you and made paths for you therein, that haply you may be guided
Who sent down water from the sky in due measure, whereby We revived a dead land—thus shall you be brought forth
and Who created the pairs, all of them, and appointed for you ships and cattle that you ride
that you may mount their backs and then remember the blessing of your Lord when you are mounted thereon and say, “Glory be to God, Who made this subservient unto us, though we were not equal to it
Truly unto our Lord do we turn.”
Yet they assign to Him a portion from some of His servants. Truly man is a manifest ingrate
Or has He taken daughters from that which He creates and favored you with sons
And when one of them receives glad tidings of that which he has set forth as a description of the Compassionate, his face blackens and he chokes with anguish
“What! One who is reared amid ornaments and is incoherent in dispute?”
And they have made the angels, who are servants of the Compassionate, females. Did they witness their creation? Their witnessing shall be recorded, and they will be questioned
They say, “Had the Compassionate willed, we would not have worshipped them.” They have no knowledge thereof. They do naught but guess
Or did We give them a book beforehand to which they hold fast
Nay! They say, “We found our fathers upon a creed, and surely we are rightly guided in their footsteps.”
Likewise, We sent no warner unto a town before thee, but that those living in luxury therein said, “We found our fathers upon a creed, and we are surely following in their footsteps.”
He replied, “What! Though I bring you better guidance than that which you found your fathers following?” They said, “Truly we disbelieve in that wherewith you have been sent.”
So We took vengeance upon them. And behold how the deniers fared in the end
And [remember] when Abraham said to his father and his people, “Truly I am quit of that which you worship
save Him who originated me, for surely He will guide me.”
And He made it a word enduring among his posterity, that haply they may return
Nay, I provided for these and their fathers until the Truth came unto them and a clear messenger
And when the Truth came unto them, they said, “This is sorcery, and we do not believe in it.”
And they said, “Why was this Quran not sent down to a great man from one of the two towns?”
Is it they who apportion the Mercy of thy Lord? We have apportioned for them their livelihood in the life of this world and have raised some of them above others in rank, that some of them may take others into service. And the Mercy of thy Lord is better than that which they amass
And were it not that mankind would be one community, We would have made for those who disbelieve in the Compassionate silver roofs for their houses, stairways whereon to ascend
doors to their houses, couches whereon to recline
and gold ornaments. Yet all of that would be but enjoyment of the life of this world. And the Hereafter, in the presence of thy Lord, is for the reverent
Whosoever turns blindly away from the remembrance of the Compassionate, We assign to him a satan who is then a companion unto him
And they turn them from the way; yet they suppose that they are rightly guided
till, when he comes unto Us, he will say, “Would that there were between me and thee the distance of the two easts! What an evil companion!”
Yet on that Day it will not benefit you, since you did wrong, to share in the punishment
Dost thou, then, make the deaf to hear or guide the blind and those in manifest error
Either We shall take thee away, and then take vengeance upon them
or We shall show thee that which We have promised them. For surely We have power over them
So hold fast to that which We have revealed unto thee. Truly thou art upon a straight path
Truly it is a reminder unto thee and thy people, and you will be questioned
Ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before thee, “Have We appointed gods to be worshipped apart from the Compassionate?”
We did indeed send Moses with Our signs unto Pharaoh and his notables. And he said, “I am a messenger of the Lord of the worlds.”
But when he brought them Our signs, behold, they laughed at them
Not a sign did We show them, but that it was greater than its sister. And We seized them with the punishment, that haply they may return
They said, “O sorcerer, call upon your Lord for us in accord with that which He has covenanted with you; surely we shall then be guided.”
Yet when We removed the punishment from them, behold, they reneged
And Pharaoh called out among his people, saying, “O my people! Is not the sovereignty of Egypt mine, and do these streams not flow beneath me? Do you not, then, see
Am I not better than this one who is vile and can scarcely speak plain
Why, then, have armlets of gold not been cast upon him, and why do angels not accompany him?”
Then he incited his people to make light, and they obeyed him. Truly they were an iniquitous people
So when they roused Our Anger, We took vengeance upon them and drowned them all together
We made them a bygone people and an example for those of later times
And when the son of Mary is set forth as an example, behold, thy people turn away from it
They say, “Are our gods better, or is he?” They do not cite him to thee, save to dispute. Nay, they are a contentious people
He was naught but a servant whom We blessed and whom We made an example for the Children of Israel
Had We willed, We would have appointed angels among you, succeeding one another upon the earth
And he is indeed a portent of the Hour; so doubt not concerning it and follow Me. This is a straight path
And let not Satan turn you away; truly he is a manifest enemy unto you
When Jesus brought clear proofs, he said, “I have come unto you with wisdom and to make clear to you some of that wherein you differ. So reverence God and obey me
Truly God is my Lord and your Lord; so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
But, then, the parties differed among themselves. Woe unto those who do wrong for the punishment of a painful day
Do they await aught but that the Hour should come upon them suddenly, while they are unaware
Friends on that Day will be enemies to one another, save for the reverent. h
My servants! No fear shall be upon you this Day; nor shall it be you who grieve
you who believed in Our signs and who were submitters
enter the Garden, you and your spouses, made joyous
For them are brought round trays and goblets of gold. Therein is whatsoever souls desire and eyes find pleasing. And you shall abide therein
This is the Garden that you have inherited for that which you used to do
Abundant fruit from which you will eat shall be yours therein
Truly the guilty are abiding in the punishment of Hell
It will not be lightened for them, and therein will they despair
We did not wrong them; rather, it is they who were the wrongdoers
And they will call, “O Malik, let thy Lord put an end to us.” He will reply, “You will surely remain
We did indeed bring you the truth, but most of you were averse to the truth.”
Or have they devised anything? Truly it is We Who devise
Or do they suppose that We hear not their secret and their secret converse? Yea, and Our envoys are present with them, recording
Say, “If the Compassionate had a child, then I would be the first of the worshippers.”
Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, above that which they ascribe
And leave them to indulge in idle talk and play until they meet the Day that they are promised
He it is Who is God in Heaven and God on earth. And He is the Wise, the Knowing
Blessed is He unto Whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, and with Whom lies knowledge of the Hour, and unto Whom you will be returned
Those upon whom they call apart from Him have no power of intercession, save such as have borne witness to the truth knowingly
Wert thou to ask them, “Who created you?” they would surely say, “God.” How, then, are they perverted
And as for his saying, “O my Lord, truly these are a people who believe not,”
bear with them and say, “Peace.” For soon they will know
Mim
By the clear Book
truly We sent it down on a blessed night—truly We are ever warning
Therein every wise command is made distinct
as a command from Us—truly We are ever sending
as a mercy from thy Lord. Truly He is the Hearing, the Knowing
Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them; would that you were certain
There is no god but He; He gives life and causes death, your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old
Nay, but they are playing in doubt
So keep watch for a day when the sky brings forth manifest smoke
covering the people. This is a painful punishment
“Our Lord! Remove from us the punishment; truly we are believers.”
How can there be a reminder for them, when a clear messenger had come to them
Then they turned away from him and said, “He is taught, possessed.”
We shall indeed remove the punishment a little. Surely you will revert
On the Day when We strike with a terrible striking, surely We are vengeful
And indeed We tried the people of Pharaoh before them, and a noble messenger came unto them
“Deliver God’s servants unto me! Truly I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
And rise not against God; surely I have come to you with a manifest authority
Truly I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me
But if you believe me not, then keep away from me.”
Then he called unto his Lord, “These are a guilty people.”
“Set forth with My servants by night; you will indeed be pursued
And leave the sea at rest; truly they will be a drowned host.”
How many gardens and springs did they leave behind
sown fields and a noble dwelling
and prosperity in which they rejoiced
Thus it was. And We bequeathed it unto another people
Neither Heaven nor earth wept for them, nor were they granted respite
And We delivered the Children of Israel from a humiliating punishment—
from Pharaoh. Truly he was foremost among the prodigal
We knowingly chose them over the worlds
And We gave them signs wherein was a manifest trial
Truly these say
“There is naught but our first death, and we shall not be resurrected
Bring us our fathers, if you are truthful.”
Are they better, or the people of Tubba? and those before them? We destroyed them. Truly they were guilty
And We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them in play
We did not create them, save in truth. But most of them know not
Truly the Day of Division is their tryst, all together
The Day when no friend will avail a friend in any way, nor will they be helped
save him unto whom God has been merciful. Truly He is the Mighty, the Merciful
Truly the tree of Zaqqum
is the food of the sinner
like molten lead boiling in their bellies
like the boiling of boiling liquid
“Seize him and thrust him into the midst of Hellfire
Then pour the punishment of boiling liquid upon his head.”
“Taste! Surely you are the mighty, the noble
This is that which you used to doubt.”
Truly the reverent are in a station secure
amid gardens and springs
wearing fine silk and rich brocade, facing one another
Thus it is. And We shall wed them to wide-eyed maidens
Therein they call for every fruit, secure
They taste not death therein, save the first death. And He will shield them from the punishment of Hellfire—
a bounty from thy Lord; that is the great triumph
We have only made this easy upon thy tongue, that haply they may remember
So be on the watch, for they, too, are on the watch
Mim
The revelation of the Book from God, the Mighty, the Wise
Truly in the heavens and the earth are signs for believers
And in your creation and in what He has scattered of animals are signs for a people who are certain
And in the variation of the night and the day, and in that which God sends down from the sky as provision whereby He revives the earth after its death, and in the shifting of the winds are signs for a people who understand
These are the signs of God that We recite unto thee in truth. So in what discourse after God and His signs do they believe
Woe unto every sinful liar
He hears the signs of God recited unto him, then persists arrogantly as if he did not hear it. So give him glad tidings of a painful punishment
And when he comes to know aught of Our signs, he takes them in mockery. For them there shall be a humiliating punishment
Beyond them lies Hell. That which they have earned will avail them naught, nor that which they have taken apart from God as protectors; and theirs shall be a great punishment
This is guidance; and those who disbelieve in the signs of their Lord, theirs shall be a painful punishment of torment
God it is Who made the sea subservient unto you, that the ships may sail upon it by His Command, that you may seek His Bounty, and that haply you may give thanks
He made subservient unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth—all together. Truly in that are signs for a people who reflect
Tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of God, that He may requite a people for that which they used to earn
Whosoever works righteousness, it is for his own soul. And whosoever commits evil, it is to the detriment thereof. Then unto your Lord shall you be returned
And indeed We gave the Children of Israel the Book, judgment, and prophethood, and We provided them with good things, and We favored them above the worlds
And We gave them clear proofs from the Command. And they differed not till after knowledge had come unto them, out of envy among themselves. Thy Lord will surely judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding that wherein they used to differ
Then We placed thee upon a clear path from the Command; so follow it, and follow not the caprices of those who know not
Truly they will avail you naught against God. And surely the wrongdoers are the protectors of one another, while God is the Protector of the reverent
These are insights for mankind, and guidance and mercy for a people who are certain
Or do those who commit evil deeds suppose that We shall treat them like those who believe and perform righteous deeds equally in their life and in their death? Evil indeed is the judgment they make
God created the heavens and the earth in truth, and so that every soul may be recompensed for that which it has earned; and they shall not be wronged
Hast thou considered one who takes his caprice as his god, God having led him astray knowingly, and sealed his hearing and his heart and placed a cover upon his sight? Who, then, will guide him after God? Will you not, then, remember
They say, “There is naught but our life in this world. We die and we live, and none destroys us save time.” But they have no knowledge thereof. They do naught but conjecture
And when Our signs are recited unto them as clear proofs, their argument is naught but to say, “Bring us our fathers, if you are truthful.”
Say, “God gives you life; then causes you to die; then He gathers you together on the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. But most of mankind know not.”
Unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. And the Day when the Hour is come—on that Day those who make false claims will have lost
and thou wilt see every community upon its knees. Every community is called to its book: “Today you will be recompensed for that which you used to do
This Our Book speaks against you with truth. Truly We were recording all that you used to do.”
As for those who believed and performed righteous deeds, their Lord causes them to enter into His Mercy. That is the manifest triumph
And as for those who disbelieve, were not My signs recited unto you? But you waxed arrogant and were a guilty people
When it was said, “Surely God’s Promise is true, and there is no doubt in the Hour,” you said, “We do not know what the Hour is. We do naught but conjecture, and we are not certain.”
The evils of that which they had done will become manifest unto them, and that which they used to mock will beset them
And it will be said, “Today We forget you just as you forgot the meeting with this your Day; your refuge is the Fire and you have no helpers
That is because you took the signs of God in mockery and the life of this world has deluded you.” So today they will not be removed from it; nor can they make amends
Unto God be praise, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, Lord of the worlds
His is the Grandeur in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
Mim
The revelation of the Book from God, the Mighty, the Wise
We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them, save in truth and for a term appointed. Yet those who disbelieve turn away from that of which they were warned
Say, “Have you considered that which you call upon apart from God? Show me that which they have created of the earth. Or do they have a share in the heavens? Bring me a book before this or some vestige of knowledge, if you are truthful.”
Who is more astray than one who calls, apart from God, upon such as do not answer him, [even] unto the Day of Resurrection, and who are heedless of their calling
When mankind is gathered, such will be enemies unto them and deniers of their worship
Yet when Our signs are recited unto them as clear proofs, those who disbelieve say to the truth when it comes to them, “This is manifest sorcery.”
Or do they say, “He has fabricated it”? Say, “Had I fabricated it, you would not be able to avail me aught against God. He knows best that about which you carry on. He suffices as a Witness between me and you, and He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
Say, “I am no innovation among the messengers, and I know not what will be done with me or with you. I only follow that which has been revealed unto me, and I am naught but a clear warner.”
Say, “Have you considered if it is from God and you disbelieve in it, though a witness from the Children of Israel bore witness to the like thereof, then believed in it, while you waxed arrogant? Surely God guides not wrongdoing people.”
And those who disbelieve say of those who believe, “Had it been good, they would not have outstripped us in [attaining] it.” Since they will not be guided by it, they will say, “This is an ancient perversion.”
Yet before it there was the Book of Moses, a guide and a mercy. This is a Book that confirms in an Arabic tongue to warn wrongdoers, and a glad tiding for the virtuous
Truly those who say, “Our Lord is God,” then stand firm, no fear shall come upon them; nor shall they grieve
They are the inhabitants of the Garden, abiding therein, as a recompense for that which they used to do
And We have enjoined man to be virtuous unto his parents. His mother carried him in travail and bore him in travail, and his gestation and weaning is thirty months, such that when he reaches maturity and reaches forty years he says, “My Lord inspire me to give thanks for Thy blessing with which Thou hast blessed me and hast blessed my parents, and that I may work righteousness such that it pleases Thee; and make righteous for me my progeny. Truly I turn in repentance unto Thee, and truly I am among those who submit.”
They are those from whom We accept the best of that which they have done and over whose evil deeds We pass. [They] will be among the inhabitants of the Garden—the true promise that they were promised
As for one who says to his parents, “Fie upon you both! Do you promise me that I shall be brought forth when generations have passed away before me?” while they call upon God for succor, “Woe unto you! Believe! Surely God’s Promise is true.” Whereat he says, “This is naught but fables of those of old.”
They are those for whom the Word among the communities of jinn and men that had passed before them came due. Truly they are lost
For each there are degrees according to that which they have done. He will pay them for their deeds in full, and they will not be wronged
And the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire: “You squandered your good things in your life in the world and sought enjoyment therein; so today you are recompensed with the punishment of disgrace for having waxed arrogant upon the earth without right and for having been iniquitous.”
And mention the brother of ?Ad, when he warned his people by the sand dunes; warners had passed away before him and after him, [saying], “Worship none but God. Truly I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day.”
They said, “Have you come to us to pervert us from our gods? Then bring upon us that wherewith you have threatened us, if you are among the truthful.”
He said, “Knowledge lies with God alone, and I only convey to you that wherewith I have been sent. But I see that you are an ignorant people.”
And when they beheld it as a cloud bound for their valleys, they said, “This is a cloud bringing us rain.” Nay! It is what you sought to hasten—a wind carrying a painful punishment
destroying everything by the Command of its Lord. They became such that naught was seen but their dwellings. Thus do We recompense the guilty people
Indeed We established them in a manner in which We did not establish you, and We endowed them with hearing, sight, and hearts. But their hearing, sight, and hearts availed them naught, since they rejected God’s signs, and that which they used to mock beset them
And indeed We destroyed the towns around you, and We vary the signs that haply they might return
Why, then, did they—whom they had taken as gods apart from God and as a means of drawing nigh [unto God]—not help them? Nay, they forsook them. That was their perversion and that which they used to fabricate
And [remember] when We made a group of jinn incline unto thee, listening to the Quran, when in its presence they said, “Hearken!” Then when it came to an end, they went back to their people as warners
They said, “O our people! Truly we have heard a Book sent down after Moses, confirming that which came before it, guiding to the truth and to a straight road
O our people! Answer God’s caller and believe in him, then He will forgive you some of your sins and protect you from a painful punishment
And whosoever does not answer God’s caller thwarts not on earth and has no protectors apart from Him—they are in manifest error.”
Have they not considered that God, Who created the heavens and the earth and did not weary in their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yea! He is Powerful over all things
On the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire: “Is this not true?” They will say, “Yea, by our Lord!” He will reply, “Taste the punishment for having disbelieved.”
So be patient, as the resolute among the messengers were patient. And seek not to hasten for them. It shall be for them, on the day when they see that which they are promised, as though they had tarried naught but an hour of a day. A proclamation! Will any but the iniquitous people be destroyed
Those who disbelieve and turn from the way of God—He has made their deeds go astray
And those who believe and perform righteous deeds, and believe in what has been sent down unto Muhammad—and it is the truth from their Lord—He has absolved them of their evil deeds and set their state aright
That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood and because those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus does God set forth for mankind their likenesses
When you meet those who disbelieve, strike at their necks; then, when you have overwhelmed them, tighten the bonds. Then free them graciously or hold them for ransom, till war lays down its burdens. Thus [shall it be]. And if God willed, He would take vengeance upon them, but that He may test some of you by means of others, And as for those who are slain in the way of God, He will not make their deeds go astray
He will guide them and set their state aright
and cause them to enter the Garden, having made it known to them
you who believe! If you help God, He will help you and make firm your steps
As for those who disbelieve, wretched are they, and He has made their deeds go astray
That is because they were averse to that which God sent down, so He made their deeds come to naught
Have they not journeyed upon the earth and observed how those before them fared in the end? God destroyed them; and the disbelievers shall have the like thereof
That is because God is Master of those who believe, and because the disbelievers have no master
Truly God causes those who believe and perform righteous deeds to enter Gardens with rivers running below, while those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat; and the Fire shall be an abode for them
And how many a town greater in strength than thy town which cast thee out have We destroyed, having none then to help them
Is one who stands upon a clear proof from his Lord like one whose evil deeds are made to seem fair unto him and like those who follow their caprices
The parable of the Garden that has been promised to the reverent: therein lie rivers of water incorruptible, rivers of milk whose flavor does not change, rivers of wine delicious for those who imbibe, and rivers of purified honey. Therein they partake of every fruit and of forgiveness from their Lord. [Are they] like one who abides in the Fire and those who are made to drink a boiling liquid which then tears apart their bowels
Among them are those who listen unto thee. Then when they depart from thee they say to those who have been given knowledge, “What did he say?” It is they whose hearts God has sealed and who follow their caprices
But those who are guided, He increases them in guidance and grants them their reverence
Do they await aught but that the Hour should come upon them suddenly? Yet its portents have already come. Then when it has come upon them, what will their remembrance do for them
Know, then, that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for thy sin and for the believing men and the believing women. God knows your coming and going, and your abode
Those who believe say, “Would that a surah were sent down.” Then when a definitive surah wherein fighting is mentioned is sent down, thou seest those in whose hearts is a disease looking at thee as if death had overcome them. More fitting for them
would be obedience to God and honorable speech. Then, when the matter is resolved, were they true to God, it would be better for them
Were you to turn away, would you perchance work corruption upon the earth and break your family relations
They are those whom God has cursed, making them deaf and blinding their sight
Do they not contemplate the Quran? Or do hearts have their locks upon them
Truly those who turn their backs after guidance has been made clear to them—Satan has seduced them, yet He grants them respite
That is because they say to those who are averse to what God has sent down, “We shall obey you in some matters.” And God knows their keeping of secrets
Then how will it be when the angels seize them, striking their faces and their backs
That is because they followed that which angers God and were averse to His good pleasure; so He made their deeds come to naught
Or do those in whose hearts is a disease suppose that God will not expose their rancor
And if We willed, We would show them to you so that you would know them by their mark. And you will certainly know them by their tone of speech. And God knows your deeds
And We shall test you until We know those among you who strive and those who are patient, and We shall test your proclamations
Truly those who disbelieve and turn from the way of God, and oppose the Messenger of God after guidance has been made clear to them will not harm God in the least. And He will make their deeds come to naught
O you who believe! Obey God and obey the Messenger and let not your deeds be in vain
Truly those who disbelieve and turn from the way of God, then die while they are disbelievers, God will not forgive them
So do not falter and call for peace while you have the upper hand. God is with you and will not deprive you of your deeds
The life of this world is but play and diversion. If you believe and are reverent, He will give you your rewards and not ask you for your wealth
Were He to ask you for it, then implore you, you would be miserly, and He would expose your rancor
Behold! You are those who are called upon to spend in the way of God; yet among you some are miserly. And whosoever is miserly is only miserly toward himself. God is the Rich, and you are the poor. And if you turn away, He will cause a people other than you to take your place, and they will not be the likes of you
Truly We have granted thee a manifest victory
that God may forgive thee thy sins that went before and that which is to come, and complete His Blessing upon thee, and guide thee upon a straight path
and that God may help thee with a mighty help
He it is Who sends down Tranquility into the hearts of the believers, that they might increase in faith along with their faith—to God belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and God is Knowing, Wise—
that He may cause the believing men and the believing women to enter Gardens with rivers running below, therein to abide, and that He may absolve them of their evil deeds—that is a great triumph in the sight of God—
and that He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, who think an evil thought concerning God. Upon them is an evil turn. God is wroth with them, curses them, and prepares Hell for them—what an evil journey’s end
And to God belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and God is Mighty, Wise
Truly We have sent thee as a witness, as a bearer of glad tidings, and as a warner
that you may believe in God and His Messenger, and support Him, and honor Him, and that you may glorify Him morning and evening
Truly those who pledge allegiance unto thee pledge allegiance only unto God. The Hand of God is over their hands. And whosoever reneges, reneges only to his detriment. And whosoever fulfills what He has pledged unto God, He will grant him a great reward
The Bedouin who stayed behind will say to thee, “We were occupied by our property and our families; so ask forgiveness for us.” They say with their tongues that which is not in their hearts. Say, “Who can avail you aught from God should He desire harm for you or should He desire benefit for you? Nay, but God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Nay, but you thought the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families, and that was made to seem fair in your hearts. You thought an evil thought and were a people ruined.”
And whosoever does not believe in God and His Messenger—truly We have prepared a Blaze for the disbelievers
Unto God belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. He forgives whomsoever He will and punishes whomsoever He will; and God is Forgiving, Merciful
Those who stayed behind will say when you set out to capture spoils, “Let us follow you.” They desire to change the Word of God. Say, “You will not follow us; thus has God said before.” Then they will say, “Nay, but you are jealous of us.” Nay, but they have not understood, save a little
Say to the Bedouin who stayed behind, “You will be called against a people possessed of great might; you will fight them or they will submit. So if you obey, God will grant you a beautiful reward; but if you turn away as you turned away before, He will punish you with a painful punishment.”
There is no blame upon the blind; nor is there blame upon the lame; nor is there blame upon the sick. Whosoever obeys God and His Messenger, He will cause him to enter Gardens with rivers running below. And whosoever turns away, He will punish him with a painful punishment
God was content with the believers when they pledged allegiance unto thee beneath the tree. He knew what was in their hearts and sent down Tranquility upon them and rewarded them with a victory nigh
and abundant spoils that they will capture; and God is Mighty, Wise
God has promised you abundant spoils that you will capture—then He hastened this for you and restrained the people’s hands from you, that it may be a sign for the believers, and that He may guide you upon a straight path—
and others of which you were not capable, God has encompassed them; and God is Powerful over all things
If those who disbelieve had fought you, they would have turned [their] backs, and then would have found neither protector nor helper
[That is] the wont of God that came to pass aforetime; and you will find no alteration in the wont of God
He it is Who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of Makkah, after having made you victorious over them. And God sees whatsoever you do
It is they who disbelieved and turned you from the Sacred Mosque and the offerings detained from reaching their place of sacrifice. And were it not for believing men and believing women whom you know not, lest you trample them, and thus incur guilt unknowingly—that God may cause whomsoever He will to enter into His Mercy—had they been clearly separated, We would surely have punished the disbelievers among them with a painful punishment
When those who disbelieve had set zealotry in their hearts, the zealotry of the Age of Ignorance, God sent down His Tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and enjoined the word of reverence upon them, they being more worthy of it and deserving of it. And God is Knower of all things
Surely God has fulfilled for His Messenger the vision in truth: you shall enter the Sacred Mosque in security, if God wills, with the hair of your heads shaven or cut, not fearing. For He knows what you know not, and therewithal He has given you a victory nigh
He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth to make it prevail over all religion. And God suffices as a Witness
Muhammad is the Messenger of God. Those who are with him are harsh against the disbelievers, merciful to one another. You see them bowing, prostrating, seeking bounty from God and contentment; their mark upon their faces is from the effect of prostration. That is their likeness in the Torah. And their likeness in the Gospel is a sapling that puts forth its shoot and strengthens it, such that it grows stout and rises firmly upon its stalk, impressing the sowers, that through them He may enrage the disbelievers. God has promised forgiveness and a great reward to those among them who believe and perform righteous deeds
you who believe! Advance not before God and His Messenger, and reverence God. Truly God is Hearing, Knowing
O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor address him in the manner that you address one another, lest your deeds come to naught, while you are unaware
Truly those who lower their voices before the Messenger of God, they are the ones whose hearts God has tested for reverence. Theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward
Truly those who call thee from behind the apartments, most of them understand not
Had they been patient until thou camest out unto them, it would have been better for them. And God is Forgiving, Merciful. j
you who believe! If an iniquitous person comes to you with tidings, then be discerning, lest you harm a people out of ignorance and become remorseful over that which you have done
And know that the Messenger of God is among you. Were he to obey you in many matters, you would suffer. But God has caused you to love faith and has made it seem fair in your hearts, and He has caused you to despise disbelief, iniquity, and disobedience—such are the rightly guided—
as a bounty from God and a blessing; and God is Knowing, Wise
If two parties among the believers fall to fighting, make peace between them. If one of them aggresses against the other, fight those who aggress until they return to God’s Command. And if they return, make peace between them with justice and act equitably. Truly God loves the just
The believers are but brothers; so make peace between your brethren, and reverence God, that haply you may receive mercy
O you who believe! Let not one people deride another; it may be that they are better than them. Nor let women deride other women; it may be that they are better than them. And do not defame yourselves or insult one another with nicknames; how evil is the iniquitous name after having believed! And whosoever does not repent, they are the wrongdoers
O you who believe! Shun much conjecture. Indeed, some conjecture is a sin. And do not spy upon one another, nor backbite one another. Would any of you desire to eat the dead flesh of his brother? You would abhor it. And reverence God. Truly God is Relenting, Merciful
O mankind! Truly We created you from a male and a female, and We made you peoples and tribes that you may come to know one another. Surely the most noble of you before God are the most reverent of you. Truly God is Knowing, Aware
The Bedouin say, “We believe.” Say, “You believe not. Rather, say, ‘We have submitted,’ for belief has not yet entered your hearts. Yet if you obey God and His Messenger, He will not diminish for you aught of your deeds. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful.”
Only they are believers who believe in God and His Messenger, then do not doubt, and who strive with their wealth and theirselves in the way of God; it is they who are the truthful
Say, “Would you teach God about your religion, when God knows whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth?” And God is Knower of all things
They count it as a favor to thee that they have submitted. Say, “Do not count your submission as a favor to me. Nay, rather God confers a favor upon you, in that He has guided you to belief, if you are truthful
Truly God knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and God sees whatsoever you do.”
Qaf. By the glorious Quran
nay, but they marvel that a warner has come unto them from among their own; so the disbelievers say, “This is an astounding thing
What! When we are dead and have become dust? That is a far-fetched return!”
Well do We know what the earth diminishes from them, and with Us there is a preserving Book
Nay, they denied the truth when it came unto them; so they are now in a confounded situation
Have they not looked upon the sky above them, how We built it and adorned it, and [how it] has no rifts
The earth We spread out, and cast therein firm mountains, and caused every delightful kind to grow therein
as a source of insight and a reminder for every penitent servant
And We sent down blessed water from the sky whereby We grew gardens and the harvested grain
and the date palms towering with layered spathes
as provision for His servants. And We revive a dead land therewith—likewise shall be the coming forth
Before them the people of Noah, the inhabitants of al-Rass, and Thamud denied
as did ?Ad, Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot
the inhabitants of the thicket, and the people of Tubba?—each denied the messengers; so My Threat came due
Did We then weary in the first creation? Nay, but they are in doubt regarding a new creation
We did indeed create man, and We know what his soul whispers to him; and We are nearer to him than his jugular vein
When the two receivers receive, seated on the right and on the left
no word does he utter without a ready watcher beside him
And the agony of death comes with the truth. That is what you were avoiding
And the trumpet is blown. That is the Day of the Threat
Then every soul comes, with it a driver and a witness
“You were indeed heedless of this. Now We have removed from you your cover; so today your sight is piercing.”
And his companion says, “This is what I have ready.”
“Cast you both into Hell every stubborn disbeliever
every hinderer of good, every transgressor, every doubter
who has set up another god along with God. Cast him into the severe punishment.”
His companion will say, “Our Lord, I did not make him rebel; rather, he was far astray.”
He will say, “Dispute not before Me, since I have already presented unto you the Threat
With Me the Word is not changed, and I do not wrong My servants.”
That Day We shall say to Hell, “Have you been filled?” And it will say, “Is there more?”
And the Garden will be brought nigh unto the reverent, not distant
“This is what is promised for every oft turning keeper
who fears the Compassionate unseen and comes with a penitent heart
Enter it in peace. This is the day of abiding.”
Therein they shall have whatsoever they will; and with Us there is more
How many a generation before them have We destroyed who were of greater prowess than them? Then they searched about in the lands: “Is there any refuge?”
Truly in that is a reminder for whosoever has a heart, or gives ear as witness
And indeed We created the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is between them in six days, and no fatigue touched Us
So bear patiently that which they say, and hymn the praise of thy Lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting
And at night glorify Him, and after prostrations
And listen on the Day when the caller calls from near at hand
on the Day when they hear the Cry of Truth; that is the Day of coming forth
Truly We give life and We cause death, and unto Us is the journey’s end
That Day the earth is split asunder from about them—as they hasten forth. That is a gathering easy for Us
We know best that which they say. Thine is not to compel them. So remind, by means of the Quran, those who fear My Threat
By the scatterers as they scatter
and by those that bear a burden
by those that course with ease
and by those that apportion the Command
verily what you are promised is true
and truly the judgment shall come to pass
By Heaven possessed of paths
truly you are of differing claims
Whosoever has been turned away shall from it be turned away
Perish those who conjecture
Those who blunder along in a stupor
asking, “When is the Day of Judgment?”
A day when they are tried upon the Fire
Taste your trial! This is what you sought to hasten
Truly the reverent shall be amidst gardens and springs
partaking of that which their Lord has given them. Truly they were virtuous aforetime
Little of the night did they slumber
and ere dawn would seek forgiveness
And in their wealth was a due for the beggar and the deprived
Upon the earth are signs for those possessing certainty
and within your souls. Do you not then behold
And in Heaven is your provision and that which you were promised
So by the Lord of Heaven and earth, it is indeed true—as it is that you are endowed with speech
Hast thou heard tell of Abraham’s honored guests
when they entered upon him and said, “Peace!” he said, “Peace—an unfamiliar folk.”
Then he went quietly to his family and came with a fattened calf
He placed it close to them, saying, “Will you not eat?”
Then he conceived a fear of them. They said, “Fear not!” and gave him glad tidings of a knowing son
Then his wife came forward with a loud cry; she struck her face and said, “A barren old woman!”
They said, “Thus has thy Lord decreed. Truly He is the Wise, the Knowing.”
He said, “What is your errand, O messengers?”
They said, “We have been sent unto a guilty people
to send upon them stones of clay
marked by thy Lord for the prodigal.”
So We brought forth those among them who were believers
yet We did not find therein but one house of submitters
And We left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment
And in Moses [We left a sign], when We sent him to Pharaoh with a manifest authority
But he turned away with his court and said, “A sorcerer or one possessed.”
So We seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea, for he was blameworthy
And in ?Ad [We left a sign], when We sent upon them the barren wind
Naught did it leave that it came upon, but that it made it as bones decayed
And in Thamud [We left a sign], when it was said unto them, “Enjoy yourselves for a time.”
Then they insolently defied the Command of their Lord, and the thunderbolt seized them as they looked on
So they were not able to rise; nor could they help one another
As for the people of Noah before, truly they were an iniquitous people
And the sky We established with might; truly We make vast
And the earth We laid out—what excellent spreaders
And of all things We created pairs, that haply you may remember
So flee unto God. Truly I am a clear warner unto you from Him
And do not set up another god along with God. Truly I am a clear warner unto you from Him
Likewise, there came no messenger unto those before them, but that they said, “A sorcerer or one possessed.”
Do they exhort one another to it? Nay, they are a rebellious people
So turn away from them, for thou shalt not be blamed
And remind, for truly the Reminder benefits the believers
I did not create jinn and mankind, save to worship Me
I desire no provision from them; nor do I desire that they should feed Me
Truly God is the Provider, the Possessor of Strength, the Firm
And surely for those who do wrong are sins like unto the sins of their companions; so let them not seek to hasten
Woe unto those who disbelieve on account of the Day that they are promised
By the Mount
and by a Book inscribed
on parchment outspread
by the house inhabited
by the canopy raised
and by the sea swelling over
truly thy Lord’s Punishment shall come to pass
None can avert it
On a day when the sky churns with [great] churning
and the mountains move with [great] motion
woe that Day to the deniers
who play in idle talk
a day when they are thrust violently into the Fire of Hell
“This is the Fire that you used to deny
Is this sorcery, or do you not see
Burn therein! Be patient, or be not patient; it will be the same for you. You are only requited for that which you used to do.”
Truly the reverent shall be in Gardens and bliss
rejoicing in what their Lord has given them. And their Lord has shielded them from the punishment of Hellfire
“Eat and drink in enjoyment for that which you used to do,”
reclining upon couches arrayed, and We shall wed them to wide-eyed maidens
And those who believe and whose progeny followed them in faith, We shall cause their progeny to join them and will not stint aught of their deeds. Each man shall be held in pledge for that which he has earned
And We shall bestow upon them fruits and meat as they desire
Therein they shall pass to one another a cup wherein is no idle talk, nor incitement to sin
and there wait upon them youths, for them, as if they were hidden pearls
And they will turn to one another, questioning each other
saying, “Truly aforetime, when among our families, we were anxious
but God was gracious unto us and shielded us from the punishment of the scorching wind
Truly we did call upon Him aforetime. Truly He is the Righteous, the Merciful.”
So remind, for thou art not, by the Blessing of thy Lord, a soothsayer or one possessed
Or do they say, “A poet—let us await the vagaries of fate for him.”
Say, “Wait! For truly I am waiting along with you.”
Do their minds command them to this, or are they a rebellious people
Or do they say, “He has invented it”? Nay, but they believe not
Then let them bring an account like unto it, if they are truthful
Were they created from naught? Or are they the creators
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay, but they have no certainty
Do they possess the treasuries of your Lord? Or are they in control
Or do they have a ladder whereby they listen? Then let their listener bring a clear warrant
Does He have daughters while you have sons
Or dost thou ask a reward of them, such that they are burdened with debt
Or do they possess the Unseen, such that they write it down
Or do they desire to devise [a scheme]? Then those who disbelieve shall be the ones against whom a scheme is devised
Or do they have a god other than God? Glory be to God above the partners they ascribe
Were they to see a fragment falling from the sky, they would say, “A heap of clouds.”
So leave them until they meet the Day when they will be thunderstruck
a day when their scheming will avail them naught and they will not be helped
And truly for those who do wrong there is punishment besides that. But most of them know not
Be patient with the judgment of thy Lord, for thou art before Our eyes; hymn the praise of thy Lord when thou dost rise
and at night glorify Him, and at the receding of the stars
By the star when it sets
your companion has neither strayed nor erred
nor does he speak out of caprice
It is naught but a revelation revealed
taught him by one of awesome power
Possessed of vigor, he stood upright
when he was upon the highest horizon
Then he drew nigh and came close
till he was within two bows’ length or nearer
Then He revealed to His servant what He revealed
The heart lied not in what it saw
Do you then dispute with him as to what he saw
And indeed he saw him another time
at the lote tree of the boundary
by which lies the Garden of the refuge
when there covered the lote tree that which covered
The gaze swerved not; nor did it transgress
Indeed, he saw the greatest of the signs of his Lord
Have you considered al-Lat and al-?Uzza
and Manat, the third, the other
Unto you males and unto Him females
This, then, is an unfair division
They are naught but names that you have named—you and your fathers—for which God has sent down no authority. They follow naught but conjecture and that which their souls desire, though guidance has surely come to them from their Lord
Or shall man have whatsoever he longs for
Yet unto God belong the Hereafter and this world
And how many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession avails naught, save after God grants leave unto whomsoever He will and unto the one with whom He is content
Truly those who believe not in the Hereafter name the angels with female names
Yet they have no knowledge thereof. They follow naught but conjecture; and surely conjecture avails naught against the Truth
So shun whosoever turns away from Our Reminder and desires naught but the life of the world
That is the extent of their knowledge. Surely thy Lord knows best those who stray from His way, and He knows best those who are rightly guided
Unto God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth, that He may requite those who commit evil for that which they have done, and that He may requite those who are virtuous with that which is most beautiful
those who shun grave sins and indecencies, save what is slight; truly your Lord is of vast forgiveness. He knows you best, from when He brought you forth from the earth and when you were hidden in your mothers’ bellies. So deem not yourselves purified. He knows best the reverent
Have you seen the one who turned away
gave little, and then withheld
Does he have knowledge of the Unseen, such that he sees
Or has he not been informed of that which is in the scriptures of Moses
and Abraham, who fulfilled
that none shall bear the burden of another
that man shall have naught but that for which he endeavored
and that his endeavoring shall be seen
whereupon he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward
that the ultimate end is unto thy Lord
that it is He Who causes laughter and weeping
that it is He Who causes death and gives life
and that He creates the two—male and female—
from a drop when emitted
and that with Him lies the second genesis
that it is He Who enriches and grants possessions
that it is He Who is the Lord of Sirius
and that He destroyed ?Ad the Former
and Thamud, sparing none
and the people of Noah aforetime—truly they were most wrongdoing and most rebellious
and He razed the subverted cities
such that there covered them that which covered
So which of thy Lord’s boons do you dispute
This is a warning from the warners of old
The imminent is nigh
It has no unveiler apart from God
Do you then marvel at this discourse
And do you laugh and not weep
a while you stand with head held high
So prostrate unto God and worship
The Hour has drawn nigh, and the moon has been cleaved
and if they see a sign, they turn away and say, “Incessant sorcery!”
They denied and followed their caprices—and every matter shall be made to endure
Indeed reports have come to them wherein is a reproof
conclusive wisdom, but the warnings availed not
So turn away from them on the Day wherein the caller will call unto a terrible thing
With their eyes humbled they emerge from the graves as if they were scattered locusts
scrambling toward the caller. The disbelievers say, “This is a calamitous day.”
The people of Noah denied before them, for they denied Our servant and said, “Possessed!” And he was reproved
Then he called upon his Lord, “Truly I am overcome. Help!”
So We opened the gates of the sky with pouring water
and We caused the earth to burst forth with springs, such that the waters met for a matter determined
Then We carried him upon a thing of planks and nails
coursing under Our Eyes as a recompense for one who was rejected
And indeed We left it as a sign; so is there any who remembers
How, then, were My Punishment and My warnings
And indeed We have made the Quran easy to remember; so is there any who remembers
Ad denied. How, then, were My Punishment and My warnings
Truly We sent upon them a howling wind on a day of incessant misfortune
tearing out people as if they were uprooted palm trunks
How, then, were My Punishment and My warnings
And indeed We have made the Quran easy to remember; so is there any who remembers
Thamud denied the warnings
They said, “Shall we follow a single human being from among us? Then we would surely be astray and mad
Has the reminder been cast upon him from among us? Nay, he is an insolent liar.”
On the morrow they will know who is the insolent liar
Behold! We are sending the she-camel as a trial for them; so watch them and be patient
And inform them that the water is to be divided among them—each share of drink equitably proportioned
Then they called their companion, and he took in hand and hamstrung [her]
How, then, were My Punishment and My warnings
Truly We sent upon them a single cry, and they were like a fence maker’s dry sticks
And indeed We have made the Quran easy to remember; so is there any who remembers
The people of Lot denied the warnings
Truly We sent upon them a torrent of stones, save the family of Lot, whom We delivered at dawn
as a blessing from Us. Thus do We requite whosoever gives thanks
And indeed he had warned them of Our assault, but they disputed the warnings
They had sought to lure him from his guests; so We blotted out their eyes. So taste My Punishment and My warnings
And indeed an enduring punishment greeted them early in the morning
So taste My Punishment and My warnings
And indeed We have made the Quran easy to remember; so is there any who remembers
And indeed the warnings came unto the House of Pharaoh
They denied Our signs—all of them; so We seized them with the seizing of One Mighty, Omnipotent
Are your disbelievers better than those? Or have you some exemption in the scriptures
Or do they say, “We are a host victorious!”
The whole shall be routed and they will turn [their] backs
Nay! The Hour is their tryst, and the Hour is more calamitous and more bitter
Truly the guilty are astray and mad
On the Day they are dragged upon their faces into the Fire, “Taste the touch of Saqar.”
Truly We have created everything according to a measure
And Our Command is naught but one, like the blinking of an eye
We have indeed destroyed the likes of you; so is there any who remembers
Everything that they have done is in the scriptures
everything small and great is inscribed
Truly the reverent are amidst Gardens and a stream
upon a seat of truth before an Omnipotent King
The Compassionate
taught the Quran
created man
taught him speech
The sun and the moon are upon a reckoning
And the stars and the trees prostrate
Heaven He has raised and the Balance He has set
that you transgress not in the balance
So set right the weight and fall not short in the balance
The earth has He laid down for creatures
Therein are fruit and date palms bearing sheaths
husked grains and fragrant herbs
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
He created man from dried clay, like earthen vessels
and He created jinn from smokeless fire
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Lord of the two easts and Lord of the two wests
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
He mixed the two seas, such that they meet one another
Between them lies a barrier that they transgress not
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
From them come forth pearls and coral stones
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
His are the ships towering aloft upon the sea like standards
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
All that is upon it passes away
And there remains the Face of thy Lord, Possessed of Majesty and Bounty
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Those in the heavens and on the earth entreat Him: every day He is upon a task
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
We shall have leisure for you both
weighty ones
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
O company of jinn and men, if you are able to pass beyond the regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass, you shall not pass, save by a warrant
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
A flash of fire and molten brass shall be sent against you, and you shall not prevail
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
When the sky shall be rent asunder and when it shall turn ruddy like hide
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
On that Day no man shall be questioned as to his sin; nor shall any jinn
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
The guilty shall be known by their marks; and they shall be seized by the forelocks and by the feet
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
This is Hell that the guilty deny
to and fro shall they pass, between it and boiling waters
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
And for one who fears standing before his Lord, there are two Gardens
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Each abounding in green branches
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
In each are two fountains flowing
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
In each are two kinds of every fruit
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
They recline upon beds lined with rich brocade, the fruits of the two Gardens near at hand
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Therein are maidens of modest gaze, whom neither man nor jinn has ever touched
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Even as the ruby and as the coral stone are they
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Is the reward of goodness aught but goodness? a So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
And beyond these two are two Gardens—
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny?—
of deepest green
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
In each are two fountains bubbling
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
In each are fruits, date palms, and pomegranates
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Therein are good and beautiful ones
so which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Maidens secluded in pavilions
so which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Untouched as yet by man or jinn
so which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
They recline upon green cushions and beautiful wonders
So which of your Lord’s boons do you two deny
Blessed is the Name of thy Lord, Possessed of Majesty and Bounty
When the Event befalls
none shall deny its befalling
abasing, exalting
When the earth is shaken violently
and the mountains are pulverized to powder
such that they become scattered dust
and you shall be of three kinds
the companions of the right; what of the companions of the right
And the companions of the left; what of the companions of the left
And the foremost shall be the foremost
They are the ones brought nigh
in Gardens of bliss—
many from those of old
and few from those of later times—
upon embroidered couches
reclining upon them, facing one another
Immortal youths wait upon them
with goblets, ewers, and a cup from a flowing spring
wherefrom they suffer neither headache nor stupefaction
with fruits as they choose
and the meat of birds as they desire
and [there shall be] wide-eyed maidens
the likeness of concealed pearls
as a recompense for that which they used to do
They hear no idle talk therein, nor incitement to sin
save that “Peace! Peace!” is uttered
And the companions of the right; what of the companions of the right
Among thornless lote trees
clustered plantains
and extended shade
gushing water
and abundant fruit
neither out of reach, nor forbidden
and [upon] raised beds
Truly We brought them into being as a [new] creation
then made for them virgins
amorous peers
for the companions of the right—
many from those of old
and many from those of later times
And the companions of the left; what of the companions of the left
Amidst scorching wind and boiling liquid
and the shadow of black smoke
neither cool nor refreshing
Truly before that they lived in luxury
would persist in great sin
and would say, “What! When we are dead and have become dust and bones, are we to be resurrected
What! And our fathers of old?”
Say, “Truly those of old and those of later times
are gathered for the tryst of a day appointed.”
Then indeed you—O you straying deniers—
shall eat from a tree of Zaqqum
and fill your bellies therewith
Then you shall drink from boiling liquid
drinking as do parched camels
This shall be their welcome on the Day of Judgment
We created you. Would that you affirm it
Have you considered that which you emit
Is it you who created it or are We the creators
We have decreed death among you, and none outstrips Us
in replacing [you with] your likenesses and bringing you into being again in what you know not
You have indeed known the first genesis. Why, then, do you not reflect
Have you considered what you reap
Is it you who sow it or are We the sowers
Had We willed, We would have turned it to chaff, such that you would remain bitterly jesting
[saying] “Truly we have suffered loss
Nay! We are deprived.”
Have you considered the water that you drink
Is it you who sent it down from the clouds, or is it We Who send down
If We had willed, We would have made it bitter; will you not, then, give thanks
Have you considered the fire that you kindle
Is it you who brought into being the tree thereof, or is it We Who bring into being
We made it a reminder and an enjoyment for the desert dwellers
So glorify the Name of thy Lord, the Magnificent
I swear by the places where the stars descend
And truly it is a magnificent oath, if you but knew
Truly it is a Noble Quran
in a Book concealed
None touch it, save those made pure
a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
Do you then scorn this discourse
and make the denial thereof your provision
Why, then, when it reaches the throat
while you are looking on
—and We are nearer to him than you, though you see not—
why, then, if you are unconstrained
do you not return it, if you are truthful
So if one be among those brought nigh
then comfort, bounty, and a Garden of bliss
And if one be among the companions of the right
then peace unto thee from the companions of the right
But if one be among the deniers who are astray
then a welcome of boiling liquid
and burning in Hellfire
Verily, this is the truth of certainty
so glorify the Name of thy Lord, the Magnificent
Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies God, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
Unto Him belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death, and He is Powerful over all things
He is the First, and the Last, and the Outward, and the Inward; and He is Knower of all things
He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days. Then He mounted the Throne. He knows that which enters the earth and that which issues therefrom, that which descends from Heaven and that which ascends thereto. He is with you wheresoever you are, and God sees whatsoever you do
Unto Him belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and unto God are all matters returned
He makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night, and He knows what lies within breasts
Believe in God and His Messenger and spend from that over which He has appointed you as trustees. For those of you who believe and spend, theirs shall be a great reward
How is it that you believe not in God when the Messenger calls you to believe in your Lord—and He has indeed made a covenant with you—if you are believers
He it is Who sends down clear signs upon His servant to bring you out of darkness into light, and truly God is Kind and Merciful unto you
And how is it that you do not spend in the way of God when unto God belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. Not equal among you are those who spent and fought before the victory. They are greater in rank than those who spend and fight afterwards; yet God has promised unto each that which is most beautiful, and God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Who is it that will lend unto God a goodly loan? He will multiply it for him, and his shall be a generous reward
On the Day when you see the believing men and the believing women with their light spreading before them and on their right, “Glad tidings unto you this Day: Gardens with rivers running below, therein to abide. That is the great triumph.”
On the Day when the hypocrites, men and women, will say to those who believe, “Wait for us that we may borrow from your light,” it will be said, “Turn back and seek a light!” Thereupon a wall with a gate will be set down between them, the inner side of which contains mercy, and on the outer side of which lies punishment
They will call unto them, “Were we not with you?” They reply, “Indeed! But you tempted yourselves, bided your time, and doubted; and false hopes deluded you till the Command of God came, and the Deluder deluded you concerning God
So this day no ransom shall be taken from you, or from those who disbelieved.” Your refuge shall be the Fire; it shall be your master. What an evil journey’s end
Has not the time come for those who believe for their hearts to be humbled to the remembrance of God and the truth that has come down, and to be not like those who were given the Book aforetime? But the span of time was too long for them, such that their hearts hardened and many of them are iniquitous
Know that God revives the earth after its death. We have indeed made the signs clear for you, that haply you may understand
Truly men who give in charity and women who give in charity and lend unto God a goodly loan, it will be multiplied for them, and theirs shall be a generous reward
And those who believe in God and His messengers—it is they who are truthful and are witnesses before their Lord. They have their reward and their light. And those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, they are the inhabitants of Hellfire
Know that the life of this world is but play, diversion, ornament, mutual boasting among you, and vying for increase in property and children—the likeness of a rain whose vegetation impresses the farmers; then it withers such that you see it turn yellow; then it becomes chaff. And in the Hereafter there shall be severe punishment, forgiveness from God, and contentment, and the life of this world is naught but the enjoyment of delusion
Race unto forgiveness from your Lord and to a garden whose breadth is as the breadth of Heaven and earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers. That is the Bounty of God, which He gives to whomsoever He will, and God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
No misfortune befalls the earth nor yourselves, save that it is in a Book before We bring it forth—truly that is easy for God—
that you not despair over what has passed you by, nor exult in that which He has given unto you. And God loves not any vainglorious boaster
those who are miserly and enjoin people to be miserly. Yet whosoever turns away, truly God, He is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised
We have indeed sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and We sent down the Book and the Balance with them, that the people would uphold justice. And We sent down iron, wherein are great might and benefits for mankind, and so that God may know those who will help Him and His messengers unseen. Truly God is Strong, Mighty
And indeed We sent Noah and Abraham and established prophethood and the Book among their progeny. And among them is he who is rightly guided; yet many of them are iniquitous
Then We sent Our messengers to follow in their footsteps, and We sent Jesus son of Mary, and We gave him the Gospel and placed kindness and mercy in the hearts of those who follow him. And monasticism they invented—We did not ordain it for them—only to seek God’s Contentment. Yet they did not observe it with proper observance. So We gave those of them who believed their reward, yet many of them are iniquitous
O you who believe! Reverence God and believe in His Messenger; He will give you a twofold portion of His Mercy, make a light for you by which you may walk, and forgive you—and God is Forgiving, Merciful—
such that the People of the Book may know that they have no power over any of God’s Bounty, and that the Bounty is in God’s Hand; He gives it unto whomsoever He will; and God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
God has indeed heard the words of she who disputes with thee concerning her husband and complains to God. And God hears your conversation. Truly God is Hearing, Seeing
Those among you who commit ?ihar against their wives, those are not their mothers. None are their mothers save those who gave birth to them. Truly they speak indecent words and calumny. And truly God is Pardoning, Forgiving
As for those who commit ?ihar against their wives and then go back on what they have said, let them free a slave before they touch one another; to that are you counseled. And God is Aware of whatsoever you do
And whosoever finds not [the means], let him fast two consecutive months before they touch one another. And whosoever is unable, let him feed sixty indigent people. That is so that you may believe in God and His Messenger. These are the limits set by God, and the disbelievers shall have a painful punishment
Truly those who oppose God and His Messenger shall be abased, just as those before them were abased. We have indeed sent down clear signs, and the disbelievers shall have a humiliating punishment
on the Day when God resurrects them all together, then informs them of that which they did. God has kept account of it while they have forgotten it; and God is Witness over all things
Hast thou not considered that God knows whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth? There is no secret converse among three, but that He is their fourth, nor among five, but that He is their sixth, nor less than that, nor more, but that He is with them wheresoever they are. Then on the Day of Resurrection He will inform them of that which they did. Truly God is Knower of all things
Hast thou not seen those who were forbidden from secretly conversing then returned to that which they had been forbidden, secretly conversing with a view to sin, enmity, and disobeying the Messenger? And when they come to thee and greet thee, they greet thee in a manner that God has not greeted thee and say within themselves, “Why does God not punish us for what we say?” Hell suffices them, burning therein. What an evil journey’s end
O you who believe! If you converse in secret, then do not converse in secret with a view to sin, enmity, and disobeying the Messenger; converse in secret with a view to piety and reverence. And reverence God, unto Whom you shall be gathered
Secret converse is only from Satan, so that those who believe may grieve; yet he harms them not a whit, save by God’s Leave. And in God let the believers trust
O you who believe! When it is said unto you, “Make room for one another in the assemblies,” then make room, and God will make room for you. And when it is said, “Rise,” then rise, and God will raise in degrees those among you who believe and those who have been given knowledge. God is Aware of whatsoever you do
O you who believe! When you converse in secret with the Messenger, offer charity before your secret converse. That is better for you and purer. But if you do not find [the means], truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Are you apprehensive about offering charity before your secret converse? If you do not do so and God relents unto you, then perform the prayer, give the alms, and obey God and His Messenger. God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Hast thou not seen those who befriend a people with whom God is wroth? They are not of you, nor are you of them. And they knowingly swear upon falsehood
God has prepared for them a severe punishment. Evil indeed is that which they used to do
They took their oaths as a shield and thus turned from the way of God; so theirs shall be a humiliating punishment
Neither their property nor their children will avail them aught against God. They are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein
On the Day when God resurrects them all, they will swear to Him just as they swear to you, supposing that they have some standing. Lo! Truly they are the liars
Satan has overwhelmed them, and so made them forget the remembrance of God. They are the party of Satan. Lo! The party of Satan are losers
Truly those who oppose God and His Messenger, they will be among the abased
God has decreed, “I shall surely prevail, I and My messengers!” Truly God is Strong, Mighty
You shall not find a people who believe in God and the Last Day loving those who oppose God and His Messenger, even if they be their fathers, their sons, their brothers, or their tribe. God has inscribed faith upon their hearts and strengthened them with a Spirit from Him. He causes them to enter Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein, God being content with them and they being content with Him. They are the party of God. Truly the party of God—it is they who shall prosper
Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies God, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
He it is Who expelled those who disbelieve among the People of the Book from their homes at the first gathering. You did not think they would go forth, and they thought their fortresses would protect them from God. Then God came upon them whence they reckoned not, and cast terror into their hearts, as they razed their houses with their own hands and with the hands of the believers. So take heed, O you who are possessed of sight
Had God not ordained banishment for them, He would have punished them in this world. And in the Hereafter theirs shall be the punishment of the Fire
That is because they defied God and His Messenger; and whosoever defies God and His Messenger, truly God is severe in retribution
Whatsoever of the palm trees you cut down or left standing upon their roots, it was by God’s Leave, and that He might disgrace the iniquitous
As for what God has given in spoils from them to the Messenger, you spurred neither horse nor camel for it. But God grants His messengers authority over whomsoever He will, and God is Powerful over all things
That which God has given in spoils to His Messenger from the people of the towns is for God and His Messenger, and for kinfolk, orphans, the indigent, and the traveler, that it not come to circulate among your wealthy. Whatsoever the Messenger gives you, take it; and whatsoever he forbids to you, forgo, and reverence God. Truly God is severe in retribution
For the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their property seeking bounty and contentment from God and who help God and His Messenger—it is, they who are the truthful
And those who were settled in the land and in belief before them love those who emigrated to them and find in their breasts no need for that which they were given. They prefer others over themselves, even if they be impoverished. And whosoever is shielded from the avarice of his soul, it is they who shall prosper
And those who came after them say, “Our Lord! Forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith, and place no rancor in our hearts toward those who believe. Our Lord! Truly Thou art Kind, Merciful.”
Hast thou not seen those who act with hypocrisy, saying to their brothers who disbelieve among the People of the Book, “If you are expelled, surely we shall go forth with you. And we shall never obey anyone against you. And if you are fought, we shall help you.” God bears witness that they are surely liars
Were they expelled, they would not go forth with them, and were they fought, they would not help them. And were they to help them, they would surely turn their backs. Then they would not be helped
Truly you incite more intense dread in their breasts than God. That is because they are a people who do not comprehend
They will not fight you all together, save in fortified towns or from behind walls. Their might is fierce among themselves. You suppose that they are together; yet their hearts are divided. That is because they are a people who do not understand
like those who shortly before them tasted the evil consequences of their affair—and theirs shall be a painful punishment—
like Satan when he says unto man, “Disbelieve!” Then when he disbelieves, he says, “Surely I am quit of you. Truly I fear God, Lord of the worlds.”
The end of both is that they will be in the Fire, abiding therein. That is the recompense of the wrongdoers
O you who believe! Reverence God and let every soul consider what it has sent forth for the morrow; and reverence God. Truly God is Aware of whatsoever you do
And be not like those who forget God, such that He makes them forget their souls. It is they who are the iniquitous
Not equal are the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of the Garden. The inhabitants of the Garden—they are the triumphant
Had We made this Quran descend upon a mountain, thou wouldst have seen it humbled, rent asunder by the fear of God. These are the parables We set forth for mankind, that haply they may reflect
He is God, other than Whom there is no god, Knower of the Unseen and the seen. And He is the Compassionate, the Merciful
He is God, other than Whom there is no god, the Sovereign, the Holy, Peace, the Faithful, the Protector, the Mighty, the Compeller, the Proud. Glory be to Him above the partners they ascribe
He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; unto Him belong the Most Beautiful Names. Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Him, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
O you who believe! Take not Mine enemy and your enemy as friends—you offer them affection, though they have indeed disbelieved in the truth that has come to you, expelling the Messenger and you for having believed in God your Lord—if you have gone forth striving in My way and seeking My good pleasure. You show them affection in secret, while I know best that which you hide and that which you disclose. And whosoever among you does so has indeed strayed from the right way
Were they to come upon you, they would be enemies unto you and would stretch forth their hands and their tongues against you in evil. And they wish you to disbelieve
Your family relations and your children will not benefit you on the Day of Resurrection; He will distinguish between you. And God sees whatsoever you do
There is indeed a beautiful example for you in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, “Truly we are quit of you and of all that you worship apart from God. We have rejected you, and enmity and hatred have arisen between us and you forever, till you believe in God alone”; save for Abraham’s saying to his father, “I shall assuredly ask forgiveness for you, though I have no power to avail you aught from God.” “Our Lord, in Thee do we trust, unto Thee do we turn in repentance, and unto Thee is the journey’s end
Our Lord! Make us not a trial for those who disbelieve, and forgive us. Our Lord! Truly Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.”
You have a beautiful example in them for whosoever hopes for God and the Last Day. And whosoever turns away—truly God is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised
It may be that God will forge affection between you and those of them with whom you are in enmity. God is Powerful, and God is Forgiving, Merciful
God does not forbid you, with regard to those who did not fight you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes, from treating them righteously and being just toward them. Truly God loves the just
God only forbids you, with regard to those who fought you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and supported your expulsion, from befriending them; whosoever befriends them, they are the wrongdoers
O you who believe! When the believing women come unto you as emigrants, examine them. God knows best their faith. Then if you know them to be believers, do not return them to the disbelievers. Those women are not lawful for those men; nor are those men lawful for those women. And give them what they have spent. There is no blame upon you if you marry them when you have given them their bridewealth. And hold not to the ties of disbelieving women. Ask for what you have spent, and let them ask for what they have spent. That is the Judgment of God; He judges between you. And God is Knowing, Wise
And if any of your wives should go over to the disbelievers, and then you have your turn, give those whose wives have gone the like of what they have spent. And reverence God, in Whom you are believers
O Prophet! When believing women come unto thee, pledging unto thee that they will not ascribe any as partners unto God, nor steal, nor fornicate, nor slay their children, nor bring a slanderous lie that they have fabricated between their hands and feet, nor disobey thee in anything honorable, then accept their pledge and seek God’s Forgiveness for them. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! Do not befriend a people with whom God is wroth; they who have despaired of the Hereafter, just as the disbelievers have despaired of the inhabitants of graves
Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies God, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do
Grievously odious is it in the Sight of God that you say that which you do not do
Truly God loves those who fight in His way in ranks, as if they were a solid structure
And [remember] when Moses said unto his people, “O my people! Why do you hurt me, though you know well that I am the Messenger of God unto you?” So when they swerved, God caused their hearts to swerve; and God guides not iniquitous people
And [remember] when Jesus son of Mary said, “O Children of Israel! Truly I am the Messenger of God unto you, confirming that which came before me in the Torah and bearing glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me whose name is A?mad.” And when he came unto them with clear proofs, they said, “This is manifest sorcery.”
Who does greater wrong than one who fabricates lies against God, while he is being called to submission? And God guides not wrongdoing people
They desire to extinguish the Light of God with their mouths, but God completes His Light, though the disbelievers be averse
He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth to make it prevail over all religion, though the idolaters be averse
O you who believe! Shall I direct you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment
that you believe in God and the Messenger and strive in God’s way with your wealth and your souls? That is better for you, if you but knew
He will forgive you your sins and cause you to enter Gardens with rivers running below, and goodly dwellings in Gardens of Eden—that is the great triumph—
and something else that you love: help from God and a victory nigh. So give glad tidings to the believers
O you who believe! Be helpers of God, just as Jesus son of Mary said to the apostles, “Who are my helpers unto God?” The apostles replied, “We are helpers unto God.” Then a group from the Children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved. So We strengthened those who believed against their enemies, and they came to prevail
Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies God, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Mighty, the Wise
He it is Who sent among the unlettered a Messenger from among themselves, reciting unto them His signs, purifying them, and teaching them the Book and Wisdom, though before they were in manifest error
and others among them, who have not yet joined them. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
That is the Bounty of God, which He gives to whomsoever He will. And God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty
The parable of those [who were] made to bear the Torah, then did not bear it, is that of an ass bearing books. How evil is the likeness of the people who denied God’s signs! And God guides not wrongdoing people
Say, “O you who are Jews! If you claim that you are friends unto God apart from [other] people, then long for death, if you are truthful.”
But they will never long for it due to that which their hands have sent forth. And God knows the wrongdoers
Say, “Truly the death from which you flee will surely meet you; then you shall be returned to the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of that which you used to do.”
“O you who believe! When you are called to the congregational prayer, hasten to the remembrance of God and leave off trade. That is better for you, if you but knew
And when the prayer is completed, disperse throughout the land and seek the Bounty of God, and remember God much, that haply you may prosper.”
And when they see some commerce or diversion, they scatter toward it and leave thee standing. Say, “That which is with God is better than diversion and commerce; and God is the best of providers.”
When the hypocrites come unto thee, they say, “We bear witness that thou art indeed the Messenger of God.” Yet God knows that thou art indeed His Messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are surely liars
They took their oaths as a shield and thus turned from the way of God. Evil indeed is that which they used to do
That is because they believed, and then disbelieved; so a seal was set upon their hearts such that they comprehend not
And when thou seest them, their bodies impress thee, and if they speak, thou listenest to their speech. [Yet] they are like leaning timbers. They suppose that every cry is against them. They are the enemy; so be wary of them. May God curse them! How are they perverted
And when it is said unto them, “Come! The Messenger of God will ask forgiveness for you,” they twist their heads, and thou seest them turning away in arrogance
It is the same for them whether thou askest forgiveness for them or thou askest forgiveness for them not; God will never forgive them. Truly God guides not iniquitous people
They are the ones who say, “Do not spend on those who are with the Messenger of God, that they may disperse.” Yet to God belong the treasuries of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites comprehend not
They say, “If we return to Madinah, the mightier will surely expel the weaker therefrom.” Yet unto God belongs the might and unto His Messenger and the believers, but the hypocrites know not
O you who believe! Let neither your property nor your children divert you from the remembrance of God. Whosoever does so, it is they who are the losers
And spend of that which We have provided you before death comes upon one of you and he says, “My Lord, wouldst that Thou grant me reprieve till a term nigh, that I may give charity and be among the righteous!”
Yet God will not grant any soul reprieve when its term has come. And God is Aware of whatsoever you do
Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies God. His is the Sovereignty and His is the praise, and He is Powerful over all things
He it is Who created you; among you are disbelievers and among you are believers. And God sees whatsoever you do
He created the heavens and the earth in truth and formed you, then made beautiful your forms, and unto Him is the journey’s end
He knows whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you disclose; God knows what lies within breasts
Has not the account come to you of those who disbelieved aforetime such that they tasted the evil consequences of their affair, and theirs shall be a painful punishment
That is because their messengers brought them clear proofs, at which they said, “Shall a human being guide us?” So they disbelieved and turned away; yet God is beyond need. And God is Self-Sufficient, Praised
Those who disbelieve claim that they will not be resurrected. Say, “Yea! By my Lord! Surely you shall be resurrected. Then you shall be informed of that which you did; and that is easy for God.”
So believe in God and His Messenger and the light We have sent down. God is Aware of whatsoever you do
The day that He gathers you for the Day of Gathering, that is the Day of Mutual Dispossession. And whosoever believes in God and works righteousness, He will absolve him of his evil deeds and cause him to enter Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein forever. That is the great triumph
And those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, they are the inhabitants of the Fire, abiding therein. What an evil journey’s end
No misfortune befalls, save by God’s Leave. And whosoever believes in God, He guides his heart. And God is Knower of all things
Obey God and obey the Messenger. Then if you turn away—only the clear proclamation is incumbent upon Our Messenger
God, there is no god but He, and in God let the believers trust
O you who believe! Among your spouses and your children there is indeed an enemy unto you; so be wary of them. Yet if you pardon, forbear, and forgive, then truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
Your property and your children are only a trial; and God—with Him is a great reward
So reverence God as much as you are able. Listen, obey, and spend; that is better for your souls. And whosoever is shielded from the avarice of his soul, it is they who shall prosper
If you lend unto God a goodly loan, He will multiply it for you and forgive you; and God is Thankful, Clement
Knower of the Unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Wise
Prophet! When you divorce your wives, divorce them for the waiting period and count well the waiting period, and reverence your Lord. Expel them not from their houses; nor shall they depart, unless they commit a flagrant indecency. These are the limits set by God, and whosoever transgresses the limits set by God has surely wronged himself. Thou knowest not: perhaps God will bring something new to pass thereafter
So when they have fulfilled their term, take them back in an honorable way or separate from them in an honorable way. And call two just persons among yourselves to witness and uphold the testimony for God. By this is exhorted whosoever believes in God and the Last Day. And whosoever reverences God, He will appoint a way out for him
and will provide for him whence he reckons not. And whosoever trusts in God, He suffices him. Truly God fulfills His Command. God has indeed set a measure for all things
As for those of your women who no longer await menstruation, if you are unsure, then their waiting period is three months, as it is for those who are yet to menstruate. But as for those who are pregnant, their term is until they deliver. And whosoever reverences God, He will appoint ease for his affair
That is the Command of God that He has sent down unto you. Whosoever reverences God, He will absolve him of his evil deeds and honor him with reward
Let them dwell where you dwell according to your means, and do not harm them so as to put them in straits. And if they are pregnant, then spend on them until they deliver. Then if they are suckling for you, give them their compensation, and consult together in an honorable way. And if you have difficulty with one another, then another will suckle for him
Let one who has abundant wealth spend from his abundance. And let one whose provision is measured spend from that which God has given him. God tasks no soul beyond that which He has given it. God will bring ease after hardship
And how many a town insolently defied the Command of its Lord and His messengers, such that We called it to a severe reckoning and punished it with a terrible punishment
Then did it taste the evil consequences of its affair, and the end of its affair was loss
God prepared a severe punishment for them. So reverence God, O possessors of intellect, who have believed. God has certainly sent down unto you a reminder
a Messenger reciting unto you the clear signs of God to bring those who believe and perform righteous deeds out of darkness into light. And whosoever believes in God and works righteousness, He causes him to enter Gardens with rivers running below, to abide therein forever. God has indeed prepared for him a beautiful provision
God it is Who created the seven heavens, and from the earth the like thereof. The Command descends among them that you may know that God is Powerful over all things and that God has encompassed all things in knowledge
Prophet! Why dost thou forbid that which God has made lawful unto thee, seeking the good pleasure of thy wives? And God is Forgiving, Merciful
God has already ordained for you the absolution of your oaths. And God is your Master. He is the Knower, the Wise
When the Prophet confided a certain matter to one of his wives, but she divulged it, and God showed it to him, he made known part of it and held back part of it. When he informed her of it, she said, “Who informed thee of this?” He replied, “The Knower, the Aware informed me.”
If you both repent unto God For your hearts did certainly incline, and if you aid one another against him, then truly God, He is his Protector, as are Gabriel and the righteous among the believers; and the angels support him withal
It may be that if he divorces you, his Lord would give him wives in your stead who are better than you, submitting, believing, devoutly obedient, penitent, worshipping, and given to wayfaring—previously married, and virgins
O you who believe! Shield yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is men and stones, over which are angels, stern and severe, who do not disobey God in what He commands of them and who do what they are commanded
O you who disbelieve! Make no excuses this day! You are only requited for that which you used to do
O you who believe! Repent unto God with sincere repentance. It may be that your Lord will absolve you of your evil deeds and cause you to enter Gardens with rivers running below—the Day when God will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believe with him, with their light spreading before them and on their right, while they say, “Our Lord, complete our light for us and forgive us. Truly Thou art Powerful over all things.”
O Prophet! Strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh with them. Their refuge is Hell. What an evil journey’s end
God sets forth as an example for those who disbelieve the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were under two of Our righteous servants; then they betrayed them, and they availed them naught against God. And it was said unto both, “Enter the Fire with those who enter.”
And God sets forth as an example for those who believe the wife of Pharaoh when she said, “My Lord, build for me a house near unto Thee in the Garden, deliver me from Pharaoh and his deeds, and deliver me from the wrongdoing people,”
and Mary, the daughter of ?Imran, who preserved her chastity. Then We breathed therein of Our Spirit, and she confirmed the Words of her Lord and His Books; and she was among the devoutly obedient
Blessed is He in Whose Hand lies sovereignty, and He is Powerful over all things
Who created death and life that He may try you as to which of you is most virtuous in deed, and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving
Who created seven heavens one upon another; no disproportion dost thou see in the Merciful’s creation. Cast thy sight again; dost thou see any flaw
Then cast thy sight twice again; thy sight will return to thee humbled and wearied
Truly We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and made them missiles against the satans; and We have prepared for them the punishment of the Blaze
And for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the punishment of Hell. What an evil journey’s end
When they are cast therein, they will hear it blaring as it boils over
well-nigh bursting with rage. Whenever a group is cast therein, its keepers ask them, “Did not a warner come unto you?”
They say, “Indeed, a warner came unto us, but we denied him and said, ‘God did not send anything down; you are in naught but great error.’”
They say, “Had we listened or had we understood, we would not be among the inhabitants of the Blaze.”
Thus do they admit their sin; so away with the inhabitants of the Blaze
Truly for those who fear their Lord unseen there shall be forgiveness and a great reward
Keep your speech secret or proclaim it; truly He knows what lies within breasts
Does He Who created not know? He is the Subtle, the Aware
He is the One Who made the earth tractable for you; so travel the open roads thereof and eat of His provision. And unto Him is the Resurrection
Do you feel secure that He Who is in Heaven will not cause the earth to engulf you while it churns
Or do you feel secure that He Who is in Heaven will not unleash a torrent of stones upon you? Soon shall you know how My warning is
And indeed those before them denied. How, then, was the change I wrought
Have they not considered the birds above them, spreading and folding up [their wings]? None holds them save the Compassionate. Truly He sees all things
Who is it that will be a host for you, who may help you, apart from the Compassionate? The disbelievers are in naught but delusion
Who is it that will provide for you if He withholds His provision? Nay, but they persist in insolence and aversion
Is one who walks with his face stooped down more guided, or one who walks upright upon a straight path
Say, “He it is Who brought you into being and endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts. Little do you give thanks!”
Say, “He it is Who multiplied you upon the earth, and unto Him shall you be gathered.”
And they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
Say, “Knowledge lies with God alone, and I am only a clear warner.”
And when they see it close at hand, the faces of those who disbelieved shall be stricken, and it shall be said, “This is that for which you called.”
Say, “Have you considered whether God destroys me and those with me or has mercy upon us? Who will protect the disbelievers from a painful punishment?”
Say, “He is the Compassionate; we believe in Him and trust in Him, and you will soon know who is in manifest error.”
Say, “Have you considered? Were your water to vanish into the ground, then who would bring you flowing water?”
Nun. By the pen and that which they inscribe
thou art not, by the blessing of thy Lord, possessed
Truly thine shall be a reward unceasing
And truly thou art of an exalted character
So thou wilt see and they will see
which of you is afflicted
Truly thy Lord knows best those who stray from His way, and He knows best those who are rightly guided
so obey not the deniers
They wish that thou might compromise and that they might compromise
So obey not any vile oath-monger—
slanderer spreading calumny
hinderer of good, a transgressing sinner
churlish, surly, and ignoble withal—
simply because he possesses wealth and children
When Our signs are recited unto him he says, “Fables of those of old.”
We shall brand him on the snout
Truly We tried them, just as We tried the owners of the garden who vowed that they would harvest its fruit in the morning
And they made no exception
Whereupon a visitation from your Lord came upon it while they slept
such that it became like a garden plucked
Then they called to one another in the morning
“Go early to your tillage if you would harvest.”
So they set forth while whispering to one another
“Surely no indigent shall come to you therein today.”
And they set out early, strong in their purpose
Then when they saw it, they said, “Surely, we are astray
Nay! we are deprived!”
The most moderate of them said, “Did I not say to you, why do you not glorify?”
They said, “Glory be to our Lord! Truly we were wrongdoers.”
Then they turned to one another, reproaching each other
saying, “Oh, woe unto us! Truly we were rebellious
Perhaps our Lord will give us something better in its stead. Truly we beseech our Lord.”
Such is the punishment; yet the punishment of the Hereafter is surely greater, if they but knew
Truly for the reverent there shall be Gardens of bliss in the presence of their Lord
Are We then to treat the submitters like the guilty
What ails you? How do you judge
Or do you have a book wherein you learn
that you shall have therein whatsoever you choose
Or do you have oaths binding upon Us until the Day of Resurrection that you shall have whatever you ordain
Ask them which of them shall vouch for that
Or do they have partners? Then let them bring their partners if they are truthful
On the Day when the shank is laid bare and they are called to prostrate, yet are not able
their eyes humbled, abasement shall overcome them; for they had indeed been called to prostrate while they were yet sound
So leave Me with those who deny this discourse. We shall lead them on little by little, whence they know not
And I shall grant them respite; truly My scheme is firm
Or dost thou ask a reward of them, such that they are burdened with debt
Or do they possess the Unseen, such that they write it down
So be patient with thy Lord’s Judgment and be not like the companion of the fish, who cried out while choking with anguish
Had not the blessing from his Lord reached him, he would surely have been cast upon the barren shore still blameworthy
But his Lord chose him and made him among the righteous
Indeed, those who disbelieve would well-nigh smite thee down with their glances when they hear the Reminder, saying, “Surely, he is possessed.”
Yet it is naught but a reminder for the worlds
The Undeniable Reality
What is the Undeniable Reality
And what shall apprise thee of the Undeniable Reality
Thamud and ?Ad denied the calamity
As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the overwhelming
And as for ?Ad, they were destroyed by a howling, raging wind
He imposed it upon them for seven nights and eight days consecutively, so that thou might see the people felled as if they were hollowed palm trunks
So dost thou see any remnant of them
And Pharaoh and those before him, and those subverted brought iniquity
They disobeyed the messenger of their Lord, and He seized them with a devastating blow
Truly when the waters overflowed, We carried you upon the ship
that We might make it a reminder for you, and that attentive ears might take heed
Then when a single blast is blown in the trumpet
and the earth and mountains are borne away and ground up in a single grinding
on that Day the Event shall befall
the sky shall be rent asunder; for that Day it shall be frail
And the angels shall be at its sides; that Day eight shall carry the Throne of thy Lord above them
That Day you shall be exposed; no secret of yours shall be hidden
As for one who is given his book in his right hand, he will say, “Here, read my book
Truly I knew for certain that I would meet my reckoning.”
So he shall enjoy a life contenting
in a lofty Garden
with low-hanging clusters
Eat and drink in enjoyment for that which you did in the past in days gone by
And as for one who is given his book in his left hand, he will say, “Would that I had not been given my book
And did not know of my reckoning
Would that it were the final end
My wealth availed me not
My power has passed from me.”
Take him and shackle him
Then cast him in Hellfire
Then put him in a chain whose length is seventy cubits
Truly he did not believe in God the Magnificent
and did not urge feeding the indigent
So today he has no loyal friend here
nor food, save filth
which none eat, save the iniquitous
So I swear by what you see
and by what you see not
truly it is the speech of a noble messenger
and not the speech of a poet. Little do you believe
Nor is it the speech of a soothsayer. Little do you reflect
It is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
Had he ascribed any statements to Us
We would have taken him by the right hand
Then We would have severed his life vein
And none among you could have shielded him from it
Truly it is a reminder for the reverent
And truly We know that among you are those who deny
It is a source of regret indeed for the disbelievers
It is indeed the truth of certainty
So glorify the Name of thy Lord, the Magnificent
A questioner asked about an impending punishment
upon the disbelievers which none can avert
from God, Lord of the ascending ways
Unto Him ascend the angels and the Spirit on a day whose measure is fifty thousand years
So be patient with beautiful patience
Truly they see it as far off
but We see it as nigh
On a day when the sky is as molten lead
and the mountains are as carded wool
and no loyal friend shall ask about a loyal friend
[though] they will be made to see them. The guilty would wish to ransom himself from the punishment of that Day at the price of his children
his spouse, and his brother
his kin who had sheltered him
and all who are on the earth, that it might save him
Nay, but it is a churning fire
ripping away the scalp
calling to those who turned their backs and fled
who amassed and hoarded
Truly man was created anxious
when evil befalls him, fretful
and when good befalls him, begrudging
save those who perform prayer
who are constant in their prayers
and in whose wealth is an acknowledged due
for the beggar and the deprived
those who affirm the Day of Judgment
and who are wary of the punishment of their Lord—
truly there is no security from the punishment of their Lord
those who guard their private parts
save from their spouses or those whom their right hands possess, for then they are not blameworthy
but whosoever seeks beyond that, they are the transgressors
those who abide by their trusts and their pact
who uphold their testimony
and who are mindful of their prayers
those shall be in Gardens, honored
So how is it that those who disbelieve scramble toward thee
from the right and from the left in droves
Does every man among them desire to be admitted into a Garden of bliss
Nay! Truly We created them from that which they know
So I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests that We are able
to replace [them] with what is better than them; and none outstrips Us
So leave them to indulge in idle talk and play until they meet the Day that they are promised
a day when they come forth from their graves, hastening as if racing to a goal
their eyes humbled, abasement shall overcome them. That is the Day they have been promised
Truly We sent Noah to his people, “Warn thy people before a painful punishment comes upon them.”
He said, “O my people! I am a clear warner unto you
that you may worship God, reverence Him, and obey me
that He may forgive you some of your sins and grant you reprieve until a term appointed. Truly when the term of God comes, it will not be delayed, if you but knew.”
He said, “My Lord, I have called my people day and night
Yet my calling has not increased them in aught but flight
Truly whenever I call them, that Thou mayest forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears, cover themselves with their garments, persist, and wax most arrogant
Then I called them openly
Then I proclaimed to them and confided to them in secret
I said, ‘Seek forgiveness of your Lord! Truly He is Forgiving
He will send the sky upon you with abundant rains
support you with wealth and sons, and make for you gardens and rivers
What ails you that you do not hope for God with dignity
seeing that He has created you in stages
Have you not considered how God created the seven heavens one upon another
and made the moon a light therein and made the sun a lamp
And God made you grow forth from the earth like plants
Then He will cause you to return to it and bring you forth again
And God made the earth an open expanse for you
that you may travel spacious paths therein.’”
Noah said, “My Lord they disobeyed me and followed those whose wealth and children increase them in naught but loss.”
And they devised a mighty plot
saying, “Do not leave your gods; do not leave Wadd or Suwa?, or Yaguth, Ya?uq, or Nasr.”
Many indeed have they led astray; and it increases the wrongdoers in naught but error
Because of their iniquities they were drowned, then made to enter a Fire. And then they found no helpers for themselves apart from God
Noah said, “My Lord, leave not a single disbeliever to dwell upon the earth
Truly if you leave them, they will mislead Thy servants and will beget naught but disbelieving profligates
My Lord, forgive me and my parents, whosoever enters my house as a believer, and the believing men and the believing women, and do not increase the wrongdoers in aught but ruin.”
Say, “It was revealed unto me that a group of jinn listened, and said, ‘Truly we have heard a wondrous Quran
that guides to sound judgment; so we believe in it and will ascribe none as partner unto our Lord
And He—exalted be the Majesty of our Lord—has neither consort nor child
Truly the fool among us has uttered outrages against God
though we had thought that mankind and jinn would not utter lies regarding God
Indeed, individuals among mankind did seek refuge with individuals among the jinn, and so increased them in oppression
They thought, as did you, that God would resurrect no one
We reached out to Heaven and found it filled with mighty sentries and flaming stars
We used to sit in places thereof to listen, but whosoever listens now finds a flaming star lying in wait for him
We do not know whether evil is desired for those upon the earth, or whether their Lord desires guidance for them
Some among us are righteous, and some among us are otherwise; we are on paths divided
We knew for certain that we could never thwart God on earth; nor could we ever thwart Him by fleeing
And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it, for whosoever believes in his Lord shall fear neither detraction nor oppression
Some among us submit and some among us are unjust; those who submit seek guidance
and as for the unjust, they are kindling for Hell.’”
And [say], “[It was revealed unto me] that if they hold firm to the path, We shall give them abundant water
that We may try them therewith, and whosoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He leads him to a grievous punishment
and that places of worship are for God; so do not call upon another alongside God
and that when the servant of God rises to call upon Him, they well-nigh swarm upon him.”
Say, “I call only upon my Lord, and I ascribe none as a partner unto Him.”
Say, “I have no power over what harm or guidance may come to you.”
Say, “None will protect me from God, and I shall never find refuge apart from Him
if I do not convey from God and His messages. And whosoever disobeys God and His Messenger, his shall be the Fire of Hell, abiding therein forever
such that when they see what they are promised, they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in number.”
Say, “I know not whether that which you are promised is nigh or whether my Lord has appointed a term
Knower of the Unseen, He does not disclose His Unseen to anyone
save to the one whom He approves as a messenger. Then He dispatches before him and behind him a guard
that He may know that they have indeed conveyed the messages of their Lord. And He encompasses whatsoever is with them and keeps a numbered count of all things.”
O thou enwrapped
Stand vigil at night, save a little
half of it or reduce it a little
or add to it; and recite the Quran in a measured pace
Truly We shall soon cast upon thee a weighty Word
Truly the vigil of the night is firmest in tread and most upright for speech
For truly by day you have lengthy affairs
So remember the Name of thy Lord and devote thyself to Him with complete devotion—
Lord of the East and the West, there is no god but He, so take Him as a guardian
Bear patiently that which they say and take leave of them in a beautiful manner
Leave to Me the deniers living in luxury, and be gentle with them for a while
Truly with Us are fetters and Hellfire
food that chokes and a painful punishment—
on a day when the earth and the mountains shake, and the mountains will be like heaps of shifting sand
We have indeed sent you a messenger as a witness concerning you, just as We sent unto Pharaoh a messenger
But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We seized him with a torrential seizing
So if you disbelieve, how will you guard against a day that would make children gray-haired
The sky shall be rent asunder thereon. His Promise shall be fulfilled
Truly this is a reminder; so let him who will, take a way unto his Lord
Truly thy Lord knows that thou dost stand vigil well-nigh two-thirds of the night, or a half of it, or a third of it, as do a group of those who are with thee; and God measures out the night and the day. He knows that you will not keep count of it and has relented unto you; so recite that which is easy for you of the Quran. He knows that some of you will be sick, while others travel upon the earth, seeking God’s Bounty, and others fight in the way of God. So recite that which is easy of it, perform the prayer, give the alms, and lend unto God a goodly loan—whatever good you send forth for your souls, you will find it with God better and greater in reward. And seek God’s Forgiveness. Truly God is Forgiving, Merciful
O thou who art covered
arise and warn
Thy Lord magnify
Thy garments purify
And defilement shun
Grant not favor, seeking gain
And for the sake of thy Lord be patient
For when the trumpet is blown
that Day shall be a difficult day
for the disbelievers, not of ease
Leave Me alone with the one whom I created
and to whom I gave vast wealth
and sons at his side
and made smooth the way for him
Yet he desires that I give more
Nay! Truly he sets himself against Our signs
I shall constrain him to endure a steep ascent
Truly he reflected and determined
May he perish for how he determined
then may he perish for how he determined
Then he beheld
Then he frowned and scowled
Then he turned his back, and waxed arrogant
and said, “This is naught but sorcery handed down
this is naught but the speech of a human being.”
I shall cast him into Saqar
And what will apprise thee of Saqar
It spares not, nor leaves behind
It scorches the human being
Over it are nineteen
And We have appointed none but angels as wardens of the Fire; and We have not appointed their number save as a trial for those who disbelieve, to grant certainty to those who have been given the Book and increase in faith those who believe; and that those who were given the Book and the believers will not doubt; and that those in whose hearts is a disease and the disbelievers will say, “What does God desire by this as a parable?” Thus does God lead astray whomsoever He will and guide whomsoever He will. And none knows the hosts of thy Lord but He. It is but a reminder for the human being
Nay! By the moon
by the night as it withdraws
and by the morning as it brightens
truly it is one of the greatest
as a warner to the human being
for those of you who wish to go forth or stay behind
Every soul is held in pledge for what it has earned
save the companions of the right
in Gardens, questioning one another
about the guilty
“What led you into Saqar?”
They say, “We were not among those who prayed
nor did we feed the indigent
and we engaged in vain discourse with those who do the same
and we denied the Day of Judgment
until certainty came upon us.”
Thus the intercession of the intercessors will avail them not
So what ails them that they turn away from the Reminder
as if they were frightened asses
fleeing from a lion
Rather, every man among them desires to be given pages unfolded
Nay! But they fear not the Hereafter
Yea! Truly it is a reminder
So let whosoever will, remember it
And they remember not, save as God wills. He is most worthy of reverence and most worthy of granting forgiveness
swear by the Day of Resurrection
And I swear by the blaming soul
Does man suppose that We shall not gather his bones
Nay! But We are able to fashion even his fingers and toes
But man desires to defile what lies before him
asking, “When is the Day of Resurrection?”
Then when the eyes are dazzled
and the moon is eclipsed
and the sun and the moon are brought together—
that Day man will say, “Where is the escape?”
Nay! But there shall be no refuge
Unto your Lord that Day is the dwelling place
Man shall be informed that Day of that which he has sent forth and of that which he has left behind
Indeed, man shall be a testimony against himself
though he proffers his excuses
Move not thy tongue therewith to hasten it
Surely it is for Us to gather it and to recite it
So when We recite it, follow its recitation
Then surely it is for Us to explain it
Nay! But you love the ephemeral
and forsake the Hereafter
Faces that Day shall be radiant
gazing upon their Lord
And faces that Day shall be scowling
knowing that a spine-crushing calamity will befall them
Nay! But when it reaches the collarbones
and it is said, “Who will [make him] ascend?”
And he knows for certain that it is the parting
and the shank is intertwined with the shank
Unto thy Lord that Day is the driving
For he neither confirmed nor prayed
but he denied and turned away
then went to his people swaggering
So nearer to you! And nearer
Then nearer to you! And nearer
Does man suppose that he would be left aimless
Was he not a drop of semen emitted
Then he was a blood clot; whereupon He created, then fashioned
and made from him the two genders, male and female
Is not such a one able to give life to the dead
Has there come upon man a span of time in which he was a thing unremembered
Truly We created man from a drop of mixed fluid that We may test him, and We endowed him with hearing, seeing
Truly We guided him upon the way, be he grateful or ungrateful
We have surely prepared for the disbelievers chains, shackles, and a blazing flame
Truly the pious drink of a cup mixed with camphor
a fountain whereof drink the servants of God, while they make it gush forth abundantly
They fulfill their vows and fear a day whose evil is widespread
and give food, despite loving it, to the indigent, the orphan, and the captive
“We feed you only for the Face of God. We do not desire any recompense or thanks from you
Truly we fear from our Lord a grim, calamitous day.”
So God has shielded them from the evil of that Day, bestowed upon them radiance and joy
and rewarded them for having been patient with a Garden and with silk
Therein they recline upon couches, seeing neither sun nor bitter cold
Its shade shall be close above them, and its clusters shall be made to hang low
And vessels of silver and goblets of crystal are brought round for them—
silvern crystal that they have measured out with due measure
Therein they are given to drink of a cup mixed with ginger
a spring therein named Salsabil
Immortal youths wait upon them; when you see them you would suppose them to be scattered pearls
And when thou seest, there thou wilt see bliss and a great kingdom
Upon them are garments of fine green silk and rich brocade. They are adorned with silvern bracelets and their Lord shall give them to drink of a drink most pure
Truly this is a reward for you, and your endeavoring is held in gratitude
Truly We have sent down the Quran upon thee as a revelation
So be patient with thy Lord’s judgment and obey neither sinner nor disbeliever among them
And invoke the Name of thy Lord morning and evening
prostrate unto Him during the night, and glorify Him by night at length
Truly they love the ephemeral and put a weighty day behind them
We created them and made firm their frames; and whensoever We will, We shall exchange them for others like them
Truly this is a reminder; so let him who will, take a way unto his Lord
And you do not will but that God wills. Truly God is Knowing, Wise
He causes whomsoever He will to enter into His Mercy. And as for the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful punishment
By those sent forth in succession
By the storming tempests
By the spreaders spreading
By the discerners discerning
And by those who bring forth the Reminder
to excuse or to warn
surely what you are promised will befall
So when the stars are blotted out
and when the sky is riven asunder
when the mountains are scattered
and when the messengers are slated
for what day is it appointed
For the Day of Division
And what shall apprise thee of the Day of Division
Woe that Day to the deniers
Did We not destroy those of old
then make those of later times follow them
Thus do We deal with the guilty
Woe that Day to the deniers
Did We not create you from a base fluid
then lodge it in a secure dwelling place
for a known measure
Thus do We determine; what excellent determiners
Woe that Day to the deniers
Did We not make the earth a receptacle
for the living and the dead
And We placed therein firm, soaring mountains and gave you sweet water to drink
Woe that Day to the deniers
Away to that which you used to deny
Away to a threefold shadow
that provides no shade, nor avails against the flame
Indeed, it throws up sparks like massive tree trunks
as though they were yellow camels
Woe that Day to the deniers
That is the Day on which they speak not
nor is permission granted them, such that they might offer excuses
Woe that Day to the deniers
This is the Day of Division, “We have gathered you and those of old.”
So if you have a scheme, then scheme against Me
Woe that Day to the deniers
Truly the reverent shall be amid shade and springs
and fruits such as they desire
“Eat and drink in enjoyment for that which you used to do.”
Thus do We recompense the virtuous
Woe that Day to the deniers
Eat and enjoy yourselves a little; truly you are guilty
Woe that Day to the deniers
And when it is said unto them, “Bow!” they bow not
Woe that Day to the deniers
So in what discourse after this will they believe
About what do they question one another
About the Great Tiding
regarding which they differ
Nay, but they will know
Then indeed they will know
Did We not make the earth a resting place
and the mountains stakes
and create you in pairs
and make your sleep repose
and make the night a garment
and the day for livelihood
And [did We not] build above you seven firmaments
and make a radiant lamp
and send down water pouring from the rain clouds
that We might produce grain and plants thereby
and luxuriant gardens
Truly the Day of Division is a Moment Appointed
a day when the trumpet is blown and you come forth in throngs
and the sky is opened as if it were gates
and the mountains are set in motion as if they were a mirage
Truly Hell lies in ambush
a place unto which the rebellious return
to tarry therein for ages
They taste therein neither coolness nor drink
save boiling liquid and a cold, murky fluid
a fitting recompense
Truly they anticipated not a reckoning
and denied Our signs with utter denial
And everything have We recorded in a book
So taste! For We shall not increase you in aught but punishment
Truly the reverent shall have a place of triumph
gardens and vineyards
buxom maidens of like age
and an overflowing cup
They hear therein neither idle talk nor lying—
a recompense from thy Lord, a gift abounding—
the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatsoever is between them, the Compassionate, Whom they have no power to address
That Day the Spirit and the angels stand in rows, none speaking, save one whom the Compassionate permits and who speaks aright
That is the True Day. So let whosoever will, take a path of return unto his Lord
Truly We have warned you of a punishment nigh, on a day when a man beholds what his hands have sent forth, and the disbeliever says, “Oh, would that I were dust!”
By those that wrest violently
by those that draw out quickly
by those that glide serenely
by those that race to the fore, outstripping
and by those that govern affairs
on the Day when the quaker quakes
and the successor follows upon it
Hearts that Day shall tremble
with eyes humbled
They will say, “Are we to be restored as we were before
What! When we have become decayed bones?”
They say, “This, then, would be a ruinous return!”
Yet it shall be but a single cry
then, behold, they will be upon a wide expanse
Hast thou heard tell of Moses
when his Lord called out to him in the holy valley of ?uwa
“Go unto Pharaoh! Truly he has rebelled
And say, ‘Dost thou wish to be purified
and that I guide thee to thy Lord that thou mightest have fear?’”
Then he showed him the greatest sign
But he denied and disobeyed
Then turned his back, moving swiftly
Then he gathered and proclaimed
and said, “I am your lord most high.”
So God seized him with a punishment exemplary in the Hereafter and in this world
Truly in that is a lesson for whosoever fears
Are you more difficult to create or the sky that He has built
He raised high its canopy and fashioned it
darkened its night, and brought forth its day
And after that He spread out the earth
From it He brought forth its water and its pastures
and the mountains He set firm
as sustenance for you and for your flocks
So when the Great Calamity befalls—
a day when man shall remember that for which he endeavored
and Hellfire is made visible for one who sees—
as for one who rebels
and prefers the life of this world
truly Hellfire is the refuge
As for one who fears standing before his Lord and forbids the soul from caprice
truly the Garden is the refuge
They ask thee about the Hour, “When shall it set in?”
What hast thou to do with mentioning it
Unto thy Lord is [knowledge of] the end thereof
Thou art but a warner for whosoever fears it
The Day they see it, it will be as if they had tarried but an evening or the morning thereof
He frowned and turned away
because the blind man came to him
And what would apprise thee? Perhaps he would purify himself
or be reminded, such that the reminder might benefit him
As for him who deems himself beyond need
to him dost thou attend
though thou art not answerable, should he not be purified
But as for him who came to thee striving earnestly
while fearful
from him thou art diverted
Nay! Truly it is a reminder—
so let whomsoever will, remember it—
on pages honored
exalted and purified
in the hands of scribes
noble and pious
May man perish! How ungrateful is he
From what thing did He create him
From a drop He created him, then proportioned him
then He made the way easy for him
Then He caused him to die and buried him
Then, when He willed, He resurrected him
Nay! But he has not accomplished what He commanded him
So let man consider his food
that We pour down water in abundance
then We split the earth in fissures
and cause grains to grow therein
and vines and herbs
and olives and date palms
and gardens densely planted
and fruit and pastures
as sustenance for you and for your flocks
So when the Piercing Cry does come
that Day when a man will flee from his brother
and his mother and his father
and his spouse and his children
For every man that Day his affair shall suffice him
Faces that Day shall be shining, radiant
laughing, joyous
And faces that Day shall be covered with dust
overspread with darkness
Those, they are the disbelievers, the profligates
When the sun is enfolded
and when the stars fade away
when the mountains are set in motion
and when pregnant camels are abandoned
when the wild beasts are gathered
and when the seas are made to swell over
when the souls are coupled
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
for what sin she was slain
when the pages are spread
and when Heaven is laid bare
when Hellfire is kindled
and when the Garden is brought nigh
each soul shall know what it has made ready
So I swear by those receding
those that move and set
by the night as it approaches
and by the morning as it breathes
Truly it is the speech of a noble messenger
possessed of strength, before the Possessor of the Throne, of high rank
obeyed, trustworthy withal
Your companion is not possessed
He surely saw him upon the clear horizon
And he does not withhold grudgingly the Unseen
Nor is it the speech of a satan outcast
So where are you going
It is naught but a reminder for the worlds
for those of you who will to go straight
And you do not will but that God, Lord of the worlds, wills
When the sky is cleft asunder
and when the stars are dispersed
when the seas are burst forth
and when graves are turned inside out
then shall each soul know what it has sent forth and what it has left behind. j
O mankind! What has deluded you with regard to your noble Lord
Who created you, then fashioned you, then proportioned you
assembling you in whatever form He willed
Nay! But you deny religion
And yet truly over you there are guardians
noble, writing
knowing what you do
Truly the pious shall be in bliss
and truly the profligate shall be in Hellfire
burning therein on the Day of Judgment
And they will not be absent from it
And what will apprise thee of the Day of Judgment
Then what will apprise thee of the Day of Judgment
A day when no soul will avail another soul in any way, and the Command that Day is with God
Woe unto the defrauders
who, when they take measure from people, demand [it] in full
and when they measure for them or weigh for them, they stint
Do they not think that they will be resurrected
unto a tremendous day—
a day when mankind shall stand before the Lord of the worlds
Nay! Truly the book of the profligate is in Sijjin
And what will apprise thee of Sijjin
A book inscribed
Woe that Day to the deniers
who deny the Day of Judgment
which none deny save every sinful transgressor
When Our signs are recited unto him, he says, “Fables of those of old!”
Nay! But that which they used to earn has covered their hearts with rust
Nay! Surely on that Day they will be veiled from their Lord
Then they will burn in Hellfire
Then it is said unto them, “This is that which you used to deny.”
Nay, truly the book of the pious is in ?Illiyyun
And what will apprise thee of ?Illiyyun
A book inscribed
witnessed by those brought nigh
Truly the pious shall be in bliss
upon couches, gazing
Thou dost recognize in their faces the splendor of bliss
They are given to drink of pure wine sealed
whose seal is musk—so for that let the strivers strive—
and whose mixture is of Tasnim
a spring whence drink those brought nigh
Truly those who sinned did laugh at those who believed
When they passed them, they would wink at one another
And when they returned to their people, they would return blithely
And when they saw them, they said, “Truly these are astray!”
Though they were not sent as guardians over them
So that Day those who believe shall laugh at those who disbelieve
upon couches, gazing
Have the disbelievers been requited for that which they used to do
When the sky is rent asunder
and hearkens unto its Lord, as in truth it must
and when the earth is stretched out
and casts forth what is in it, emptying itself
and hearkens unto its Lord, as in truth it must. j
O mankind! Truly thou art laboring unto thy Lord laboriously, and shall meet Him
As for one who is given his book in his right hand
he will be reckoned with an easy reckoning
and will return to his people joyful
But as for one who is given his book from behind his back
he will cry out for destruction
and will enter a Blaze
Truly among his people he was joyful
Truly he thought that he would never return
Nay! Truly his Lord was watchful of him
So I swear by the twilight
by the night and what it enshrouds
and by the moon when full
thou wilt surely journey from stage to stage
So what ails them that they believe not
and that when the Quran is recited unto them, they do not prostrate
Nay! Those who disbelieve deny
But God knows best what they conceal
So give them glad tidings of a painful punishment
save those who believe and perform righteous deeds; theirs shall be a reward unceasing
By the sky possessed of constellations
By the Day promised
and by the witness and the witnessed
May they perish, the inhabitants of the pit
the fire well fueled
when they sat by it
and were witness to what they did unto the believers
and took vengeance on them for naught but that they believed in God, the Mighty, the Praised
unto Whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth; and God is Witness over all things
Truly those who persecute believing men and believing women, then do not repent, theirs shall be the punishment of Hell, and theirs shall be the punishment of the burning
Truly those who believe and perform righteous deeds, theirs shall be Gardens with rivers running below: that is the supreme triumph
Truly thy Lord’s assault is severe
Truly it is He Who originates and brings back
And He is the Forgiving, the Loving
Possessor of the Throne, the Glorious
Doer of whatsoever He will
Hast thou heard tell of the hosts—
Pharaoh and Thamud
Yet those who disbelieve are in denial
And God is behind them, All-Encompassing
Nay, it is a glorious Quran
upon a Preserved Tablet
By the sky and that which comes by night
And what will apprise thee of that which comes by night
It is the piercing star
Over every soul there is a guardian
So let man consider that from which he was created
He was created from a gushing fluid
issuing from between the loins and the pelvic arch
Truly He is able to bring him back
on the Day when secrets are tested
whereat man has neither strength nor helper
By the resurgent sky
and by the furrowed earth
truly it is indeed a decisive Word
And it is not for amusement
Truly they are devising a scheme
and I, too, am devising a scheme
So be gentle with the disbelievers; grant them respite for a while
Glorify the Name of thy Lord, the Most High
Who created, then fashioned
Who measured out, then guided
and Who brought forth pasture
then made it as blackened stubble
We shall teach thee to recite, that thou wilt not forget
save what God wills. Truly He knows that which is open and that which is hidden
And We shall ease thy way unto ease
So remind, should the reminder benefit
he who fears will remember
while the most wretched shall avoid it
he who enters into the greatest Fire
then neither dies therein nor lives
He indeed prospers who is purified
remembers the Name of his Lord and prays
Nay, but you prefer the life of this world
while the Hereafter is better and more enduring
Truly this is in the scriptures of old
the scriptures of Abraham and Moses
Hast thou heard tell of the overwhelming event
Faces that Day shall be humbled
toiling, weary
entering a scorching Fire
given drink from a boiling spring
They will have no food, save a vile thorn
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger
Faces that Day shall be blessed
contented by their endeavoring
in a lofty Garden
wherein they hear no idle talk
Therein lies a flowing spring
therein are raised couches
goblets placed
cushions arrayed
and carpets spread
Do they not consider the camels, how they are created
the sky, how it is raised
the mountains, how they are established
and the earth, how it is spread
So remind! Thou art but a reminder
thou art not a warder over them
But whosoever turns away and disbelieves
God shall punish him with the greatest punishment
Truly unto Us is their return
then truly with Us lies their reckoning
By the dawn
by the ten nights
by the even and the odd
and by the night as it recedes
is there an oath therein for one who is mindful
Hast thou not seen how thy Lord dealt with ?Ad
Iram the pillared
the like of which was never created in all the land
Thamud who hollowed the rocks in the valley
and Pharaoh of the tent poles
who tyrannized the land
and increased corruption therein
So thy Lord poured upon them the scourge of punishment
Truly thy Lord lies in ambush
As for man, whenever his Lord tests him, then honors him and blesses him, he says, “My Lord has honored me.”
And as for whenever He tries him and straitens his provision, he says, “My Lord has abased me.”
Nay, but you honor not the orphan
nor urge you the feeding of the indigent
You devour inheritance with rapacious devouring
and love wealth with abounding love
Nay, but when the earth is ground up, grinding upon grinding
and your Lord comes with the angels, row upon row
and Hell is brought forth that Day; that Day man will remember; yet whence will that remembrance avail him
He will say, “Would that I had sent forth for my life!”
That Day none punishes as He punishes
and none binds as He binds
O thou soul at peace
Return unto thy Lord, content, contenting
Enter among My servants
Enter My Garden
Nay, I swear by this land
while thou art free in this land
and [by] the begetter, and that which he begat
truly We created man in travail
Does he suppose that none will ever have power over him
He says, “I have squandered vast wealth!”
Does he suppose that no one sees him
Did We not make for him two eyes
a tongue, and two lips
and guide him upon the two highways
Yet he has not assailed the steep pass
And what will apprise thee of the steep pass
[It is] the freeing of a slave
or giving food at a time of famine
to an orphan near of kin
or an indigent, clinging to the dust
while being one of those who believe and exhort one another to patience, and exhort one another to compassion
Those are the companions of the right
And those who disbelieve in Our signs, they are the companions of the left
Upon them is a Fire enclosed
By the sun and its morning brightness
by the moon when following it
by the day when disclosing it
by the night when enshrouding it
by the sky and the One Who established it
by the earth and the One Who spread it
by the soul and the One Who fashioned it
and inspired it as to what makes it iniquitous or reverent
Indeed, he prospers who purifies it
And indeed he fails who obscures it
Thamud denied in their rebelliousness
when the most wretched of them was dispatched
So the messenger of God said to them, “[This is] the she-camel of God; give her drink!”
But they denied him, then hamstrung her. So their Lord crushed them for their sin, then leveled it
for He fears not the consequence thereof
By the night as it enshrouds
by the day as it discloses
by Him Who created the male and the female
truly your endeavors are diverse
As for one who gives and is reverent
and attests to what is most beautiful
We shall ease his way unto ease
And as for one who is miserly and deems himself beyond need
and denies what is most beautiful
We shall ease his way unto hardship
and his wealth shall not avail him when he perishes
Truly Ours it is to give guidance
and truly unto Us belong the Hereafter and this world
Thus have I warned you of a raging Fire
which none shall enter, save the most wretched
who denies and turns away
And the most reverent shall be removed from it
who gives his wealth to purify
not recompensing any for a favor thereby
save for seeking the Face of his Lord, the Most High
and surely he shall be content
By the morning brightness
and by the night when still
thy Lord has not forsaken thee; nor does He despise
And the Hereafter shall be better for thee than this life
And surely thy Lord shall give unto thee, and thou shalt be content
Did He not find thee an orphan and shelter
find thee astray and guide
and find thee in need and enrich
So as for the orphan, scorn not
And as for one who requests, repel not
And as for the blessing of thy Lord, proclaim
Did We not expand for thee thy breast
and lift from thee thy burden
that weighed heavily upon thy back
And did We not elevate thy renown
For truly with hardship comes ease
Truly with hardship comes ease
So when thou art free, exert thyself
and let thy desire be for thy Lord
By the fig and the olive
by Mount Sinai
and by this land made safe
truly We created man in the most beautiful stature
then We cast him to the lowest of the low
save those who believe and perform righteous deeds; for theirs shall be a reward unceasing
What then will make you deny religion
Is not God the most just of judges
Recite in the Name of thy Lord Who created
created man from a blood clot
Recite! Thy Lord is most noble
Who taught by the Pen
taught man that which he knew not
Nay, truly man is rebellious
in that he considers himself beyond need
Truly unto thy Lord is the return
Hast thou seen him who prohibits
a slave when he prays
Hast thou seen if he does so out of guidance
or to enjoin reverence
Hast thou seen if he denied and turned away
Does he not know that God sees
Nay, but if he ceases not, We shall surely seize him by the forelock—
a lying, iniquitous forelock
So let him call his cohorts
We shall call the guards of Hell
Nay! Obey him not! But prostrate and draw nigh
Truly We sent it down in the Night of Power
And what shall apprise thee of the Night of Power
The Night of Power is better than a thousand months
The angels and the Spirit descend therein, by the leave of their Lord, with every command
peace it is until the break of dawn
Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and the idolaters will not desist until the clear proof comes unto them
a messenger from God reciting scriptures purified
wherein are books upright
Those who were given the Book did not become divided until after the clear proof had come unto them
They were not commanded but to worship God, devoting religion entirely to Him, as ?anifs, and to perform the prayer, and to give the alms—that is the upright religion
Truly the disbelievers among the People of the Book and the idolaters are in the Fire of Hell, abiding therein; it is they who are the worst of creation
Truly those who believe and perform righteous deeds, it is they who are the best of creation
Their reward is with their Lord, Gardens of Eden with rivers running below, abiding therein forever, God being content with them and they being content with Him. That is for whosoever fears his Lord
When the earth is shaken with her shaking
and the earth yields up her burdens
and man says, “What ails her?”
That Day she shall convey her chronicles
for thy Lord inspired her
That Day mankind shall issue forth upon diverse paths to witness their deeds
So whosoever does a mote’s weight of good shall see it
And whosoever does a mote’s weight of evil shall see it
By the panting chargers
by the strikers of sparks
by the raiders at dawn
raising thereby a trail of dust
penetrating to the center altogether
truly man is ungrateful to his Lord
and truly he is a witness to that
and truly he is fierce in his love for good things
Does he not know that when what lies within graves is turned inside out
and what lies within breasts is made known
truly on that Day their Lord shall be aware of them
The calamity
what is the calamity
And what shall apprise thee of the calamity
A day wherein mankind shall be like scattered moths
and the mountains shall be like carded wool
As for one whose scales are heavy
he shall enjoy a life contenting
And as for one whose scales are light
an abyss shall be his mother
And what shall apprise thee of her
It is a raging fire
Vying for increase distracts you
till you visit the graves
Nay! Soon you will know
Indeed! Soon you will know
Nay! If you knew with the knowledge of certainty
you would surely see Hellfire
Then you would surely see it with the eye of certainty
Then surely you will be questioned that Day about the blessing
By the declining day
truly mankind is in loss
save those who believe, perform righteous deeds, exhort one another to truth, and exhort one another to patience
Woe unto every slandering backbiter
who amasses wealth and tallies it
supposing that his wealth makes him immortal
Nay! He shall surely be cast into the crushing Fire
And what shall apprise thee of the crushing Fire
The Fire of God, ignited
which engulfs hearts
Truly it is enclosed upon them
in pillars outstretched
Hast thou not seen how thy Lord dealt with the masters of the elephant
Did He not make their scheming go astray
and send against them birds in swarms
pelting them with stones of baked clay
such that He made them like devoured husks
For the secure passage of the Quraysh
their secure passage in the journey of winter and of summer
so let them worship the Lord of this house
Who relieved them of hunger and made them safe from fear
Hast thou seen the one who denies religion
That is the one who drives away the orphan
and does not urge feeding the indigent
So woe unto the praying
who are heedless of their prayers
those who strive to be seen
yet refuse small kindnesses
Truly We have bestowed abundant good upon thee
So pray to thy Lord and sacrifice
Truly thine enemy shall be the one without posterity
Say, “O disbelievers
I worship not what you worship
nor are you worshippers of what I worship
nor am I a worshipper of what you worship
nor are you worshippers of what I worship
Unto you your religion, and unto me my religion.”
When God’s Help and Victory come
and you see mankind entering God’s religion in throngs
hymn the praise of thy Lord, and seek forgiveness from Him. Truly He is Ever Relenting
May the hands of Abu Lahab perish, and may he perish
His wealth avails him not, nor what he has earned
He shall enter a blazing Fire
And his wife, carrier of firewood
upon her neck is a rope of palm fiber
Say, “He, God, is One
God, the Eternally Sufficient unto Himself
He begets not; nor was He begotten
And none is like unto Him.”
Say, “I seek refuge in the Lord of the daybreak
from the evil of what He has created
from the evil of darkness when it enshrouds
from the evil of those who blow upon knots
and from the evil of the envier when he envies.”
Say, “I seek refuge in the Lord of mankind
the King of mankind
the God of mankind
from the evil of the stealthy whisperer
who whispers into the breasts of mankind
from jinn and mankind.”
{
    "name": "eng-thestudyquran",
    "author": "The Study Quran",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-thestudyquran.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-thestudyquran.min.json"
}