In the name of God, the Almighty, the Merciful
Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
The Almighty, the Merciful
Sovereign of the Day of Recompense
You alone we serve, and You alone we seek for help
Guide us to the straight path
The path of those You have blessed, not of those who have incurred the wrath, nor the misguided
ALM
That is the Book in which there is no doubt, a guidance for the righteous
Those who believe in the unseen, and hold the contact prayer, and from Our provisions to them they spend
And those who believe in what was sent down to you, and what was sent down before you, and regarding the Hereafter they are certain
These are the ones guided by their Lord, and these are the successful ones
As for those who reject, whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe
God has sealed their hearts and their ears, and over their eyes are covers. They will incur a great retribution
And from the people are those who say: "We believe in God and in the Last Day," but they are not believers
They seek to deceive God and those who believe, but they only deceive themselves without noticing
In their hearts is a disease, so God increases their disease, and they will have a painful retribution for what they have denied
And if they are told: "Do not make corruption in the land," they say: "But we are reformers
No, they are the corruptors, but they do not perceive
And if they are told: "Believe, as the people have believed," they say: "Shall we believe like the foolish have believed?" No, they are the foolish but they do not know
And if they come across those who have believed, they say: "We believe," and when they are alone with their devils they say: "We are with you, we were only mocking
God mocks them, and leaves them prolonged in their transgression
These are the ones who have purchased straying with guidance; their trade did not profit them, nor were they guided
Their example is like the one who lights a fire, so when it illuminates what is around him, God takes away his light and leaves him in the darkness not seeing
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return
Or like a storm cloud from the sky, in it is darkness and thunder and lightning. They place their fingers in their ears from the thunder-claps for fear of death; and God is aware of the rejecters
The lightning nearly snatches their sight, whenever it lights the path they walk in it, and when it becomes dark for them they stand. Had God willed, He would have taken their hearing and their sight; God is capable of all things
O people, serve your Lord who has created you and those before you that you may be righteous
The One who has made the earth a resting place, and the sky a shelter, and He sent down from the sky water with which He brought out fruits as a gift to you. So do not set up any equals with God while you know
And if you are in doubt as to what We have sent down to Our servant, then bring a chapter like this, and call upon your witnesses other than God if you are truthful
And if you cannot do this; and you will not be able to do this; then beware the Fire whose fuel is people and stones, it has been prepared for the rejecters
And give good news to those who believe and do good works that they will have estates with rivers flowing beneath them. Every time they receive a provision of its fruit, they say: "This is what we have been provisioned before," and they are given its likeness. And there they will have pure mates, and in it they will abide
God does not shy away from putting forth the example of a mosquito, or anything above it. As for those who believe, they know that it is the truth from their Lord. As for the rejecters, they say: "What does God intend with this example?" He strays many by it, and He guides many by it; but He only strays by it the wicked
The ones who break the pledge to God after making its covenant, and they sever what God had ordered to be delivered, and they make corruption on the earth; these are the losers
How can you reject God when you were dead and He brought you to life? Then He makes you die, then He brings you to life, then to Him you return
He is the One who has created for you all that is on the earth, then He attended to the heaven and has made it seven heavens, and He is aware of all things
And your Lord said to the angels: "I am placing a successor on the earth." They said: "Will You place in it he who would make corruption in it, and spill blood; while we praise by Your glory, and exalt to You?" He said: "I know what you do not know
And He taught Adam the names of all things, then He displayed them to the angels and said: "Inform Me of the names of these if you are truthful
They said: "Glory to You, we have no knowledge except that which You have taught us, You are the Knowledgeable, the Wise
He said: "O Adam, inform them of their names," so when he informed them of their names, He said: "Did I not tell you that I know the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you reveal and what you are hiding
And We said to the angels: "Yield to Adam," so they yielded except for Satan, he refused and became arrogant, and became of the rejecters
And We said: "O Adam, reside you and your mate in the paradise, and eat from it bountifully as you both wish, and do not come near this tree, else you will be of those who have wronged
So, the devil caused them to slip from it, and he brought them out from what they were in, and We said: "Descend; for you are enemies to one another; and on the earth you will have residence and provisions until the appointed time
Adam then received words from His Lord, so He forgave him; He is the Forgiver, the Merciful
We said: "Descend from it all of you, so when the guidance comes from Me, then whoever follows My guidance, they will have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve
And those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, they are the dwellers of Hell, in it they will abide
O Children of Israel, remember My blessings that I had blessed you with, and fulfill your pledge to Me that I may fulfill My pledge to you, and reverence Me alone
And believe in what I have sent down, authenticating what is with you, and do not be the first to disbelieve in it! And do not purchase with My revelations a cheap gain, and of Me you shall be aware
And do not confound the truth with falsehood, nor keep the truth secret while you know
And hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification, and kneel with those who kneel
Do you exhort the people to do good, but forget yourselves, while you are reciting the Book? Do you not comprehend
And seek help through patience and through the contact prayer. It is a difficult thing, but not so for the humble
The ones who conceive that they will meet their Lord and that to Him they will return
O Children of Israel, remember My blessings that I had blessed you with, and that I had preferred you over all the worlds
And beware of a Day when no soul can avail another soul, nor will any intercession be accepted from it, nor will any ransom be taken, nor will they have supporters
And We saved you from the people of Pharaoh, they were afflicting you with the worst punishment; they used to slaughter your children, and rape your women. In that was a great test from your Lord
And We parted the sea for you, thus We saved you and drowned the people of Pharaoh while you were watching
And We appointed a meeting time for Moses of forty nights, but then you took the calf after him while you were wicked
Then We forgave you after that, perhaps you would be thankful
And We gave Moses the Book and the criterion, perhaps you would be guided
And Moses said to his people: "O my people, you have wronged your souls by taking the calf, so repent to your Maker, and kill yourselves. That is better for you with your Maker, so He would forgive you. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
And you said: "O Moses, we will not believe you until we see God openly!" So the lightning strike took you while you were still staring
Then We resurrected you after your death that you may be thankful
And We shaded you with clouds, and sent down to you manna and quails: "Eat from the goodness of the provisions We have provided you." They did not wrong Us, but it was their souls that they wronged
And We said: "Enter this town, and eat from it as you wish bountifully. And enter the passageway by crouching, and say: "Our load is removed," so that your wrongdoings will be forgiven, and We will increase for the good doers
But the wicked altered what was said to them to a different saying, thus We sent down upon the wicked an affliction from the heavens for what wickedness they were in
And Moses was seeking water for his people, so We said: "Strike the stone with your staff." Thus twelve springs exploded out of it; each people then knew from where to drink. "Eat and drink from the provisions of God, and do not roam the earth as corrupters
And you said: "O Moses, we will not be patient to one type of food, so call for us your Lord that He may bring forth what the earth grows of its beans, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions." He said: "Would you trade that which is lowly with that which is good?" Descend Egypt, you will have in it what you have asked for. And they were stricken with humiliation and disgrace, and they remained under the wrath of God for they were disbelieving in the revelations of God, and killing the prophets without right; this is for what they have disobeyed and transgressed
Surely those who believe; and those who are Jewish, and the Nazarenes, and the Sabians, whoever of them believes in God and the Last Day and does good works; they will have their recompense with their Lord, and there is no fear upon them, nor will they grieve
And We took your covenant, and raised the mount above you: "Take what We have given you with strength, and remember what is in it that you may be righteous
Then you turned away after this. And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, you would have been of the losers
You have come to know who it was among you that transgressed the Sabbath, We said to them: "Be despicable apes
So it was that We made it into an example for what had happened in it and also what had passed, and a reminder to the righteous
And Moses said to his people: "God orders you to slaughter a heifer." They said: "Do you mock us?" He said: "I seek refuge with God that I not be of the ignorant ones
They said: "Call upon your Lord for us that He may clarify which it is." He said: "He says it is a heifer neither too old nor too young, an age between that. So now do as you are commanded
They said: "Call upon your Lord for us that He may clarify what color it is." He said: "He says it is a yellow heifer with a strong color, pleasing to those who see it
They said: "Call upon your Lord for us that He may clarify which one it is, for the heifers all look alike to us and we will, God willing, be guided
He said: "He says it is a heifer which was never subjugated to plough the land, or water the crops, free from any blemish." They said: "Now you have come with the truth." And they slaughtered it, though they had nearly not done so
And you had murdered a person, then disputed in the matter; God was to bring out what you were keeping secret
We said: "Strike him with parts from it." It is thus that God brings the dead to life, and He shows you His signs that you may comprehend
Then your hearts became hardened after that, they became like stone or even harder; but even from stone there are rivers that burst forth, and from them are those that crack so that the water comes forth, and from them are what descends from concern towards God; and God is not unaware of what you do
Did you expect that they would believe with you, when a group of them had heard the words of God then altered them knowingly after having understood
And when they come across those who believe, they say: "We believe!" And when they are alone with each other they say: "Why do you inform them of what God has said to us? Then they would use it in argument against us at your Lord. Do you not comprehend
Do they not know that God knows what they conceal and what they declare
And among them are Gentiles who do not know the Book except by hearsay, and they only conjecture
So woe to those who write the Book with their hands then say: "This is from God," so that they can purchase with it a cheap price! Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they gained
And they said: "The Fire will not touch us except for a few number of days." Say: "Have you taken a pledge with God? If so, then God will not break His pledge. Or do you say about God what you do not know
Indeed, whoever gains a sin, and is surrounded by his mistakes; those are the people of the Fire, in it they will abide
And those who believe and do good works, they are the people of the Paradise, in it they will abide
And We took the covenant of the Children of Israel: "You shall not serve except God, and do good to your parents, and regard the relatives, and the orphans, and the needy, and say kind things to the people, and hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification." But then you turned away, except for a few of you; you were objecting
And We have taken a covenant with you: "You shall not spill the blood of each other, nor expel each other from your homes." And you agreed to this while bearing witness
But then here you are killing each other and expelling a group of you from their homes; you act towards them with evil and animosity. And if they come to you as prisoners, you ransom them while it was unlawful for you to expel them! Do you believe in part of the Book and disbelieve in part? The punishment for those among you who do so is humiliation in this worldly life, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be delivered to the most severe retribution. God is not unaware of what you all do
These are the ones who have purchased this worldly life instead of the Hereafter. The retribution will not be reduced for them, nor will they be supported
And We gave Moses the Book, and after him We sent the messengers. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, the clear proofs, and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. Is it that every time a messenger comes to you with what your souls do not desire, you become arrogant? A group of them you deny, and a group of them you kill
And they said: "Our hearts are sealed!" No, it is God who has cursed them for their rejection, for very little do they believe
And when a Book came to them from God, authenticating what is with them; while before that they were mocking those who rejected; so when what they knew came to them, they rejected it! The curse of God be upon the rejecters
Miserable indeed is what they purchase with their souls, that they disbelieve in what God has sent down as a resentment that God would send down from His grace to whom He pleases of His servants; thus they have incurred wrath upon wrath. And the rejecters will have a humiliating retribution
And if it is said to them: "Believe in what God has sent down;" they say: "We believe only in what was sent down to us," and they reject what came after it, while it is the truth authenticating what is with them. Say: "Why then did you kill the prophets of God if you were believers
And Moses had come to you with clear proofs, then you took the calf after him; you were wicked
And We took your covenant, and raised the mount above you: "Take what We have given you with strength, and listen." They said: "We hear and disobey!" And they had consumed the calf inside their hearts by their disbelief. Say: "Miserable indeed is what your belief orders of you if you are believers
Say: "If the abode of the Hereafter has been set exclusively for you with God, to the exception of all other people, then you should wish for death if you are truthful
They will never wish for it because of what their hands have delivered; and God is aware of the wicked
And you will find them the most obsessive people regarding longevity; even more than the polytheists; each one of them wishes that he could live a thousand years. It will not change for him the retribution even if he lived so long, God is watchful over what you do
Say: "Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, then know that he has sent it down into your heart with the permission of God, authenticating what is with him, and a guide and good news for the believers
Whoever is an enemy to God and His angels, and His messengers, and Gabriel, and Michael, then so God is the enemy to the disbelievers
We have sent down to you clear revelations; only the wicked would disbelieve in them
Is it that each time they make a pledge, a group of them breaks it? Alas, most of them do not believe
And when a messenger came to them from God, authenticating what was with them, a group of those who had already received the Book placed the Book of God behind their backs as if they did not know
And they followed what the devils recited regarding the kingship of Solomon. Solomon did not reject, but it was the devils who rejected by teaching people magic, and teaching them what was sent down on the two angels in Babylon, Haroot and Maroot. They did not teach anyone until they would say: "We are a test, so do not lose faith!" Thus they teach what can separate between a person and his mate; but they cannot harm anyone except with the permission of God. And they learn what harms them and does not benefit them, and they have known that he who purchases such has no place in the Hereafter. Miserable indeed is what they purchased with their souls if only they knew
And had they believed and been righteous, it would have brought them a recompense with God which is far better if only they knew
O you who believe, do not say: "Shepherd us," but say: "Be patient with us," and listen. For the rejecters is a painful retribution
Neither do those who have rejected from among the people of the Book, nor from among the polytheists, wish that any good comes down to you from your Lord. But God chooses with His mercy whom He wishes; and from God is the greatest grace
We do not duplicate a sign, or make it forgotten, unless We bring one which is like it or even greater. Did you not know that God is capable of all things
Did you not know that to God is the kingship of the heavens and the earth, and that you do not have besides God any guardian or supporter
Or do you want to ask your messenger as Moses was asked before? Whoever replaces belief with rejection, he has indeed strayed from the right path
Many of the people of the Book have wished that they could return you to being rejecters after your believing, out of envy from their souls after the truth was made clear to them. You shall forgive them and overlook until God brings His will. God is capable of all things
And hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification; and what you bring forth of good for your souls you will find it with God. God is watching what you do
And they said: "None shall enter the Paradise except those who are Jewish or Nazarenes;" this is what they wish! Say: "Bring forth your proof if you are truthful
No; whoever submits himself to God, while doing good, he will have his recompense with his Lord. There will be no fear over them, nor will they grieve
And the Jews say: "The Nazarenes have no basis," and the Nazarenes say: "The Jews have no basis," while they are both reciting the Book! Similarly, those who do not know have said the same thing. God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in what they dispute
And who are more wicked than those who prevent the temples of God that His name be mentioned in them; and they seek their destruction? They will not be able to enter them except in fear; they will have humiliation in this world and in the Hereafter a painful retribution
And to God belong the east and the west, so wherever you turn, there is the face of God. God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
And they said: "God has taken a son!" Be He glorified. To Him is all that is in the heavens and the earth, all are dutiful to Him
Initiator of the heavens and the earth, when He decrees a command, He merely says to it: 'Be,' and it is
And those who do not know said: "If only God would speak to us, or a sign would come to us." It is the same thing that the people before them have said, their hearts are so similar! We have clarified the signs for a people who comprehend
We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and a warner. You will not be questioned about the people of Hell
Neither the Jews nor the Nazarenes will be pleased with you until you follow their creed. Say: "The guidance is the guidance of God." And if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, then there is none who can help or protect you against God
Those to whom We gave the Book, they recite it as it truthfully deserves to be recited; they believe in it. As for those who disbelieve in it, they are the losers
O Children of Israel, remember My blessings that I had blessed you with, and that I had preferred you over all the worlds
And beware of a Day when no soul can avail another soul, nor will any amendment be accepted from it, nor will any intercession help it; they will not be supported
And Abraham was tested by words from His Lord, which he fulfilled. He said: "I will make you a leader for the people." He said: "And also from my progeny?" He said: "My pledge will not encompass the wicked
And We have made the Sanctuary to be a model for the people and a security. And you shall take, from the station of Abraham, a place for making the contact. And We entrusted to Abraham and Ishmael: "You shall purify My Sanctuary for those who visit, and those who are devoted, and the kneeling, the prostrating
And Abraham said: "My Lord, make this a land of peace, and provide for its inhabitants of the fruits for whoever believes in God and the Last Day." He said: "As for he who rejects, I will let him enjoy for a while, then I will force him to the retribution of the Fire. What a miserable destiny
And as Abraham raised from the Sanctuary its foundations, along with Ishmael: "Our Lord accept this from us, You are the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
Our Lord, and let us submit to You and from our progeny a nation submitting to You, and show us our rites, and forgive us; You are the Forgiver, the Merciful
Our Lord, and send among them a messenger from among themselves, that he may recite to them Your revelations and teach them the Book and the wisdom, and purify them. You are the Noble, the Wise
And who would abandon the creed of Abraham except one who fools himself? We have selected him in this world, and in the Hereafter he is of the righteous
When his Lord said to him: "Submit," he said: "I submit to the Lord of the worlds
And Abraham enjoined his sons and Jacob: "O my sons, God has selected the system for you, so do not die except as ones who have submitted
Or were you present when death came to Jacob and he said to his sons: "Who shall you serve from after me?" They said: "Your god, and the god of your fathers Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac; One god and to Him we submit
That is a nation that has passed away; to them is what they have earned, and to you is what you have earned; and you will not be asked regarding what they did
And they said: "Be Jewish or Nazarenes so that you may be guided!" Say: "No, rather the creed of Abraham, monotheism; for he was not of the polytheists
Say: "We believe in God and in what was sent down to us and what was sent down to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, and what was given to Moses and Jesus, and what was given to the prophets from their Lord; we do not make a distinction between any of them and to Him we submit
So, if they believe exactly as you have believed, then they are guided; but if they turn away, then they are in opposition and God will suffice you against them, and He is the Hearer, the Knower
Such is the coloring of God, and who is better than God in coloring? And to Him we are in service
Say: "Do you debate with us regarding God? He is our Lord and your Lord, and we have our works and you have your works, and to Him we are believers
Or do you say that Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Patriarchs were Jewish or Nazarenes?" Say: "Are you more knowledgeable or is God?" Who is more wicked than the one who conceals a testimony with him from God? God is not unaware of what you do
That is a nation that has passed away; to them is what they have earned, and to you is what you have earned; and you will not be asked regarding what they did
The foolish from among the people will say: "What has turned them away from the focal point that they were on?" Say: "To God are the east and the west, He guides whomsoever He wishes to a straight path
And as such, We have made you a balanced nation so that you may be witness over the people, and that the messenger may be witness over you. And We did not make the focal point that you became on except to distinguish who follows the messenger from those who will turn on their heels. It was a great thing indeed except for those whom God had guided; God was not to waste your belief. God is Merciful and Compassionate over the people
We see the shifting of your face towards the heaven; We will thus set for you a focal point that will be pleasing to you: "You shall set yourself towards the Restricted Temple; and wherever you may be, you shall all set yourselves towards it." Those who have been given the Book know it is the truth from their Lord. And God is not unaware of what you do
And if you come to those who have been given the Book with every sign they will not follow your focal point, nor will you follow their focal point, nor will some of them even follow each others focal point. And if you were to follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, then you would be one of the wicked
Those to whom We have given the Book know it as they know their own children; and a group of them hides the truth while they know
The truth is from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt
And to each is a direction that he will take, so you shall race towards good deeds. Wherever you may be, God will bring you all together. God is capable of all things
And from wherever you go out, you shall set yourself towards the Restricted Temple; it is the truth from your Lord; and God is not unaware of what you do
And wherever you go out, you shall set yourself towards the Restricted Temple. And wherever you may be you shall set yourselves towards it; that the people will have no room for debate with you, except those of them who are wicked. You shall not be concerned by them, but be concerned by Me; so that I may complete My blessings upon you and that you may be guided
As We have sent a messenger to you from among yourselves to recite Our revelations to you, and purify you, and teach you the Book and the wisdom, and teach you what you did not know
So remember Me that I may remember you, and be thankful to Me and do not disbelieve
O you who believe, seek help through patience and through the contact prayer, God is with the patient ones
And do not say of those who are killed in the cause of God that they are dead; no, they are alive but you do not perceive
And We will test you with some fear and hunger, and a shortage in money and lives and fruits. And give good news to those who are patient
The ones who, when afflicted with adversity, they say: "We are to God and to Him we will return
For those there will be contacts from their Lord and a mercy, they are the guided ones
Indeed, the stone and the rock outcropping are among the symbols of God. So whoever makes Pilgrimage to the Sanctuary, or is merely visiting, commits no error should he traverse them. And whoever donates for goodness, then God is Thankful, Knowledgeable
Surely those who conceal what We have sent down to them of the clarities and the guidance, after We Had made it clear for the people in the Book; these will be cursed by God and be cursed by those who curse
Except those who repent and amend and clarify; for those I will accept their repentance, for I am the One who accepts repentance, the Merciful
Surely, those who have disbelieved and then died as disbelievers; they will be cursed by God, and the angels, and all the people
They will abide therein, where the retribution will not be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved
And your god is but One god, there is no god except He; the Almighty, the Merciful
Surely, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the differences between the night and the day, and the ships that sail in the sea for the benefit of the people, and what God has sent down of water from the sky so He brings the earth back to life after it had died, and He sent forth from it every creature, and the dispatching of the winds and the clouds that have been designated between the earth and the sky are signs for a people who comprehend
And from among the people are some who take other than God as equals to Him, they love them as they love God; but those who believe love God more strongly; and when those who were wicked see the retribution, they will see that all power belongs to God, and that God is severe in retribution
When those who were followed will disown those who followed them, and they will see the retribution, and all excuses will abandon them
And those who followed them said: "If we only could have a chance to disown them as they have disowned us." It is such that God will show them their works which will be regretted by them; they will not leave the Fire
O people, eat from what is on the earth as good and lawful, and do not follow in the footsteps of the devil. He is to you a clear enemy
He only orders you to evil and immorality, and that you may say about God what you do not know
And if they are told: "Follow what God has sent down," they say: "No, we will follow what we found our fathers doing!" What if their fathers did not comprehend anything and were not guided
And the example of those who disbelieve is like one who repeats what he has heard of calls and cries; deaf, dumb, and blind, they do not comprehend
O you who believe, eat from the good things We have provided for you, and be thankful to God; if it is Him you serve
He has only made unlawful for you that which is already dead, and the blood, and the meat of pig, and what was dedicated with to other than God. But whoever is forced to, without seeking disobedience or transgression, then there is no sin upon him. God is Forgiving, Merciful
Surely, those who conceal what God has sent down of the Book, and they purchase with it a cheap price; they will not eat in their bellies except the Fire, and God will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, and they will have a painful retribution
These are the ones who have purchased straying with guidance, and retribution for forgiveness; they have no patience towards the Fire
This is because God has sent down the Book with the truth; and those who have disputed about the Book are in far opposition
Piety is not to turn your faces towards the east and the west, but pious is one who believes in God and the Last Day, and the angels, and the Book, and the prophets, and who gives money out of love to the relatives, and the orphans, and the needy, and the wayfarer, and those who ask, and to free the slaves; and who upholds the contact prayer, and who contributes towards purification; and those who keep their pledges when they make a pledge, and those who are patient in the face of adversity and hardship and when in despair. These are the ones who have been truthful, and these are the righteous
O you who believe, equivalence has been decreed for you in the case of those who are slain; the free for the free, and the slave for the slave, and the female for the female. Whoever is forgiven anything by his brother, then it is to be followed with kindness and goodness towards him; that is an alleviation from your Lord, and a mercy. Whoever transgresses after that, he will have a painful retribution
And through equivalence you will be protecting life, O you who possess intelligence, that you may be righteous
It is decreed for you that if death should come to any of you, that it is best if he leaves a will for his family and relatives out of goodness; this is a truth for the righteous
Whoever alters it after having heard it, then the sin will be upon those who alter it. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
If anyone fears harm or sin from his beneficiary, then reconcile what is between them. God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe, fasting has been decreed for you as it was decreed for those before you, perhaps you may be righteous
A few number of days. Whoever of you is ill or traveling, then the same number from different days. As for those who can do so but with difficulty, they may redeem by feeding the needy. And whoever does good voluntarily, then it is better for him. And if you fast it is better for you if only you knew
The month of Ramadhan, in which the Qur'an was revealed; as a guide to the people and clarities from the guidance and the Criterion. Whoever of you witnesses the month, then let him fast it. And whoever is ill or traveling, then the same number from different days. God wants to bring you ease and not to bring you hardship; and so that you may complete the count, and magnify God for what He has guided you, that you may be thankful
And if My servants ask you about Me, I am near answering the calls of those who call to Me. So let them respond to Me and believe in Me that they may be guided
It has been made lawful for you during the night of fasting to approach your women sexually. They are a garment for you and you are a garment for them. God knows that you used to betray your souls so He has accepted your repentance, and forgiven you; now you may approach them and seek what God has written for you. And you may eat and drink until the white thread is distinct from the black thread of dawn; then you shall complete the fast until night; and do not approach them while you are devoted in the temples. These are the boundaries of God, so do not transgress them. It is thus that God clarifies His revelations to the people who they may be righteous
And do not consume your money between you unjustly by bribing the decision makers so that you may consume a part of the money of other people sinfully while you know
They ask you regarding the crescent moons, say: "They are a timing mechanism for the people and the Pilgrimage." And piety is not that you would enter a home from its back, but piety is whoever is righteous and comes to the homes from their main doors. And be aware of God that you may succeed
And fight in the cause of God against those who fight you, but do not aggress, God does not love the aggressors
And kill them wherever you encounter them, and expel them from where they expelled you, and know that persecution is worse than being killed. And do not fight them at the Restricted Temple unless they fight you in it; if they fight you then kill them, thus is the recompense of the rejecters
And if they cease, then God is Forgiving, Merciful
And fight them so there is no more persecution, and so that the system is for God. If they cease, then there will be no aggression except against the wicked
The restricted month may be met within the restricted month, and what is unlawful may be met with retaliation. Whoever attacks you, then you shall attack him the same as he attacked you; and be aware of God, and know that God is with the righteous
And spend in the cause of God, but do not throw your resources to disaster. And do good, for God loves those who do good
And conclude the Pilgrimage and the visit for God. But, if you are prevented, then provide what offering is affordable; and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches its destination. Whoever of you is ill or has an ailment to his head, then he may redeem by fasting or giving a charity or a rite. But if you are secure, then whoever makes the visit, but decides to continue until the Pilgrimage, then he shall provide what offering is affordable; but for he who cannot find anything, then he must fast for three days during the Pilgrimage and seven when he returns; this will make a complete ten - this is for those whose family is not resident at the Restricted Temple. And be aware of God, and know that God is severe in retribution
The Pilgrimage months are made known. So whoever decides to perform the Pilgrimage therein, then there shall be no sexual approach, nor wickedness, nor baseless argument in the Pilgrimage. And any good that you do, God is aware of it; and bring provisions for yourselves, though the best provision is righteousness; and be aware of Me O you who possess intelligence
There is no sin upon you to seek goodness from your Lord. So when you disperse from the elevated place, then remember God at the symbol which is restricted, and remember Him as He has guided you; for you were straying before that
Then you shall disperse from where the people dispersed, and seek the forgiveness of God; God is surely Forgiving, Merciful
When you have completed your rites, then remember God as you remember your fathers or even greater. From among the people is he who says: "Our Lord, give us from this world!" But in the Hereafter he has no part
And some of them say: "Our Lord, give us good in this world, and good in the Hereafter, and spare us from the retribution of the Fire
These will have a benefit for what they have earned; and God is swift in reckoning
And remember God during a few number of days. Whoever hurries to two days, there is no sin upon him; and whoever delays, there is no sin upon him if he is being righteous. And be aware of God, and know that it is to Him that you will be gathered
And from among the people are whose words you admire in this worldly life, but God is witness as to what is in his heart, for he is the worst in opposition
And if he gains power, he seeks to corrupt the earth and destroy its crops, and the lineage. God does not love corruption
And if he is told: "Be aware of God," his pride leads him to more sin. Hell shall be sufficient for him; what a miserable abode
And from among the people is he who sells his soul seeking the grace of God; God is kind to His servants
O you who believe, join in peace, all of you, and do not follow in the footsteps of the devil. He is to you a clear enemy
But if you slip after the clarity has come to you, then know that God is Noble, Wise
Are they waiting for God to come to them shadowed in clouds with the angels? The matter would then be finished! And to God all matters are returned
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs did We give them? And whoever changes the grace of God after it has come to him, then God is Mighty in retribution
This worldly life has been made pleasing to the disbelievers, and they mock those who believe. And those who are righteous will be above them on the Day of Resurrection; God provides for whoever He wishes without a price
The people used to be one nation, then God sent the prophets as bearers of good news and warners, and He sent down with them the Book with the truth so that they may judge between the people in what they were disputing. But after receiving the clarity, the people disputed in it due to animosity between them. And God guided those who believed with His permission regarding what they disputed in of the truth. And God guides whoever He wishes to a straight path
Or did you expect that you would enter the Paradise, while the example of those who were before you came to you; they were stricken with adversity and hardship, and they were shaken until the messenger and those who believed with him said: "When is the victory of God?" Yes indeed, the victory of God is near
They ask you what they should spend, say: "What you spend out of goodness should go to your family and the relatives and the orphans, and the needy, and the wayfarer. And any good you do, God is fully aware of it
Warfare has been decreed for you while you hate it; and perhaps you may hate something while it is good for you, and perhaps you may love something while it is bad for you; and God knows while you do not know
They ask you about the restricted month: "Is there fighting in it?" Say: "Much fighting is in it, and to repel from the path of God and to disbelieve in it, and the Restricted Temple, to drive its inhabitants out from it is far greater with God, and persecution is worse than being killed." And they still will fight you until they turn you back from your system if they are able. And whoever of you turns back from his system, and he dies while disbelieving, then these have nullified their works in this world and the next; these are the people of the Fire, in it they will abide
Those who believe, and those who have immigrated and strived in the cause of God; these are seeking the mercy of God; and God is Forgiving, Merciful
They ask you about alcohol and gambling. Say: "In them is great harm, and a benefit for the people; but their harm is greater than their benefit." And they ask you how much they are to give, say: "The excess." It is thus that God clarifies for you the revelations that you may think
In this world and the next; and they ask you regarding the orphans, say: "To fix their situation is best, and if you are to care for them, then they are your brothers." And God knows the corrupt from the good, and if God had wished He could have made things difficult. God is Noble, Wise
And do not marry the female polytheists until they believe. For a believing female servant is better than a polytheist even if she attracts you. And do not marry the male polytheists until they believe. For a believing male servant is better than a polytheist even if he attracts you. Those invite to the Fire, while God is inviting to the Paradise and forgiveness by His consent. He clarifies His revelations for the people that they may remember
And they ask you about the menstruations? Say: "It is harmful, so retire yourselves sexually from the women during the menstruations, and do not approach them until they are cleansed. When they are cleansed, then you may approach them as God has commanded you." God loves the repenters and He loves the cleansed
Your women are a cultivation for you. So approach your cultivation as you wish towards goodness. And be aware of God and know that you will meet Him, and give good news to the believers
And do not make God the subject of your casual oaths. Be pious and righteous and reconcile among the people; and God is Hearer, Knower
God will not call you to account for your casual oaths, but He will call you to account for what has entered your hearts. God is Forgiving, Compassionate
For those who abstain from their wives, they shall be given four months. If they cease, then God is Forgiving, Merciful
And if they insist on the divorce, then God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
And those divorced shall wait for three menstruation periods; and it is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in their wombs, if they believe in God and the Last Day. And their husbands would then have just cause to return together, if they both wish to reconcile. And the obligations owed to them are to be fulfilled, as are the obligations owed by them. But the men will have a greater responsibility over them in this. And God is Noble, Wise
The divorce is allowed twice. So, either they remain together equitably, or they part ways with goodness. And it is not lawful for you to take back anything you have given them unless you fear that they will not uphold the boundaries of God. So if you fear that they will not uphold the boundaries of God, then there is no sin upon them for what is given back. These are the boundaries of God so do not transgress them. And whoever shall transgress the boundaries of God, then these are the wicked
So if he divorces her again, then she will not be lawful for him until after she has married a different husband; if he divorces her; then there is no sin that they come back together if they think they will uphold the boundaries of God. These are the boundaries of God, He clarifies them for a people who know
And if you have divorced the women, and they have reached their required interim period, then either you remain together equitably, or part ways equitably. And do not reconcile with them so you can harm them out of animosity; whoever does so is doing wrong to his soul; and do not take the revelations of God as mockery. And remember the blessings of God upon you, and what was sent down to you of the Book and the wisdom, He warns you with it. And be aware of God and know that God is knowledgeable of all things
And if you divorce the women, and they reach their required interim period, then do not make difficulty for them if they wish to remarry their husbands if they have amicably agreed among themselves out of what is best. This is to remind any of you who believe in God and the Last Day, this is better for you and purer; and God knows while you do not know
And the divorced mothers are allowed to suckle their children two full years, if they wish to complete the suckling. And the man for whom the child is born is responsible for both their provisions and clothing equitably. A soul is not burdened except with what it can bear. No mother shall be harmed because of her child, nor shall a father be harmed because of his child. And for the guardian is the same requirement. So if they wish to separate out of mutual agreement and counsel, then there is no sin upon them. And if you want to hire nursing mothers, then there is no sin upon you if you return what you have been given equitably. And be aware of God, and know that God is watching over what you do
And for those of you whose lives are terminated and they leave widows behind, then their widows will have a required interim period of four months and ten. So when they reach their required interim, then there is no sin upon you for what they do with themselves in goodness. And God is Expert to what you do
And there is no sin upon you if you openly propose marriage to the women, or you keep it between yourselves. God knows that you will be thinking about them, but do not meet them secretly, unless you have something righteous to say. And do not finalize the marriage contract until the book interim is reached. And know that God knows what is in your souls, so be aware of Him, and know that God is Forgiving, Compassionate
There is no sin upon you if you divorce the women before having sexual intercourse with them, or before setting the dowry for them. Let them have recompense, the rich according to his means, and the poor according to his means. A recompense in kindness, a responsibility for the good doers
And if you divorce them before having sexual intercourse with them, but you have already set the dowry for them; then you must give half of what you have agreed, unless they forgive or the guardian over the marriage contract forgives. And if you forgive, it is closer to righteousness. And do not forget the favor between you; God is Seer of what you do
Maintain the contact prayers; and the middle contact prayer; and stand for God dutifully
But if you are fearful, then you may do so while walking or riding. If you become secure, then remember God as He has taught you what you did not know
And for those of you whose lives are terminated and they leave widows behind; a testimony to them that they may enjoy for one year without being made to vacate. If they leave then there is no sin upon you for what they do with themselves of goodness; and God is Noble, Wise
And for those divorced to have a recompense is an obligation upon the righteous
It is such that God clarifies for you His revelations that you may comprehend
Did you not see those who left their homes in groups, all the while they were fearful of death; so God said to them: "Die," then He resurrected them. God has bestowed a great grace over the people, but most of the people are not thankful
And fight in the cause of God and know that God is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
Who will lend God a loan of righteousness that He may multiply it for him many times over? God collects and He distributes, and to Him you will return
Did you not note the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses, they said to their prophet: "Send us a king that we may fight in the cause of God;" he said: "Are you not concerned that if fighting is decreed for you, you will then not fight?" They said: "And why should we not fight in the cause of God when we have been expelled from our homes along with our children." So it was, that when fighting was decreed for them they turned away, except for a few of them! God is fully aware of the wicked
And their prophet said to them: "God has sent Saul to you as a king." They said: "How can he have the kingship when we are more deserving than him, and he has not been given an abundance of wealth?" He said: "God has chosen him over you and increased him in knowledge and physical stature." God grants His sovereignty to whom He chooses; and God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
And their prophet said to them: "The sign of his kingship shall be that he brings to you the ark in which there is tranquility from your Lord and the legacy of what was left behind by the descendants of Moses and the descendants of Aaron being carried by the angels. In this is a sign for you if you are believers
So when Saul set out with the soldiers, he said: "God will test you with a river, whoever drinks from it is not with me, and whoever does not taste from it except one scoop with his hand is with me." They all drank from it, except for a few of them. So when he and those who believed with him crossed it, they said: "We have no power today against Goliath and his soldiers!" But the ones who understood that they would meet God said: "How many a time has a small group beaten a large group with the permission of God, and God is with the patient ones
And when they came forth to Goliath and his soldiers, they said: "Our Lord grant us patience, and make firm our foothold, and grant us victory over the disbelieving people
So they defeated them with the permission of God, and David killed Goliath, and God gave him the kingship and the wisdom and taught him what he wished. And if it were not for God defending the people against themselves, then the earth would have long been corrupted; but God has bestowed grace upon the worlds
These are the revelations of God, We recite them to you with the truth, and you are one of the messengers
Such messengers, We have preferred some over others; some of them talked to God, and He raised some of them in rank, and We gave Jesus, son of Mary, the clear proofs and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. And had God wished, the people after them would not have fought after the proofs had come to them, but they disputed, some of them believed and some of them rejected. If God had wished they would not have fought, but God does what He pleases
O you who believe, spend from what We have provided for you before a Day comes when there is no trade, nor friendship, nor intercession; and the rejecters are the wicked
God, there is no god except He, the Living, the Sustainer. No slumber or sleep overtakes Him; to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Who will intercede with Him except with His permission? He knows their present and their future, and they do not have any of His knowledge except for what He wishes. His Throne encompasses all of the heavens and the earth and it is easy for Him to preserve them. He is the Most High, the Great
There is no compulsion in the system; the proper way has been clarified from the wrong way. Whoever rejects evil, and believes in God, indeed he has taken grasp of the strongest hold that will never break. God is Hearer, Knower
God is the ally of those who believe, He brings them out of the darkness and into the light. As for those who reject, their allies are the evil ones, they bring them out of the light and into the darkness; these are the people of the Fire, in it they will abide
Have you not noted him who debated with Abraham regarding his Lord, while God had given him a kingship? Abraham said: "My Lord is the One who gives life and death," he said: "I bring life and death." Abraham said: "God brings the sun from the east, so you bring it from the west." The one who rejected was baffled! And God does not guide the wicked people
Or the one who passed through a town which had become ruins. He said: "How can God possibly revive this after it had died?" So God put him to death for one hundred years, then He resurrected him. He said: "How long have you stayed here?" He said: "I have stayed here a day or part of a day." He said: "No, you have stayed here for one hundred years! Look at your food and drink, they have not changed, but look at your donkey! And We will make you a sign for the people; and look at the bones how We expand them, then We cover them with flesh." So when it was clear to him what happened, he said: "I now know that God is capable of all things
And Abraham said: "My Lord, show me how you resurrect the dead." He said: "Do you not already believe?" He said: "I do, but it is so my heart can be relieved." He said: "Choose four birds, then cut them, then place parts of the birds on each mountain, then call them to you; they will come racing towards you. And know that God is Noble, Wise
The example of those who spend their money in the cause of God is like a seed that sprouts forth seven pods, in each pod there is one hundred seeds; and God multiplies for whoever He chooses, and God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
Those who spend their money in the cause of God, then they do not follow what they have spent with either insult or harm; they will have their recompense with their Lord, there is no fear over them nor will they grieve
Kind words and forgiveness are far better than a charity that is followed by harm. God is Rich, Compassionate
O you who believe, do not nullify your charities with insult and harm; like the one who spends his money in vanity to show off to the people, and he does not believe in God and the Last Day. His example is like a stone on which there is dust, then it is subjected to a heavy rain which leaves it bare. They cannot do anything with what they have earned; and God does not guide the rejecting people
And the example of those who spend their money seeking the grace of God, and to save their souls, is like the example of a garden that is on a high ground and is subjected to a heavy rain, and because of that it produces double its crop. And if no heavy rain comes, then it still gives enough. And God is Seer of what you do
Does anyone of you desire that he have an estate with palm trees and grapevines, and rivers flowing beneath it, and in it for him are all kinds of fruits, then he is afflicted with old age and his progeny is weak, and a firestorm strikes it and it all burns? It is thus that God makes clear for you the signs that you may reflect
O you who believe, spend from the good things that you have earned, and from what We have brought forth from the earth. And do not select the rotten out of it to give, while you would not take it yourselves unless you closed your eyes regarding it. And know that God is Rich, Praiseworthy
The devil promises you poverty and orders you to immorality, while God promises forgiveness from Him and grace. God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
He grants wisdom to whom He chooses, and whoever is granted wisdom has been given much good. Only those who possess intelligence will remember
And whatever you spend out of your monies, or whatever you pledge as a promise, then God knows it. The wicked have no supporters
If you openly give charities, then it is acceptable; but if you conceal them and give them to the poor, then that is better for you. And He cancels some of your sins; and God is Expert to all that you do
You are not responsible for their guidance, but it is God who will guide whoever He wishes. And whatever you spend out of goodness is for your own souls. And anything you spend should be in seeking the face of God. And whatever you spend out of goodness will be returned to you, and you will not be wronged
For the poor who face hardship in the cause of God, they cannot go forth in the land; the ignorant ones think they are rich from their modesty; you know them by their features, they do not ask the people repeatedly. And what you spend out of goodness, God is fully aware of it
Those who spend their money in the night and in the day, secretly and openly, they will have their recompense with their Lord, there is no fear over them nor will they grieve
Those who consume usury do not rise except as one being influenced by the touch of the devil. That is because they have said: "Trade is the same as usury." While God has made trade lawful, and He has made usury unlawful. Whoever has received understanding from His Lord and ceases, then he will be forgiven for what was before this and his case will be with God. But whoever returns, then they are the people of the Fire, in it they will abide
God condemns usury, and He grants growth to the charities. And God does not love any wicked sinner
Those who believe and do good works, and hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification; they will have their recompense with their Lord and there is no fear over them nor will they grieve
O you who believe, be aware of God and give up what is left from usury, if you are truly believers
And if you will not do this, then be informed of a war from God and His messenger; but if you repent, then you will have back your principal money, you will not be wronged nor will you wrong
If the person is facing insolvency, then you shall wait until he becomes able. And if you relinquish it as a charity it is better for you if only you knew
And be aware of a Day when you will be returned to God then every soul will be paid what it has earned, and they will not be wronged
O you who believe, if you borrow for a future period, then you shall record it. And let a scribe of justice record it for you; and let not the scribe refuse to record as God has taught him. Let him record and let the person who is borrowing dictate to him, and let him be aware of God, and let him not reduce from it anything. If the one who is borrowing is immature or weak or he cannot dictate himself, then let his guardian dictate with justice; and bring two witnesses from among your men; if there are not two men, then a man and two women from whom you will accept their testimony, so that if one of them becomes blindsided, then the one can remind the other. And let the witnesses not refuse to come if they are called. And do not fail to record it no matter how small or large until its maturity. That is more just with God and better for the testimony, and better that you do not have doubts; except if it is a trade to be done on the spot between you, then there is no sin upon you if you do not record it. And have evidence if you trade. No scribe shall be harmed nor any witness; for if you do so then it is a wickedness on your part, and be aware of God and God teaches you and God is aware of all things
And if you are traveling or do not find a scribe, then a pledge of collateral. So, if you have entrusted each other in this manner, then let the one who was entrusted deliver his trust, and let him be aware of God his Lord. And do not hold back the testimony. And whoever holds it back, then he has sinned in his heart, and God is aware of what you do
To God is what is in the heavens and in earth, and whether you declare what is in your souls or hide it, God will call you to account for it. He will forgive whom He wishes, and punish whom He wishes, and God is capable of all things
The messenger believes in what was sent down to him from his Lord; and the believers, all who believe in God, and His angels, and His Books, and His messengers: "We do not make a distinction between any of His messengers;" and they said: "We hear and obey, forgive us our Lord, and to you is our destiny
God does not burden a soul except with what it can bear. For it is what it earns, and against it is what it earns. "Our Lord, do not mind us if we forget or make mistakes; our Lord, do not place a burden upon us as You have placed upon those before us; our Lord, do not place upon us what we cannot bear; pardon us, and forgive us, and have mercy on us; You are our patron, so grant us victory over the disbelieving people
ALM
God, there is no god except He, the Living, the Sustainer
He sent down to you the Book with the truth, authenticating what is between his hands; and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
From before as a guidance for the people, and He sent down the Criterion. Those who rejected the revelations of God, they will have a severe retribution, and God is Noble, exacting in Revenge
For God nothing is hidden on the earth or in the heavens
He is the One who pictures you in the wombs as He pleases. There is no god except He, the Noble, the Wise
He is the One who sent down to you the Book, from which there are lawgiving revelations; they are the essence of the Book; and others which are of a similatude. As for those who have a disease in their hearts, they will follow that which is of a similatude, seeking to confuse, and seeking to derive an interpretation. But none know its interpretation except God, and those who are well founded in knowledge; they say: "We believe in it, all is from our Lord." And none will remember except those who possess intelligence
Our Lord, do not make our hearts deviate after You have guided us, and grant us from You a mercy. Indeed, You are the Grantor
Our Lord, You will gather the people for a Day in which there is no doubt; God does not break His appointment
As for those who rejected, neither their money nor their children will avail them anything from God. They are the fuel of the Fire
Like the behavior of the people of Pharaoh and those before them. They rejected Our signs so God took them for their sins. God is awesome in retribution
Say to those who have rejected: "You will be defeated and gathered towards Hell, what a miserable abode
There was a sign for you in the two groups that met. One was fighting in the cause of God, and the other was rejecting. They thus saw them as twice their number with their eyes. And God supports with His victory whom He wills. In this is a lesson for those with vision
It has been adorned for people to love the desire of women, and sons, and ornaments made from gold and silver, and trained horses, and livestock, and fields. These are the enjoyment of the world, and with God is the best abode
Say: "Shall I inform you of what is greater than all this? For those who believe in their Lord will be estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein, and with pure mates, and an acceptance from God. And God is Seer over the servants
The ones who say: "Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us our sins, and spare us the retribution of the Fire
The patient, and the truthful, and the dutiful, and the givers, and the seekers of forgiveness in the late hours of the night
God bears witness that there is no god except He, as do the angels, and those with knowledge, He is standing with justice. There is no god except He, the Noble, the Wise
The system with God is submission, and those who received the Book did not dispute except after the knowledge came to them out of jealousy between them. And whoever rejects the revelations of God, then God is swift in judgment
If they debate with you, then say: "I have submitted myself to God, as well as those who follow me." And say to those who have received the Book and the Gentiles: "Have you submitted?" If they have submitted then they are guided, and if they turn away, then you are only to deliver, and God is Seer over the servants
Those who reject the revelations of God and kill the prophets without right, and kill those who order justice from among the people; inform them of a painful retribution
These are the ones whose works will be lost in this world, and in the Hereafter they will have no supporters
Did you not see those who were given a portion of the Book being invited to the Book of God to judge between them, then a group of them turns away while they are adverse
That is because they said: "The Fire will not touch us except for a few number of days," and they were arrogant by what they invented in their system
How shall it be when We gather them on the Day in which there is no doubt; and every soul shall receive what it has earned, and they will not be wronged
Say: "Our god, Possessor of kingship; you grant kingship to whom You please, and revoke kingship from whom You please, and honor whom You please, and humiliate whom You please; in Your hand is goodness. You are capable of all things
You blend the night into the day, and blend the day into the night; and you bring the living out of the dead, and bring the dead out of the living; and You provide for whom You wish without reckoning
Let not the believers take the rejecters as allies instead of the believers. And whoever does so will have nothing with God; for you are to be cautious of them as they deserve. And God warns you of Himself, and to God is the destiny
Say: "Whether you hide what is in your chests or you reveal it, God will know." And He knows what is in the heavens and the earth; and God is capable of all things
The Day every soul will find what good it had done present; and what bad it had done, it will wish that between them was a great distance. And God warns you of Himself, and God is Compassionate towards the servants
Say: "If you love God then follow me so God will love you and forgive your sins." God is Forgiver, Merciful
Say: "Obey God and the messenger." But if they turn away, then God does not love the rejecters
God has selected Adam, and Noah, and the family of Abraham, and the family of Imran over the worlds
A progeny each from the other, and God is Hearer, Knower
When the wife of Imran said: "My Lord, I have vowed to You what is in my womb, devoted, so accept from me, You are the Hearer, the Knower
So when she had delivered she said: "My Lord, I have delivered a female," and God is fully aware of what she delivered, "And the male is not like the female, and I have named her Mary, and I seek refuge for her and her progeny with You from the outcast devil
So her Lord accepted her a good acceptance, and made her grow into a good growth, and charged Zachariah with her. Every time Zachariah entered upon her in the temple enclosure, he found provisions with her. He said: "O Mary, from where did you get this?" She said: "It is from God, for God provides for whom He wishes without reckoning
It was then that Zachariah implored his Lord; he said: "My Lord, grant me from You a good progeny. You are the hearer of prayer
So the angels called to him while he was standing, making contact, in the temple enclosure: "God gives you glad tidings of John, authenticating the word from God, and a master, and steadfast, and a prophet from the upright
He said: "My Lord, how can I have a son when old age has reached me and my wife is infertile?" He said: "It is as such that God does what He pleases
He said: "My Lord, make for me a sign." He said: "Your sign is not to speak to the people for three days except by symbol, and remember your Lord greatly, and glorify at dusk and dawn
And the angels said: "O Mary, God has selected you and cleansed you, and He has selected you over all the women of the worlds
O Mary, be dutiful to your Lord and prostrate and kneel with those who kneel
This is from the news of the unseen that We inspire to you. You were not with them when they drew straws as to which one of them will be charged with Mary; you were not with them when they disputed
And the angels said: "O Mary, God gives you glad tidings of a word from Him. His name is the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary. Honorable in this world and in the Hereafter, and from among those who are made close
And he will speak to the people from the cradle and to middle-age, and is from among the upright
She said: "My Lord, how can I have a son when no human being has been with me?" He said: "It is thus that God creates what He wills, when He decrees a command, He merely says to it 'Be,' and it is
And He teaches him the Book and the Wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel
And as a messenger to the Children of Israel: "I have come to you with a sign from your Lord; that I create for you from clay the form of a bird, then I blow into it and it becomes a bird with the permission of God, and I heal the blind and the lepers, and give life to the dead with the permission of God, and I prophesize for you what you shall eat and what to store in your homes. In that is a sign for you if you are believers
And authenticating what is between my hands of the Torah, and to make lawful some of that which was made unlawful to you; and I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, so be aware of God and obey me
God is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him, this is a straight path
So when Jesus felt their rejection, he said: "Who are my supporters to God?" The disciples said: "We are the supporters of God, we believe in God and we bear witness that we have submitted
Our Lord, we believe in what You have sent down, and followed the messenger, so record us with those who bear witness
And they schemed and God schemed, but God is the best schemer
For God said: "O Jesus, I will terminate your life, and raise you to Me, and cleanse you of those who have rejected, and make those who have followed you above those who have rejected until the Day of Resurrection. Then to Me is your return, all of you,so I will judge between you in what it was that you disputed
As for those who have rejected, I will punish them severely in this world and in the Hereafter, they will have no supporters
And as for those who have believed and have done good works, We will pay them their recompense; God does not love the wicked
This We recite to you from the revelations and the wise reminder
The example of Jesus with God is similar to that of Adam; He created him from dust, then He said to him "Be" and he was
The truth is from your Lord, so do not be of those who doubt
Whoever debates with you in this after the knowledge has come to you, then say: "Let us call our children and your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then, let us invoke and make the curse of God upon the liars
This is the narration of truth, there is no god except God; and God is the Noble, the Wise
And if they turn away, then God is aware of the corrupters
Say: "O people of the Book, let us come to a common understanding between us and between you; that we serve none except God, and that we do not set up anything with Him, and that none of us takes each other as patrons besides God." If they turn away, then say: "Bear witness that we have submitted
O people of the Book, why do you debate with us regarding Abraham when the Torah and the Gospel were not sent down except after him? Do you not comprehend
Here you have debated in what you knew; so why then do you debate in what you do not know? And God knows while you do not know
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Nazarene, but he was a monotheist who submitted; he was not of the polytheists
The most legitimate people to Abraham are those who followed him; and this prophet, and those who believed; and God is the supporter of the believers
A group from the people of the Book wished that they could misguide you, but they only misguide themselves and they do not notice
O people of the Book, why do you reject the revelations of God while you are bearing witness
O people of the Book, why do you confound the truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know
And a group from among the people of the Book said: "Believe in what was sent down to those who believe during the beginning of the day, and reject it by the end of it, perhaps they will return
And do not believe except in he who follows your system." Say: "The guidance is the guidance of God." That anyone should be given similar to what you have been given, or that they debate with you at your Lord. Say: "The bounty is in the hand of God, He gives it to whom He chooses, and God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
He singles out with His mercy whom He chooses, and God is with Great Bounty
And from among the people of the Book are those whom if you entrust him with a large amount he gives it back to you, and there are those whom if you entrust with one gold coin he will not return it to you unless you are standing over him. That is because they said: "We have no obligation towards the Gentiles." They say about God lies while they know
Indeed, anyone who fulfils his pledge and is righteous, then God loves the righteous
The ones who purchase with the pledge of God and their oaths a cheap price, those will have no portion in the Hereafter, and God will not speak to them, nor will He look at them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, and they will have a painful retribution
And from among them is a group who twist their tongues with the Book so that you may think it is from the Book, while it is not from the Book, and they say it is from God while it is not from God, and they say about God lies while they know
It is not for any human being that God would give him the Book and the authority and the prophethood, then he would say to the people: "Be servants to me rather than God!" Rather: "Be Devotees for what you have been taught of the Book, and of what you have studied
Nor does He order you that you take the angels and the prophets as patrons. Would He order you to rejection after you have submitted
And God took a covenant from the prophets: "For what I have given you of the Book and wisdom, then a messenger will come to you authenticating what is with you. You will believe in him and support him." He said: "Do you testify, and agree to this burden?" They said: "We testify." He said: "Then bear witness, and I am with you bearing witness
Whoever turns away after that, then they are the wicked
Is it other than the system of God that they desire, when those in the heavens and the earth have submitted to Him voluntarily or by force? And to Him they will be returned
Say: "We believe in God and what was sent down to us and what was sent down to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Patriarchs, and what was given to Moses and Jesus and the prophets from their Lord. We do not make a distinction between any of them, and to Him we submit
And whoever follows other than submission as a system, it will not be accepted from him, and in the Hereafter he is of the losers
How can God guide a people who have rejected after believing, and they had witnessed that the messenger was true, and the clarity had come to them? God does not guide the wicked people
To these the punishment will be that the curse of God will be upon them and that of the angels and the people all together
Abiding therein, the retribution will not be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved
Except those who repent after this and make amends, then God is Forgiver, Merciful
Those who have rejected after their belief, then increased in rejection, their repentance will not be accepted, they are the strayers
Those who have rejected and died while they were rejecters, if the earth full of gold were to be ransomed with it would not be accepted from any of them. For these there will be a painful retribution and they will have no supporters
You will not reach piety until you spend from what you love; and whatever you spend, God is aware of it
All the food was made lawful to the Children of Israel except what Israel forbade for himself before the Torah was sent down. Say: "Bring the Torah and recite it if you are truthful
Whoever invents lies about God after this, these are the wicked
Say: "God bears truth. Follow the creed of Abraham, monotheism, and he was not of the polytheists
The first Sanctuary established for the people is the one in Bakk'a, blessed, and a guidance for the worlds
In it are clear signs: the station of Abraham. And whoever enters it will be secure. And God is owed from the people to make Pilgrimage to the Sanctuary, whoever can make a path to it. And whoever rejects, then God has no need of the worlds
Say: "O people of the Book, why do you reject the revelations of God, while God is witness over what you do
Say: "O people of the Book, why do you repel from the path of God those who believe? You wish to twist it while you are witnesses. And God is not unaware of what you do
O you who believe, if you obey a group of those who received the Book they will turn you after your belief into rejecters
And how can you reject when the revelations of God are being recited to you and with you is His messenger? And whoever holds firmly to God has been guided to the straight path
O you who believe, reverence God as He deserves to be reverenced, and do not die except as ones who have submitted
And hold firmly to the rope of God, all of you, and do not be separated. And remember the blessing of God upon you when you were enemies and He united your hearts. Then you became, with His blessing, brothers; and you were on the edge of a pit of fire and He saved you from it; it is thus that God clarifies for you His signs that you may be guided
And let there be a nation from among you who calls towards goodness, and orders kindness, and prohibits vice. And these are the successful ones
And do not be like those who separated and differed after the clarity had come to them. And for them is a painful retribution
The Day on which faces will be lightened and faces will be darkened; as for those whose faces will be darkened: "Did you reject after believing? Taste the retribution for what you rejected
As for those whose faces will be lightened, they are in the mercy of God, in it they abide
These are the revelations of God, We recite them to you with the truth. God does not want wickedness for the worlds
And to God is all that is in the heavens and the earth; and to God all matters are returned
You were the best nation that emerged for the people, you ordered kindness and prohibited vice, and believed in God. If the people of the Book believed it would have been better for them; from among them are the believers, but the majority are the wicked
They will not harm you except in being an annoyance, and if they fight you they will turn and flee, then they will not be supported
They are struck with humiliation wherever they are encountered, except for a rope from God and a rope from the people. And they stayed in the wrath of God and were struck with humiliation; that is because they were disbelieving in the revelations of God and killing the prophets without right; that is for what they disobeyed and were transgressing
They are not all the same, from the people of the Book are a nation that is upright; they recite the revelations of God during the night hours and they prostrate
They believe in God and the Last Day and order kindness and prohibit vice, and they hasten in goodness; these are of the good doers
And what they do of good will not be turned back, and God is aware of the righteous
As for those who rejected, neither their money nor their children will avail them anything from God. These are the people of the Fire, in it they abide
The example of what they spend in this world is like a wind in which there is a frost; it afflicts the field of the people who wronged themselves, and thus destroys it. God did not wrong them, but it was their souls that they wronged
O you who believe do not take as an inner-circle any from besides yourselves; they will only disrupt you greatly. They wish that you deviate; the hatred is apparent out of their mouths and what their chests conceal is even greater! We have made clear for you the signs if you comprehend
Here you love them while they do not love you, and you believe in the entire Book. And if they meet you they say: "We believe," and if they are alone they bite their fingers out of frustration at you. Say: "Die in your frustration, God is aware of what is in the chests
If any good befalls you it disturbs them, and if any bad befalls you they rejoice with it. And if you are patient and righteous their planning will not harm you at all. God is Encompassing all they do
And as you departed from your family to prepare for the believers their stations for battle - and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
When two parties from among you were obsessed that they would fail; while God was their supporter. In God the believers should trust
God had granted you victory at Badr, while you had been the lesser, so reverence God that you may be thankful
When you said to the believers: "Is it not enough for you that your Lord would supply you with three thousand of the angels sent down
Indeed, if you are patient and are righteous and they come and attack you, He will supply you with five thousand of the angels battle trained
And God did not give this except as good news to you, and so that your hearts may be assured with it. Victory is only from God, the Noble, the Wise
Thus He will sever a group of those who reject, or disgrace them; then they will turn back frustrated
You will have no say in the matter, for He may pardon them, or punish them; for they are wicked
And to God is what is in the heavens and in the earth, He forgives whom He pleases, and He punishes whom He pleases; and God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe, do not consume usury, compounding over and over; and reverence God that you may succeed
And be aware of the Fire that has been prepared for the rejecters
And obey God and the messenger so that you may obtain mercy
And race towards forgiveness from your Lord and a Paradise whose width encompasses the width of the heavens and of the earth; it has been prepared for the righteous
The ones who spend in prosperity and hardship, and who repress anger, and who pardon the people; God loves the good doers
And those who, if they commit lewdness, or wrong themselves, they remember God and seek forgiveness for their sins. And who can forgive the sins except God? And they do not persist in what they have done while they know
To these the recompense will be forgiveness from their Lord and estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein. Excellent is the recompense of the workers
Many nations have come before you, so roam the earth and see how the punishment was for the deniers
This is a clarification for the people and a reminder for the righteous
Do not be weak, and do not grieve, for you will have the upper hand, if you are believers
If you are wounded, then know that the other group is also wounded. And such are the days, We alternate them between the people, so that God will distinguish those who believe, and so He may make witnesses from among you; and God does not love the wicked
And God will prove those who believe and He will condemn the rejecters
Or did you think that you would enter the Paradise without God distinguishing those who would strive among you and distinguishing those who are patient
And you used to long for death before you came upon it; so now you see it right in-front of you
And Mohammed is but a messenger, like many messengers who have passed before him. If he dies or is killed will you turn back on your heels? And whoever turns back on his heels, he will not harm God in the least. And God will recompense the thankful
It is not permitted for a soul to die except by the permission of God in an appointed record. And whoever wants the reward of this world We give him of it, and whoever wants the reward of the Hereafter, We give him of it. And We will reward the thankful
And many a prophet had a large number of Devotees fighting with him. They did not waver by what afflicted them in the cause of God, nor did they become weak, nor did they become discouraged; and God loves the patient ones
And they did not say except: "Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our shortcomings in our responsibility, and make firm our foothold, and grant us victory over the rejecting people
So God gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the Hereafter; and God loves the good doers
O you who believe, if you obey those who have rejected, then they will turn you back on your heels and you will turn back as losers
It is God who is your Patron, and He is the best victor
We will cast terror in the hearts of those who have rejected, because of what they have set up besides God while He never sent down any authority to do so, and their destiny is the Fire. Miserable is the abode of the wicked
And God has fulfilled His promise to you, that you would overwhelm them with His permission; but then you failed and disputed in the matter and disobeyed after He showed you what you had sought. Some of you want this world, and some of you want the Hereafter. Then He let you retreat from them that He may test you; and He has pardoned you. God is with great grace over the believers
For you were ascending to the high ground and would not even glance towards anyone, and the messenger was calling to you from behind. Therefore He gave you worry to replace your worry, so that you would not have sadness by what has passed you, or for what afflicted you, and God is Expert over what you do
Then He sent down to you after the worry a tranquility in sleepiness, it overtook a group of you; and another group was obsessed with themselves, they were thinking about God other than the truth, the thoughts of the days of ignorance. They say: "Why are we involved in this affair?" Say: "The entire affair is for God." They hide in their souls what they do not show to you, they say: "If we had a say in this affair then none of us would have been killed here." Say: "If you were inside your own homes, then the ones who had been marked for death would have come out to their resting place." God will test what is in your chests and bring out what is in your hearts. God is Knowledgeable as to what is in the chests
Those of you who turned away on the day that the two hosts met, it was the devil who caused them to slip due to some of what they had earned. And God has pardoned them, for God is Forgiver, Compassionate
O you who believe do not be like those who rejected and said to their brothers when they had gone forth in the land or on the offensive: "If they were here with us they would not have died nor been killed." God will make this a source of grief in their hearts, and God grants life and death, and God is watching over what you do
And if you are killed in the cause of God or die, then forgiveness from God and mercy are far greater than all they can put together
And if you die or are killed, then to God you will be gathered
It was a mercy from God that you were soft towards them; had you been harsh and hard-hearted, they would have dispersed from you; so pardon them and ask forgiveness for them, and consult them in the matter; but when you are convinced, then put your trust in God; for God loves those who put their trust
If God grants you victory then none can defeat you, and if He abandons you then who can grant you victory after Him? And towards God the believers should put their trust
It was not for any prophet to embezzle, and he who embezzles will be brought with what he has embezzled on the Day of Resurrection, then every soul will be given what it has earned without being wronged
Is he who follows the pleasure of God as he who draws the wrath of God and his abode is Hell and a miserable destiny
They are in grades with God, and God is Seer of what they do
God has bestowed grace upon the believers by sending them a messenger from among themselves reciting His revelations and purifying them and teaching them the Book and the wisdom, and they were before in manifest darkness
And so it was when you suffered setback; even though you afflicted them with twice as much setback; you said: "Where is this coming from?" Say: "It is from yourselves." God is capable of all things
And what you suffered on the day the two hosts met was with the permission of God, and to let the believers know
And to let those who are hypocrites know, that they were told: "Come fight in the cause of God or defend," they said: "If we knew how to fight we would have followed you." They are closer to rejection than they are to belief. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts, and God is aware of what they conceal
Those who remained and said to their brothers: "If they obeyed us they would not have been killed." Say: "Then avert death away from yourselves if you are truthful
And do not think that those who are killed in the cause of God are dead. No, they are alive at their Lord receiving a bounty
Happy with what God has granted them from His grace, and they rejoice in those who have yet to follow after them. There is no fear upon them nor do they grieve
They rejoice with the bounty of God and grace; God will not waste the recompense of the believers
Those who have answered God and the messenger after they were afflicted with wounds. For those of them who did good and were righteous is a great recompense
The ones who the people said to them: "The people have gathered against you, so be concerned by them," but it only increased their faith and they said: "God is sufficient for us, and He is the best to put our trust in
So they came back with a recompense from God and a bounty, no harm would touch them. And they had followed the pleasure of God, and God is the One with great pleasure
It is only the devil trying to create fear for his allies, so do not fear them, but fear Me if you are believers
And do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief. They will not harm God in the least. God does not wish to make for them any share in the Hereafter, and they will have a painful retribution
Those who have purchased rejection with belief will not harm God in the least, and they will have a painful retribution
And let not those who reject think that We are providing for them out of the goodness of themselves. We are only providing for them so that they may increase in transgression, and they will have a humiliating retribution
God was not to leave the believers as they were without distinguishing the rotten from the good. And God was not to let you know the future, but God chooses from His messengers whom He wishes; so believe in God and His messengers. And if you believe and are righteous, then you will have a great recompense
And let not those who are stingy with what God has given them of His bounty think that it is good for them, no, it is evil for them. They will be surrounded by what they were stingy with on the Day of Resurrection. And to God will be the inheritance of the heavens and the earth; and God is Expert over what you do
God has heard the words of those who said: "God is poor and we are rich!" We will record what they have said and their killing of the prophets without right; and We will say: "Taste the retribution of the Fire
This is for what their hands have delivered, and God does not wrong the servants
Those who said: "God has pledged to us that we should not believe in a messenger unless he brings us an offering which the fire will devour." Say: "Messengers have come to you before me with clarity and with what you have said, so why did you kill them if you were truthful
If they deny you, then messengers before you were also denied; they came with the proofs and the scriptures and the Book of Enlightenment
Every soul will taste death, and you will be recompensed your dues on the Day of Resurrection. Whoever is swayed from the Fire and entered into the Paradise, he has indeed won. This worldly life is nothing more than the enjoyment of vanity
We will test you in your wealth and in yourselves, and you will hear from those who have been given the Book from before you and from the polytheists much annoyance. And if you are patient and righteous, then that is from a strength of conviction
And God took the covenant of those who were given the Book: "You will make it clear to the people and not conceal it." But they placed it behind their backs and purchased with it a cheap price. Miserable indeed is what they have purchased
Do not think that those who are happy with what they have been given, and they love to be praised for what they did not do; do not think they are saved from the punishment. For them is a painful retribution
And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and God is capable of all things
In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference between the night and the day, are signs for those who possess intelligence
Those who remember God while standing, and sitting, and on their sides, and they ponder over the creation of the heavens and the earth: "Our Lord you have not created this without purpose, glory to You, spare us the retribution of the Fire
Our Lord, whoever You admit to the Fire has been disgraced. The wicked will have no supporters
Our Lord, we have heard a caller inviting to the faith: "Believe in your Lord," so we have believed. Our Lord forgive us our bad deeds, and forgive our sins, and let us die in the company of the righteous
Our Lord, and grant us what You have promised through Your messengers, and do not embarrass us on the Day of Resurrection. You do not break the promise
Their Lord answered them: "I do not waste the work of any worker from among you, whether male or female, you are all as each other. For those who emigrated and were driven-out from their homes and were harmed in My cause, and they fought and were killed, I will forgive for them their sins and admit them to estates with rivers flowing beneath them." A recompense from God; and God has the best recompense
Do not be deceived by the success of those who have rejected in the land
A brief enjoyment, then their abode is Hell. What a miserable abode
As for those who reverence their Lord, they will have estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein as a dwelling from God. What is with God is better for the obedient
And from the people of the Book are those who believe in God and what was sent down to you and what was sent down to them; fearful to God, they do not purchase with the revelations of God a cheap price. These will have their recompense with their Lord. For God is swift in reckoning
O you who believe, be patient and call for patience, and stand firm, and reverence God that you may succeed
O people, be aware of your Lord who has created you from one person and He created from it its mate and sent forth from it many men and many women; and be aware of God whom you ask about, and the relatives. God is Watcher over you
And give the orphans their money, and do not replace the good with the bad, and do not consume their money with your money; for truly this is a great sin
And if you fear that you cannot be just to the orphans, then you may marry those who are agreeable to you of the women: two, and three, and four. But if you fear you will not be fair, then only one, or whom you maintain by your oaths. This is best that you do not face financial hardship
And give the women their dues willingly, and if they remit any of it to you of their own will, then you may take it with good feelings
And do not give the immature ones your money for which God has made you overseers, and spend on them from it and clothe them, and speak to them in goodness
And test the orphans when they reach puberty, then, if you have determined from them comprehension, then give them their money, and do not deliberately consume it wastefully or quickly before they grow up. And whoever is rich, then let him not claim anything, and if he is poor then let him consume in kindness. If you give to them their money, then make a witness for them, and God is enough for Reckoning
For the men is a portion from what the parents and the relatives left behind, and for the women is a portion from what the parents and relatives left behind, be it little or much; a forced portion
And if the distribution is attended by the relatives and the orphans and the needy, then you shall give them part of it and say to them a kind saying
And let them be concerned, that if it was they who had left behind them a weak progeny, would they not fear for them? Let them reverence God and let them say what is appropriate
Those who consume the money of the orphans illicitly, in fact they are consuming fire in their bellies, and they will endure the Blaze
God directs you regarding the inheritance of your children: "To the male shall be as that given to two females. If they are women, more than two, then they will have two thirds of what is inherited. And if she is only one, then she will have one half. And to his parents, each one of them shall have one sixth of what is inherited, if he has a child. If he has no child and his parents are the heirs, then to his mother is one third; if he has siblings then to his mother is one sixth. All after a will is carried through or a debt. Your parents and your children, you do not know which are closer to you in benefit, a directive from God, for God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And for you is half of what your wives leave behind if they have no child; but if they have a child then to you is one quarter of what they leave behind. All after a will is carried through or a debt. And to them is one quarter of what you leave behind if you have no child; but if you have a child then to them is one eighth of what you leave behind. All after a will is carried through or a debt. And if a man or a woman who is being inherited has no ascendants, but has a brother or a sister, then to each one of them is one sixth, but if they are more than this then they are to share in one third. All after a will is carried through or a debt, which does not cause harm. A directive from God, and God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate
These are the boundaries of God, and whoever obeys God and His messenger, He will admit him to estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein. This is the great triumph
And whoever disobeys God and His messenger, and transgresses His boundaries, He will admit him to a Fire, abiding therein, and he will have a humiliating retribution
And those of your women who commit lewdness, you shall bring four witnesses over them from among you; if they bear witness, then you shall restrict them in the homes until death terminates their lives, or God makes for them a way out
And the two men who commit it from among you, you shall trouble them. If they repent and amend, then leave them alone. God is Redeemer, Merciful
Repentance is only for those who commit a sin out of ignorance and then repent soon after; these will be forgiven by God, for God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And there will be no repentance for those who commit sin then when death comes upon any one of them he says: "I repent now!" Nor for those who die while they are rejecters. For those We have prepared a painful retribution
O you who believe, it is not lawful for you to inherit from the women by force. And do not make difficulty for them so that you may take away some of what you have given them, unless they commit a clear lewdness. And live with them in kindness. If you dislike them, then perhaps you dislike something while God makes in it much good
And if you wish to replace one wife with another, and you have given one of them a large amount, then do not take anything from it. Will you take it by falsehood while it is clearly a sin
And how can you take it when you have become intimate with each other, and they have taken from you a solemn covenant
And do not marry who your fathers had married from the women, except what has already been done. It is a lewdness, and an abhorrence, and an evil path
Forbidden for you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters, and the sisters of your father, and the sisters of your mother, and the daughters of your brother, and the daughters of your sister, and your foster mothers who suckled you, and your sisters from suckling, and the mothers of your women, and your step-daughters who are in your lodgings from your women with whom you have already consummated the marriage; if you have not consummated the marriage then there is no sin upon you; and those who were in wedlock with your sons who are from your seed, and that you join between two sisters except what has already been done. God is Forgiving, Merciful
And the independent from the women, except those maintained by your oaths; the book of God over you; and permitted for you is what is beyond this, if you are seeking with your money to be independent, not for illicit sex. As for those whom you have already had joy with, then you shall give them their dowries as an obligation. There is no sin upon you for what you agree on after the obligation. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And whoever of you cannot afford to marry the independent female believers, then from those maintained by your oaths of the believing young women. And God is more aware of your faith, some of you to each other. You shall marry them with the permission of their parents, and give them their dowries in kindness - to be independent - not for illicit sex or taking lovers. Until they become independent, any of them who comes with an immorality shall have half of what is the punishment for those who are independent. This is for those who fear hardship from among you. But if you are patient it is better for you, and God is Forgiver, Merciful
God wants to clarify for you and guide you to the paths of those before you, and pardon you, and God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And God wants to pardon you, but those who follow desires want that you would be diverted into a great diversion
God wants to alleviate for you; and man was created weak
O you who believe, do not consume your money between you unjustly, unless it is through a trade which is mutually agreed by you. And do not kill yourselves; God is Merciful towards you
And whoever does so out of animosity and transgression, We will cast him to a Fire; and this for God is very easy
If you avoid the major sins that you are prohibited against, then We will cancel your existing sins and admit you to a generous entrance
And do not envy that which God has graced some of you over others with. For the men is a portion of what they earned, and for the women is a portion of what they earned. And ask God from His grace; God is knowledgeable in all things
And for each We have made inheritors for what was left behind by the parents and the relatives. And those bound by your oaths, you shall give them their portion. God is witness over all things
The men are to support the women with what God has bestowed upon them over one another and for what they spend of their money. The upright females are dutiful; keeping private the personal matters for what God keeps watch over. As for those females from whom you fear desertion, then you shall advise them, and abandon them in the bedchamber, and separate from them. If they respond to you, then do not seek a way over them; God is Most High, Great
And if you fear a permanent rift between them, then send a judge from his family and a judge from her family. If they want to reconcile, then God will bring them together. God is Knowledgeable, Expert
And serve God and do not set up anything with Him, and do good to the parents, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the needy, and the neighbor who is a relative, and the neighbor nearby, and the friend nearby, and the wayfarer, and those maintained by your oaths. God does not love the arrogant, the boastful
Those who are stingy and order the people to stinginess, and they conceal what God has given them from His bounty. And We have prepared for the rejecters a humiliating retribution
And those who spend their money to show off to the people, and they do not believe in God or the Last Day. And whoever has the devil as his associate, then what a miserable associate
What would bother them if they believed in God and the Last Day and spent from the provisions of God? God is aware of them
Indeed, God does not wrong the weight of an atom; and if it is good He will double it. And He grants from Himself a great recompense
How is it then when We bring forth from every nation a witness, and bring you as a witness over these
On that Day those who rejected and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth would swallow them; but they cannot hide any narrative from God
O you who believe, do not come near the contact prayer while you are intoxicated, until you know what you are saying. Nor if you have had intercourse, unless traveling, until you bathe. And if you are ill, or traveling, or one of you has excreted feces, or you had sexual contact with the women, and could not find water, then you shall select from the clean soil; you shall wipe your faces and hands. God is Pardoning, Forgiving
Did you not see those who have been given a portion of the Book? They purchased straying, and they want you to stray from the path
And God is fully aware of your enemies; and God is enough as a supporter, and God is enough as a victor
From among those who are Jewish are some who take the words out of context, and they say: "We hear and disobey, and listen but let not any listen, and shepherd us," in a twisting of their tongues and as a mockery of the system! And had they said: "We hear and obey, and listen, and watch over us," it would have been better for them and more upright; but God has cursed them for their disbelief, they do not believe except very little
O you who have received the Book, believe in what We have sent down authenticating what is with you, before We cast down faces and turn them on their backs or curse them as the people of the Sabbath were cursed. And the will of God is always done
God does not forgive that partners be set up with Him, and He forgives other than that for whom He pleases. Whoever sets up partners with God has indeed invented a great sin
Did you not see those who ascribe purity to themselves? No, it is God who purifies whom He wills, and they will not be wronged in the least
See how they invent lies about God! And that is enough as a clear sin
Did you not see those who were given a portion of the Book, they believe in sorcery and evil, and they say to those who rejected: "You are better guided than those who believed the path
These are the ones whom God has cursed, and whoever God curses, you will not find for him a victor
Or would they have a portion of the sovereignty? If so, then they would not give the people a speck
Or do they envy the people for what God has given them of His bounty? We have given the descendants of Abraham the Book and the wisdom; We have given them a great kingship
Some of them believed in it, and some of them turned away from it. In Hell will be enough flames
Those who have rejected Our revelations, We will admit them to a Fire. Every time their skins are cooked, We replace them with other skins that they may taste the retribution. God is Noble, Wise
And those who believe and do good, We will admit them to estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein eternally, in it they will have pure mates, and We will admit them to a vast shade
God orders you to deliver anything you have been entrusted with to its owners. And if you judge between the people, then you shall judge with justice. It is always the best that God prescribes for you. God is Hearer, Seer
O you who believe, obey God and obey the messenger and those in authority among you. But if you dispute in any matter, then you shall refer it to God and His messenger if you believe in God and the Last Day. That is better and more suitable for knowing
Did you not see those who claimed they believed in what was sent down to you and what was sent before you? They wanted to seek judgment using evil, while they were ordered to reject it. It is the devil who wants to lead them far astray
And if they are told: "Come to what God has sent down and to the messenger," you see the hypocrites turning away from you strongly
Why then, when disaster befalls them for what their hands have delivered, do they come to you swearing by God that they only wanted to do good and reconcile
These are a people whom God knows what is in their hearts, so turn away from them and advise them, and say to them in their souls a clear saying
We do not send a messenger except to be obeyed with the permission of God. And had they come to you when they had wronged themselves and sought the forgiveness of God, and the messenger sought forgiveness for them, they would have then found God to be Pardoning, Merciful
No, by your Lord, they will not believe until they make you judge in what they dispute with each other, then they will not find in their souls any animosity for what you have decided, and they will comply completely
And had We decreed for them: "Kill yourselves," or "Leave your land," they would not have done so except for a few of them. And if they had done what they were advised with, it would have been better for them and helped to strengthen them
Then We would have given them from Us a great recompense
And We would have guided them to a straight path
And whoever obeys God and the messenger will be among those whom God has blessed from the prophets and the truthful and the martyrs and the upright. What an excellent companionship
That is the bounty from God; and God knows what is best
O you who believe, take your precaution by going out in clusters, or going out all together
And from among you are those who would slow behind, so that if disaster befalls you he would say: "God has blessed me that I was not a martyr with them
And if grace from God benefits you, he will speak as if there had not been affection between you and him: "Oh, I wish I had been with them so I would have triumphed a great triumph
Let those who seek to purchase the Hereafter rather than this world fight in the cause of God. And whoever fights in the cause of God and is killed or attains victory, then We will grant him a great recompense
And why do you not fight in the cause of God, when the weak among the men and women and children say: "Our Lord, bring us out of this town whose people are wicked, and grant us from Yourself a supporter, and grant us from Yourself a victor
Those who believe fight in the cause of God, while those who reject fight in the cause of evil; so fight the supporters of the devil, for the planning of the devil is weak
Did you not see those who were told: "Cease your aggression, and hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification." But when fighting was decreed for them, a group of them were concerned towards the people as they would have been concerned towards God or even more so. And they said: "Our Lord, why did You decree fighting for us? If only You would delay for us until another time." Say: "The enjoyment of this world is little, and the Hereafter is far better for those who are aware; you will not be wronged in the least
Wherever you may be, death will find you, even if you are in fortified towers. If any good befalls them, they say: "This is from God," and if any evil befalls them, they say: "This is from you!" Say: "All is from God;" what is wrong with these people, they barely understand any narrative
Any good that befalls you is from God, and any evil that befalls you is from yourself. We have sent you as a messenger to the people and God is enough as a witness
Whoever obeys the messenger has obeyed God; and whoever turns away, We have not sent you as a guardian over them
And they say: "Obedience" but when they come out from being with you a group of them prepares for other that what you have said, and God records what they planned. So turn away from them and put your trust in God. God is enough for your trust
Do they not reflect on the Qur'an? If it was from any other than God they would have found in it many a discrepancy
And if any matter regarding security, or fear, comes to them they make it publicly known, but if they had referred it to the messenger and to those entrusted from them then it would have been known by those who studied it from them. And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, you would have followed the devil, except for a few
So fight in the cause of God; you are not responsible except for yourself. And enjoin the believers: "Perhaps God will put a stop to the might of those who disbelieved." And God is far Mightier and far more Punishing
Whoever intercedes with a good intercession, he will have a reward of it; and whoever intercedes with an evil intercession, he will receive a share of it. And God has control over all things
And if you are greeted with a greeting, then return an even better greeting or return the same. God is Reckoning over all things
God, there is no god except He. He will gather you for the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. Who is more truthful a narrative than God
What is the matter with you that you are divided into two groups over the hypocrites, while God has regressed them for what they have earned? Do you want to guide those whom God misguides? Whoever God causes to be misguided, you will never find for him a path
They hope that you will reject as they have rejected, then you will be the same. Do not take any of them as allies until they emigrate in the cause of God. If they turn away, then take them and kill them wherever you find them; and do not take from them any ally or supporter
Except for those who reach a people with whom you have a covenant, or if they come to you with a reluctance in their chests to fight you or to fight their own people. Had God willed He would have given them strength and they would have fought you. But if they retire from you, and do not fight you, and they offer you peace; then God does not make for you a path against them
You will find others who want to be safe among you and safe among their own people. Every time they are returned to the test, they fall back in it. If they do not withdraw from you, and offer you peace, and restrain their hands, then you shall take them and kill them wherever you encounter them. For these We have given you a clear authority
And it is not for a believer to kill another believer except by accident. And whoever kills a believer by accident, then he shall free a believing slave, and give compensation to the family; except if they remit it. If he was from a people who are enemies to you, and he was a believer, then you shall free a believing slave. And if he was from a people with whom you have a covenant, then a compensation to his family, and free a believing slave. Whoever does not find, then the fasting of two months sequentially as a repentance from God; for God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And whoever kills a believer intentionally, then his recompense shall be Hell, abiding therein, and God will be angry with him, and curse him, and for him is prepared a great retribution
O you who believe, if you strike in the cause of God, you shall investigate carefully. And do not say to he who greets you with peace: "You are not a believer!" You are seeking the vanity of this world; but with God are many riches. That is how you were before, but God graced you, so investigate carefully. God is expert over what you do
Not equal are those who stayed behind from the believers; except those disabled; with those who strived in the cause of God with their money and lives. God has preferred those who strive with their money and lives over those who stayed behind by a grade; and to both God has promised goodness; and God has preferred those who strived over those who stayed behind by a great reward
Grades from Him and forgiveness and a mercy. God is Forgiving, Merciful
Those whose lives are terminated by the angels, while they had wronged themselves; they said: "What situation were you in?" They said: "We were oppressed on the earth." They said: "Was the earth of God not wide enough that you could emigrate in it?" To these their abode will be Hell; what a miserable destiny
Except for those who were oppressed from the men, women, and children who could not devise a plan nor could be guided to a way
For these, perhaps God will pardon them. God is Pardoner, Forgiving
Whoever emigrates in the cause of God will find in the earth many spoils and a bounty. And whoever leaves his home emigrating to God and His messenger, then is overcome by death; his recompense has fallen to God, and God is Forgiving, Merciful
And if you go forth in the land, then there is no harm that you shorten from the contact prayer, if you fear that the rejecters will try you. The rejecters are to you a clear enemy
And if you are with them and you hold the contact prayer for them, then let a group from among them stand with you and let them bring their weapons; and when they have prostrated then let them be behind you; and let a group who has not yet made the contact prayer come and make the contact prayer with you, and let them be wary and let them bring their weapons with them. The rejecters hope that you would neglect your weapons and goods so they can come upon you in one blow. There is no sin upon you if you are impeded by rainfall, or if you are ill, that you place down your weapons. And be wary. God has prepared for the rejecters a humiliating retribution
Then, if you have completed the contact prayer, remember God while standing, or sitting, or on your sides. Then, if you are secure, hold the contact prayer. Indeed, the contact prayer for the believers is a Book that is scheduled
And do not falter in the pursuit of the remaining group. If you are feeling pain, then they are also feeling pain as you are; and you seek from God what they do not seek. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
We have revealed to you the Book with the truth that you may judge between the people by that which God has shown you, and do not be an advocate for the treacherous
And seek forgiveness from God; for God is Forgiver, Merciful
And do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves. God does not love those who are betrayers, sinners
They may conceal this from the people, but they do not conceal it from God, and He was with them when they schemed what He does not approve of to be said. God is Encompassing what they do
Here you are arguing on their behalf in this world, but who will argue on their behalf with God on the Day of Resurrection? Or, who will be their sponsor
And whoever does any evil, or wrongs himself, then seeks the forgiveness of God; he will find God is Forgiver, Merciful
And whoever earns any sin, then he has brought it on himself. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And whoever does a mistake or sin, then blames it on an innocent person; he has incurred falsehood and a clear sin
And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, a group of them would have obsessed on misguiding you; they would not have misguided except themselves, nor would they harm you in anything. And God has sent down to you the Book and the wisdom, and He has taught you what you did not know. And the grace of God upon you is great
There is no good in most of what they privately confer, except whoever orders a charity or kindness or reconciliation between the people. And whoever does this seeking the grace of God, We will give him a great recompense
And whoever is hostile to the messenger after the guidance has been clarified to him, and he follows other than the path of the believers; We will grant him what he has sought and deliver him to Hell; what a miserable destination
God does not forgive that partners be set up with Him, and He forgives other than that for whom He pleases. Whoever sets up partners with God has indeed strayed a far straying
They are calling on females besides Him. Indeed, they are only calling on a persistent devil
God has cursed him; and he said: "I will take from Your servants a sizeable portion
And I will misguide them and make them desire, and I will command them, so that they will mark the ears of the livestock, and I will command them so they will make changes to the creation of God." Whoever takes the devil as a supporter other than God, then he has indeed lost a great loss
He promises them and makes them desire, but what the devil promises them is only vanity
For these, their abode shall be Hell, and they will find no escape from it
As for those who believe and do good works, We will admit them to estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein eternally. The promise of God is truth; and who is more truthful in saying than God
It will not be by what you desire, nor by what the people of the Book desire. Whoever works evil, he will be paid for it; and he will not find for himself besides God any supporter or victor
And whoever works good, whether male or female, and is a believer, then these will be admitted to the Paradise, and they will not be wronged in the least
And who is better in the system than the one who submits himself to God, and he is a good doer, and he follows the creed of Abraham in monotheism? And God took Abraham as a friend
And to God is what is in the heavens and the earth; and God is Encompassing all things
And they seek a ruling regarding the women, say: "God will give you a ruling regarding them and what is being recited to you in the Book regarding the orphans' mothers whom you wish to marry but have not given them what was decreed for them, and the oppressed from the children: That you stand for the orphans in equality." Whatever good you do, then God is aware of it
And if a woman fears from her husband desertion or disregard, then there is no sin for them to reconcile between themselves; and reconciliation is good. And the souls are brought by need. And if you are kind and do right, then God is expert over what you do
And you will not be able to be fair regarding the women even if you make every effort; so do not sway too greatly and leave her as one hanging in a void. And if you reconcile and do right, then God is Forgiver, Merciful
And if they separate, then God will provide for each of them from His bounty. God is Vast, Wise
And to God is what is in the heavens and the earth; and We have instructed those who were given the Book before you, and you, to be aware of God. And if you reject, then to God is all that is in the heavens and the earth; God is Rich, Praiseworthy
And to God is all that is in the heavens and the earth; and God is enough as a Caretaker
O you people, if He wills, He can make all of you cease to exist; then He will bring others in your place. God is most capable to do this
Whoever seeks the reward of this world, then with God is the reward of this world and the Hereafter. God is Hearing, Watchful
O you who believe, stand with justice as witnesses to God, even if against yourselves, or the parents or the relatives. Even if he be rich or poor, God is more worthy of them, so do not follow desire into being unjust. And if you twist or turn away, then God is Expert over what you do
O you who believe; believe in God and His messenger, and the Book which was sent down to His messenger, and the Book which was sent before. And whoever rejects God, and His angels, and His Books, and His messengers, and the Last Day; then he has strayed a far straying
Those who believed, then rejected, then believed, then rejected, then they increased in rejection; God was not to forgive them nor to guide them to the path
Give news to the hypocrites that they will have a painful retribution
Those who take the rejecters as allies instead of the believers: "Do they seek glory with them?" All glory belongs to God
And it has been sent down to you in the Book, that if you hear the revelations of God being rejected and mocked, then do not sit with them until they move on to a different narrative; if not, then you are like them. God will gather the hypocrites and the disbelievers in Hell all together
Those who linger and observe you, if you have a victory from God they say: "Were we not with you?" And if the rejecters have success, they say: "Did we not side with you and deter the believers from you?" God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection, and God will not grant the rejecters any success over the believers
The hypocrites seek to deceive God, while He is deceiving them; and if they stand to make the contact prayer, they do so lazily, only to show the people; they do not remember God except very little
They are swaying in-between, neither with this group nor with that group. Whoever God will misguide, you will not find for him a way
O you who believe, do not take the rejecters as allies instead of the believers. Do you want God to have a reason against you
The hypocrites will be in the lowest pit of the Fire; and you will not find for them a victor
Except those who repent, and amend, and hold fast to God, and are loyal in their system to God; then these will be with the believers. And God will give the believers a great recompense
What would God want with your punishment if you were only thankful and believed? God is Thankful, Knowledgeable
God does not love that any negative sayings be publicized, except if one is wronged. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
If you reveal what is good or hide it, or forgive what is bad, then God is Pardoner, Capable
Those who rejected God and His messengers, and they want to make a separation between God and His messengers, and they say: "We believe in some and reject some!" And they desire to take a path in-between
These are the true rejecters; and We have prepared for the rejecters a humiliating retribution
And those who believe in God and His messengers and do not make a distinction between any of them, We will give them their recompense. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
The people of the Book ask you to bring down to them a book from the heaven. They had asked Moses for even more than that, for they said: "Show us God openly!" So the lightning strike took them for their wickedness. Then they took the calf after the clarity had come to them, and We pardoned them for this; We gave Moses a clear authority
And We raised the mount above them by the covenant they took, and We said to them: "Enter the passageway by crouching." And We said to them: "Do not transgress the Sabbath;" and We took from them a solemn covenant
So, for the breaking of their covenant, and their rejection of the revelations of God, and their killing of the prophets without right, and their saying: "Our hearts are shielded." Indeed, God has stamped upon their hearts because of their rejection; they do not believe, except for a few
And for their rejection and their saying about Mary a great falsehood
And their saying: "We have killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, messenger of God!" And they had not killed him, nor crucified him, but it appeared to them as if they had. And those who dispute are in doubt regarding him, they have no knowledge except to follow conjecture; they did not kill him for a certainty
Instead, God had raised him to Himself; and God is Noble, Wise
And from the people of the Book are those who refused to believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be witness against them
Because of the wickedness from among those who are Jewish, We made unlawful to them the good things that were lawful to them; and for their deterring many from the path of God
And for their taking of usury, while they were prohibited from doing so, and for their consuming the money of the people unjustly. We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful retribution
But those of them who are well founded in knowledge, and the believers, they believe in what was sent down to you and what was sent down before you; and those who hold the contact prayer, and those who contribute towards purification, and those who believe in God and the Last Day; to these We will give them their recompense greatly
We have inspired you as We had inspired Noah and the prophets after him. And We had inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonah, and Aaron, and Solomon; and We gave David the Psalms
And messengers of whom We have told to you from before, and messengers We have not told to you; and God spoke to Moses directly
Messengers who were bearers of good news and warners, so that there will be no excuse for the people with God after the messengers. God is Noble, Wise
But God bears witness for what He has sent down to you with His knowledge, and the angels bear witness; and God is enough as a witness
Those who have rejected and turned away from the path of God, they have strayed a far straying
Those who have rejected and did wrong, God was not to forgive them, nor guide them to a path
Except to the path of Hell, they will abide therein eternally. For God this is very easy
O people, a messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord, so believe; that is better for you. And if you reject, then to God is what is in the heavens and the earth. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise
O people of the Book, do not overstep in your system, nor say about God except the truth. Jesus, son of Mary, was no more than a messenger of God and the fulfillment of His word to Mary and a Spirit from Him. So believe in God and His messengers, and do not say: "Trinity." Cease, for it is better for you. God is only One god, be He glorified that He should have a son! To Him is all that is in the heavens and the earth; and God is enough as a Caretaker
The Messiah is not too proud to be a servant to God, nor are the angels who are close to Him. Whoever is too proud from His service, and is arrogant, then He will gather them all towards Him together
As for those who believe and do good works, He will give them their recompense and increase for them from His bounty. And as for those who are too proud and arrogant, He will punish them a painful retribution, and they will not find besides God any supporter or victor
O people, proof has come to you from your Lord, and We have sent down to you a guiding light
As for those who believe in God and hold fast to Him, He will admit them in a mercy from Him and a bounty, and He will guide them to Himself, a straight path
They seek a ruling from you, say: "God gives you the ruling for those who have no ascendants. If a person passes away and has no children but has a sister, then she shall receive half of what he leaves behind; and he will inherit from her if she has no child. However, if he has two sisters, then they will receive two thirds of what he left behind; and if he has siblings, men and women, then the male shall receive twice what the female receives." God makes clear to you that you do not stray; God is aware of all things
O you who believe, honor your contracts. Made lawful for you are the animals of the livestock, except that which is being recited to you. You are not permitted to hunt the game while you are under restriction. God decrees as He pleases
O you who believe, do not violate the symbols of God, nor the restricted month, nor the donations, nor what is regulated, nor the safety made by the Restricted Sanctuary; for they are seeking a bounty from their Lord and a blessing. And when it is permitted for you, then you may hunt. And let not the hatred of another people; because they had barred you from the Restricted Temple; make you aggress. And help each other in piety and righteousness, and do not help each other in sin and aggression. And be aware of God, for the retribution of God is severe
Forbidden to you is that which is already dead, and the blood, and the meat of pig, and what was dedicated to other than God, and that which has been strangled, and that which has been beaten to death, and that which has fallen from a height, and that which has been gored, and that which the wild animals have eaten from except what you managed to rescue, and what has been slaughtered on altars, and what you divide through arrows of chance. This is vile. Today the rejecters have given up from your system, so do not be concerned by them, but be concerned by Me. Today I have perfected your system for you, and completed My blessings upon you, and I have approved submission as the system for you. So, whoever is forced by severe hunger and not seeking sin, then God is Forgiving, Merciful
They ask you what was made lawful to them, say: "All the good things have been made lawful for you, and what the trained dogs and birds catch, you teach them from what God teaches you." So eat from what they have captured for you and mention the name of God upon it, and be aware of God. God is swift in reckoning
Today, the good things have been made lawful to you, and the food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them; and the independent females from those who are believers, and the independent females from those who have been given the Book before you, if you have given them their dowries, to be independent, not for illicit sex or taking lovers. And whoever rejects belief, then his work has fallen, and in the Hereafter he is of the losers
O you who believe, if you rise to hold the contact prayer, then wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet to the ankles; and if you have had intercourse, then you shall purify. And if you are ill, or traveling, or you have excreted feces, or you have had sexual contact with the women, and you cannot not find water, then you shall select from the clean soil; you shall wipe your faces and your hands with it. God does not want to place any hardship on you, but He wants to cleanse you and to complete His blessings upon you that you may be thankful
And remember the blessings of God over you and His covenant that He has bound you with, for which you have said: "We hear and obey," and be aware of God; for God knows what is in the chests
O you who believe, stand for God and be witnesses for justice, and let not the hatred towards a people make you avoid being just. Be just, for it is closer to righteousness, and be aware of God. God is expert over what you do
God has promised those who believe and do good works that they will have forgiveness and a great recompense
And those who reject and deny Our revelations, they are the dwellers of Hell
O you who believe, remember the blessings of God upon you when a group desired to aggress against you, and He restrained their hands from you. And reverence God. And in God the believers should put their trust
God has taken the covenant of the Children of Israel and raised from them twelve representatives, and God said: "I am with you if you hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification, and believe in My messengers, and support them, and lend God a loan of righteousness; then I will cancel your sins and admit you into estates with rivers flowing beneath them." Whoever rejects after this from you, then he has strayed from the path
But because of them breaking their covenant, We have cursed them, and made their hearts become hardened; they take the words out of context; and they forgot much of what they were reminded of. And you will still discover betrayal in them except for a few; so pardon them and overlook; God loves the good doers
And from those who have said: "We are Nazarenes," We have taken their covenant and they have forgotten much of what they were reminded of; so We planted between them animosity and hatred until the Day of Resurrection; and God will inform them of what they had done
O people of the Book, Our messenger has come to you to clarify for you much of what you were hiding from the Book, and to pardon over much. A light has come to you from God and a clarifying Book
God guides with it whoever follows His acceptance, to the ways of peace; and it brings them out of the darkness and into the light with His permission; and it guides them to a straight path
Rejecters indeed are those who have said: "God is the Messiah, son of Mary." Say: "Who has any power against God if He had wanted to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and all who are on the earth!" And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is in-between; He creates what He pleases. God is capable of all things
And the Jews and the Nazarenes said: "We are the children of God, and His loved ones." Say: "Then why does He punish you for your sins?" No, you are merely human beings which He has created. He forgives whom He pleases, and He punishes whom He pleases. And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is in-between, and to Him is the destiny
O people of the Book, Our messenger has come to clarify for you after a lack of messengers; so that you cannot say: "No bearer of good news or warner has come to us;" for a bearer of good news and a warner has come to you; and God is capable of all things
And Moses said to his people: "My people, remember the grace of God upon you that he made among you prophets, and made you kings, and he gave you what He had not given any from the worlds
O my people, enter the holy land as God Has decreed for you, and do not turn your backs, or you will become losers
They said: "O Moses, in it are a mighty people, and we will not enter it until they leave from it. So when they leave from it, then we will enter
Two men from among those who were fearing, upon whom God had bestowed favor, said: "Enter upon them through the gate, if you enter it then you will be the victors; and put your trust in God if you are believers
They said: "O Moses, we will never enter it as long as they are in it, so go you and your Lord and fight, we will stay right here
He said: "My Lord, I do not possess except myself and my brother, so separate between us and between the wicked people
He said: "It has become restricted to them for forty years, and they will be lost in the land." Do not be sorrowful over the wicked people
And recite to them the news of the two sons of Adam with truth. They had both made an offering, and it was accepted from one of them, and not accepted from the other. He said: "I will kill you!" He said: "God only accepts from the righteous
If you stretch your hand to kill me, I will not stretch my hand to kill you, for I fear God, Lord of the worlds
I want you to have both my sin and your own sin, and you will then be among the dwellers of the Fire. Such is the recompense of the wicked
So he found it in himself to kill his brother; so he killed him. He thus became one of the losers
So God sent forth a raven to scratch the land and show him how to deal with the body of his brother. He said: "Woe to me! Am I not even able to be like this raven and deal with the body of my brother?" So he became of those who regretted
It is because of this that We have decreed for the Children of Israel: "Anyone who kills a person for other than murder, or corruption in the land; then it is as if he has killed all the people! And whoever spares a life, then it is as if he has given life to all the people." Our messengers had come to them with clarities, but many of them are, after this, still corrupting on the earth
The recompense of those who fight God and His messenger, and seek to make corruption in the land, is that they will be killed or crucified or that their hands and feet be cut off from alternate sides or that they be banished from the land; that is a disgrace for them in this world and in the Hereafter they will have a great retribution
Except for those who repent before you overpower them, then know that God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe, be aware of God and seek a way to Him, and strive in His cause; that you may succeed
Those who have rejected, if they had all that is on the earth and the same again with it to ransom against the retribution of the Day of Resurrection, it will not be accepted from them; and they will have a painful retribution
They want to exit from the Fire, but they can never exit from it; and they will have a permanent retribution
As for the thief, both male and female, you shall cut from their resources  as a penalty for what they have earned  to be made an example of from God. God is Noble, Wise
Whoever repents after his wrongdoing and amends, then God will accept his repentance. God is Forgiving, Merciful
Did you not know that God possesses the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He punishes whom He wills and He forgives whom He wills; and God is capable of all things
O messenger, do not be saddened by those who increase in disbelief from among those who said: "We believe" with their mouths while their hearts did not believe. And from among those who are Jewish, there are those who listened to lies; they listened to people who never came to you; they distort the words from their context, and they say: "If you are given this, then take it, but if you are given anything different, then beware!" And whoever God wants to test, then you will not possess anything for him against God. These are the ones whose hearts God did not want to cleanse; in this world they will have humiliation, and in the Hereafter they will have a great retribution
They listen to lies, and consume money illicitly. If they come to you, then you may judge between them or turn away from them; and if you turn away from them then they cannot harm you in the least; and if you judge then judge between them with justice. God loves those who are just
And how can they make you their judge when they have the Torah, in which there is the judgment of God; then they turn away after that. Those are not believers
We have sent down the Torah, in it is a guidance and a light; the prophets who have submitted judged with it for those who are Jewish, and the Devotees, and the Priests, for what they were entrusted of the Book of God, and they were witness over. So do not be concerned with the people but be concerned with Me; and do not purchase with My revelations a cheap price. And whoever does not judge with what God has sent down, then these are the rejecters
And We have decreed for them in it that a life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose, and an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth, and wounds to be similar; and whoever remits anything of it, then it will cancel sins for him. And whoever does not judge with what God has sent down, then these are the wicked
And We sent in their footsteps Jesus, son of Mary, authenticating what was present with him of the Torah. And We gave him the Gospel, in it is a guidance and a light, and authenticating what was present with him of the Torah, and a guidance and a lesson for the righteous
And let the people of the Gospel judge with what God has sent down in it. And whoever does not judge with what God has sent down, then these are the wicked
And We have sent down to you the Book with the truth, authenticating what is between your hands of the Book and superseding it. So judge between them by what God has sent down, and do not follow their desires from what has come to you of the truth. For each of you We have made laws, and a structure; and if God had willed, He would have made you all one nation, but He tests you with what He has given you; so strive to do good. To God you will return all of you, and He will inform you regarding that in which you dispute
And judge between them by what God has sent down, and do not follow their desires, and beware lest they divert you away from some of what God has sent down to you. If they turn away, then know that God wants to inflict them with some of their sins; and many of the people are wicked
Is it the judgment of the days of ignorance that they seek? Who is better than God as a judge for a people who comprehend
O you who believe, do not take the Jews and the Nazarenes as allies, for they are allies to one another; and whoever takes them as such from among you is one of them. God does not guide the wicked people
You will see those who have a disease in their hearts hurrying to them, saying: "We are concerned that a disaster will befall us!" Perhaps God will bring a victory or a decree from Himself, then they will become regretful over what they had kept hidden within themselves
And those who believe said: "Were these the ones who swore oaths by God that they are with you?" Their works have collapsed, and they have become losers
O you who believe, whoever from among you turns away from His system, then God will bring a people whom He loves and they love Him; humble towards the believers, proud towards the rejecters; they strive in the cause of God and do not fear to be blamed by those who blame. This is the grace of God, He bestows it upon whom He wills; God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
For your supporter are God and His messenger and those who believe; they hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification, and they kneel
And whoever allies God and His messenger and those who believe; then the party of God are the ones who will be victorious
O you who believe, do not take as allies those who have taken your system for mockery and play from among those who have been given the Book before you and the rejecters. And be aware of God if you are believers
And if you call to the contact prayer, they take it for mockery and play. That is because they are a people who do not comprehend
Say: "O people of the Book, do you hate us simply because we believe in God and in what was sent down to us and what was sent down before?" Alas, the majority of them are wicked
Say: "Shall I inform you of worse than this as a punishment from God? Those whom God cursed and became angry at them, and He made from them apes and pigs and servants of evil. Those have a worse place and are more astray from the right path
And if they come to you they say: "We believe," while they had entered in with rejection and went out with the same. God is aware of what they were hiding
And you see many of them hasten to sin and transgression and consuming money illicitly. Miserable indeed is what they were doing
If only the Devotees and Priests had prohibited them for speaking evil and consuming money illicitly. Miserable indeed is what they have done
And the Jews said: "The hand of God is tied-down!" Their hands will be tied-down, and they will be cursed for what they have said. No, His hands are wide open spending as He wills. And for many of them, what has been sent down to you will increase them in rebellion and rejection; and We have cast between them animosity and hatred until the Day of Resurrection. Every time they ignite the fire of war, God puts it out; and they seek to make corruption in the land; and God does not love the corrupters
And if the people of the Book only had believed and been aware, We would have cancelled for them their sins and admitted them to gardens of bliss
And if they had upheld the Torah and the Gospel, and what was sent down to them from their Lord, they would have been rewarded from above them and from beneath their feet. From among them is a pious nation, but most of them only do evil
O messenger, deliver what was sent down to you from your Lord, and if you do not then you have not delivered His message; and God will protect you from the people. And God does not guide the rejecting people
Say: "O people of the Book, you are not upon anything until you uphold the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent down to you from your Lord." And for many of them, what was sent down to you from your Lord will only increase them in transgression and rejection. So do not feel sorry for the rejecting people
Surely those who believe; and those who are Jewish, and the Sabians, and the Nazarenes, whoever of them believes in God and the Last Day and does good works; then they will have nothing to fear nor will they grieve
We have taken the covenant of the Children of Israel and We sent to them Our messengers. Every time a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire, a group of them they would reject, and a group of them they would kill
And they did not consider it might be a test, so they were blind and deaf. But God would have accepted the repentance from them; but many of them were still blind and deaf. God is Seer over what they do
Rejecters indeed are those who have said: "God is the Messiah, son of Mary." And the Messiah said: "O Children of Israel, serve God, my Lord and your Lord. Whoever sets up partners with God, then God will restrict the Paradise from him, and his destiny will be the Fire; and the wicked will have no supporters
Rejecters indeed are those who have said: "God is a trinity!" There is no god except One god. If they do not cease from what they are saying, then those who reject from among them will be afflicted with a painful retribution
Would they not repent to God and seek His forgiveness? God is Forgiving, Merciful
The Messiah, son of Mary, is no more than a messenger; like whom messengers have passed away; and his mother was trustworthy, they used to eat the food. See how We clarify the signs for them, then see how they deviate
Say: "Do you serve other than God what cannot harm you or benefit you?" God is the Hearer, the Knower
Say: "O people of the Book, do not overstep in your system other than the truth, and do not follow the desires of a people who have been misguided before, and they misguide many; and they strayed from the right path
Cursed are those who have rejected from among the Children of Israel by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That is for what they have disobeyed, and for what they transgressed
They would not stop each other from doing vice. Wickedness is what they used to do
You see many of them allying the rejecters. Wicked is what their souls have provided for them, for the wrath of God is upon them, and in the retribution they will abide
And if they had believed in God and the prophet, and what was sent down to him, then they would not have taken them as allies; but many of them are wicked
You will find the people with the greatest animosity towards those who believe are the Jews and those who are polytheists; and you will find the closest in affection to those who believe are those who said: "We are Nazarenes;" that is because among them are Priests and Monks, and they are not arrogant
And if they hear what was sent down to the messenger you see their eyes flooding with tears, for what they have known as the truth, they say: "Our Lord, we believe, so record us with the witnesses
And why should we not believe in God and what has come to us of the truth? And we yearn that our Lord admits us with the righteous people
So God recompensed them for what they have said with estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein; such is the recompense of the good doers
And those who rejected and denied Our revelations; they are the dwellers of Hell
O you who believe, do not make unlawful the good things that God has made lawful to you, and do not aggress; God does not love the aggressors
And eat from what God has provided for you, good and lawful; and be aware of God in whom you believe
God will not hold you for your casual oaths, but He will hold you for what oaths you have made binding; its cancellation shall be the feeding of ten poor from the average of what you feed your family, or that you clothe them, or that you free a slave; whoever cannot find such shall fast for three days; this is a cancellation for making your oaths when you swear. And be careful from making oaths. It is such that God clarifies for you His revelations that you may be thankful
O you who believe, alcohol, and gambling, and altars, and arrows of chance are tainted - by the work of the devil. You shall avoid him so that you may be successful
The devil only wants to cause strife between you through alcohol and gambling, and to repel you away from remembering God and from the contact prayer. Will you be deterred
And obey God and obey the messenger, and be aware. If you turn away then know that it is the duty of Our messenger to deliver clearly
There is no sin upon those who believe and do good works for what they eat if they are aware and believe and do good works, then they are aware and believe, then they are aware and do good; God loves the good doers
O you who believe, God will test you with some of the game for hunting coming within reach of your hands and your spears, so that God will know who reverences Him while unseen. Whoever transgresses from now on, then he will have a painful retribution
O you who believe, do not kill any game while you are restricted; and whoever of you kills it deliberately, then the recompense is to value what was killed against the livestock, which shall be judged by two equitable persons from you, and to make it as a donation to reach the Ka'aba. Or, its expiation shall be in using it to feed the needy ones, while he abstains from it; that is to suffer the results of his deed; God forgives what has past. And whoever returns, then God will seek vengeance on him. God is Noble, capable of vengeance
Lawful for you is the catch of the sea, to eat it as enjoyment for you and for those who travel; and unlawful for you is the catch of the land as long as you are under restriction; and be aware of God to whom you will be gathered
God has made the Ka'aba to be the Restricted Sanctuary; to stand for the people, and the restricted month, and the donations, and the regulations; that is so you may know that God knows what is in the heavens and what is in earth, and that God is aware of all things
Know that God is powerful in retribution, and that God is Forgiving, Merciful
The messenger is only to deliver. And God knows what you reveal and what you conceal
Say: "The bad and the good are not equal, even if the abundance of the bad impresses you." So be aware of God, O you who possess intelligence, that you may succeed
O you who believe, do not ask about things which, if clarified, would harm you - and if you ask about them with the Qur'an being revealed, then they will become clear to you. God pardons for them, and God is Forgiving, Compassionate
A people before you had asked the same, then they became rejecters in it
God did not decree any restrictions for combining of livestock, or roaming livestock, or ones that give twin births, or a male camel freed from work; but the people who rejected invented lies to God, and most of them do not comprehend
And if they are told: "Come to what God hassent down, and to the messenger;" they say: "We are content with what we found our fathers doing." What if their fathers did not know anything nor were guided
O you who believe, you are responsible for yourselves; none who are misguided can harm you if you are guided. To God is your return, all of you, and then He will inform you of what you have done
O you who believe, witnessing shall be done if death is approaching one of you and a will is being made, by two among you who are equitable. If you have gone forth in the land, and death is approaching, then any two may suffice - if you have doubt regarding them, then detain them after making the contact prayer, and they will swear by God: "We will not purchase with it any price, even if it was from a near relative, and we will not conceal the testimony of God, else we are of the sinners
If it is then found that they had indeed incurred the sin, then two others, from those who have been named as beneficiaries, will take their place; and they will swear by God: "Our testimony is more truthful than their testimony, and if we aggress, then we are of the wicked
This is best as they are more likely to bring the testimony as intended, or face that their oaths would be disregarded as the previous oaths. And be aware of God, and listen; God does not guide the wicked people
The Day God will gather the messengers and He will say: "What was the response you received?" They said: "We have no knowledge, you are the Knower of all the unseen
God said: "O Jesus, son of Mary, recall My blessings upon you and your mother, that I supported you with the Holy Spirit; you spoke to the people in the cradle and middle-age; and I taught you the Book and the wisdom, and the Torah, and the Gospel; and you would create from clay the shape of a bird, then blow into it and it becomes a bird with My permission; and you would heal the blind and the leaper with My permission; and you would bring out the dead with My permission. And I have restrained the Children of Israel from you, that you came to them with proofs; but those who rejected among them said: 'This is clearly magic
And I inspired the disciples: 'You shall believe in Me and My messenger;' they said: 'We believe, and bear witness that we have submitted
And the disciples said: "O Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord send down for us a feast from the heaven?" He said: "Be aware of God if you are believers
They said: "We want to eat from it and so our hearts become relieved, and so we know that you are truthful, and so that we can become a witness over it
Jesus, son of Mary, said: "Our god, our Lord, send downto us a feast from the heaven, that it becomes a joy to us from the first to the last, and a sign from You, and provide for us, you are the best provider
God said: "I will send it down to you, but whoever rejects after this from among you, I will punish him a punishment like no one else from the worlds will be punished
And God will say: "O Jesus, son of Mary, did you tell the people to take you and your mother as gods other than God?" He said: "Glory to you, I cannot say what I have no right of. If I had said it then You know it, You know what is in my self while I do not know what is in Your self. You are the Knower of the unseen
I only said to them what You commanded me to say, that you shall serve God my Lord and your Lord; and I was witness over them as long as I was with them, but when You terminated my life, You were watcher over them. You are witness over all things
If You punish them, then they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, then You are the Noble, the Wise
God will say: "This is a Day when the truth will benefit the truthful; they will have estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein eternally; God has become pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. Such is the greatest victory
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them; and He is capable of all things
Praise be to God who has created the heavens and the earth, and Who made the darkness and the light; yet those who have rejected their Lord continue to deviate
He is the One who has created you from clay, then He decreed a period of time for you; a time only known by Him. Yet you still deny
And He is God in the heavens and the earth. He knows your secrets and what you reveal; and He knows what you earn
And every sign that came to them from their Lord, they turned away from it
They have denied the truth when it came to them. The news will ultimately come to them of what they were mocking
Did they not see how many generations We have destroyed before them? We granted them dominance over the land more than what We granted you, and We sent the sky to them abundantly, and We made rivers flow beneath them; then, We destroyed them for their sins, and established after them a new generation
And if We had sent down to you a book already written on paper, and they touched it with their own hands, then those who have rejected would say: "This is but clear magic
And they said: "If only an angel were sent down to him?" But if We had sent down an angel, the matter would be settled, then they would no longer be respited
And had We sent an angel, We would have made him appear as a man, and We would have confounded them in what they already are confounded
Messengers before you were mocked, but those who ridiculed suffered the consequences of that which they mocked
Say: "Roam the earth, then see what the punishment of the rejecters was
Say: "To whom is all that is in the heavens and the earth?" Say: "To God." He has decreed mercy on Himself, that He will gather you to the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. Those who have lost their souls, they do not believe
And for Him is what resides in the night and in the day; and He is the Hearer, the Knower
Say: "Shall I take other than God as an ally; the initiator of the heavens and the earth; while He feeds and is not fed!" Say: "I have been commanded to be the first who submits." And do not be of the polytheists
Say: "I fear if I disobey my Lord, the retribution of a great Day
Whoever He spares from it, then He has had mercy on him; and that is the clear triumph
And if God were to inflict you with harm, then none can remove it except He; and if He were to bless you with good, then He is capable of all things
And He is the Supreme over His servants; and He is the Wise, the Expert
Say: "Which is the greatest testimony?" Say: "God is witness between me and you, and He has inspired to me this Qur'an that I may warn you with it and whoever it reaches, that you are bearing witness that with God are other gods!" Say: "I do not bear witness!" Say: "He is only One god, and I am innocent of what you have set up
Those to whom We have given the Book know it as they know their children. Those who lost their souls, they do not believe
And who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God, or denies His revelations! The wicked will never succeed
And the Day We gather them all, then We say to the polytheists: "Where are your partners whom you used to claim
Then, their only excuse was to say: "By God, our Lord, we were not polytheists
See how they lied to themselves; and that which they invented abandoned them
And from them are those who listen to you; and We have made covers over their hearts to prevent them from understanding it, and a deafness in their ears; and if they see every sign they will not believe; even when they come to you they argue, those who reject say: "This is nothing except fictional tales of old
And they prohibit others from it, and keep away themselves from it; but they will only destroy themselves, yet they do not notice
And if you could see when they are standing over the Fire, they say: "If only we could be sent back, we would not deny the revelations of our Lord, and we would be believers
No, it is merely what they have been concealing that has now become evident to them; and if they were sent back they would return again to what they were prohibited from, they are but liars
And they had said: "There is only this worldly life, and we will not be resurrected
And if you could see them when they are standing at their Lord; He said: "Is this not the truth?" They said: "Yes, by our Lord," He said: "Then taste the retribution for what you have rejected
Losers are those who have denied their meeting with God; until the Hour comes to them suddenly, then they say: "We deeply regret that which we have wasted in it," and they will carry their burdens on their backs; miserable indeed is their burden
And the worldly life is nothing more than play and distraction, and the abode of the Hereafter is far better for those who are righteous. Do you not comprehend
We know that you are saddened by what they say; they are not rejecting you, but it is the revelations of God which the wicked disregard
Messengers before you were denied, but they were patient for what they were denied, and they were harmed until Our victory came to them; there is no changing the words of God. News of the messengers has come to you
And if their aversion has become too much for you, then perhaps you could make a tunnel in the earth, or a ladder to the heavens, and bring them a sign. Had God willed, He would have gathered them to the guidance; so do not be of the ignorant ones
Only those who listen will respond. As for the dead, God will resurrect them, then to Him they will return
And they said: "If only a sign was sent to him from his Lord!" Say: "God is able to send a sign, but most of them would not know
And there is not a creature on the earth, nor a bird that flies with its wings, except they belong to nations like you belong. We did not leave anything out of the record; then to their Lord they will be gathered
And those who deny Our revelations, they are deaf and dumb, in darkness. Whoever God wishes He misguides, and whoever He wishes He puts him on a straight path
Say: "We will see when the retribution of God comes to you, or the Hour comes to you, if you will still call on any other than God. If you are being truthful
No, it is Him alone you will call on; and He will remove that which you called Him for, if He wills; and you will forget what you set up
And We have sent others to nations before you. We then took them with adversity and hardship, perhaps they would implore
If only they had implored when Our punishment came to them; but their hearts hardened, and the devil adorned for them what they used to do
So when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We opened for them the gates of all opportunities; and when they were happy with what they were given, We took them suddenly! They were confounded
It was thus that the remainder of the wicked people were wiped out; and praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Say: "Do you see that if God were to take away your hearing and your eyesight, and He seals your hearts; which god besides God can bring it to you?" See how We dispatch the signs, but then they turn away
Say: "Do you see if the retribution of God comes to you suddenly, or gradually, will anyone be destroyed except the wicked people
And We do not send the messengers except as bearers of good news and warners; whoever believes, and does good, then there is no fear for them nor will they grieve
And those who deny Our revelations, the retribution will inflict them for what wickedness they were in
Say: "I do not say to you that I possess the treasures of God, nor do I know the future, nor do I say to you that I am an angel. I merely follow what is inspired to me." Say: "Are the blind and the seer the same? Do you not think
And warn with it those who realize that they will be gathered to their Lord; they do not have besides Him any ally nor intercessor; perhaps they will be righteous
And do not turn away those who call on their Lord at dawn and dusk seeking His face; you are not responsible for their judgment, nor are they responsible for your judgment; if you turn them away, then you will be of the wicked
And it is such that We test them with one another, so that they may say: "Are these the ones whom God has blessed from among us?" Is God not aware of the thankful
And if those who believe in Our revelations come to you, then say: "Peace be upon you, our Lord has decreed mercy upon Himself, that any of you who commits sin out of ignorance and then repents afterwards and amends, then He is Forgiving, Merciful
And it is such that We explain the revelations, and point out the way of the criminals
Say: "I am prohibited from serving those you call upon other than God" Say: "I will not follow your desires, otherwise I would go astray and I would not be of those guided
Say: "I am on a clarity from my Lord and you have denied it. I do not have what you hasten towards; the judgment is with God only; He narrates the truth, and He is the best decider
Say: "If I had what you were hastening towards, then the matter between us would have been resolved. And God is fully aware of the wicked
And with Him are the keys of the unseen, none know them except He. And He knows what is in the land and in the sea; and not a leaf falls except He knows of it; nor a seed in the darkness of the earth; nor anything moist or anything dry; all in a clear record
And He is the One who seizes you during the night, and He knows what you have done during the day, then He sends you back again to complete an appointed term; then to Him is your return and He will inform you of what you used to do
And He is the Supreme over His servants, and He sends over you guardians. So that when the time of death comes to one of you, Our messengers terminate his life, and they do not neglect any
Then they are returned to God, their true Patron; to Him is the judgment and He is the swiftest of reckoners
Say: "Who rescues you from the darkness of the land and the sea?" You call on Him in humility and in secret: "If You save us from this, we will be of the thankful
Say: "God will save you from it and from all distresses, yet you will still set up partners
Say: "He is able to send retribution from above you or from below your feet, or He will make you belong to opposing factions, then He will let you taste the might of each other." See how We dispatch the signs, perhaps they may understand
And your people denied it, while it is the truth. Say: "I am not a guardian over you
For every news there is a time, and you will come to know
And if you encounter those who make fun of Our revelations, then turn away from them until they move on to a different narrative; and if the devil makes you forget, then do not sit after remembering with the wicked people
And those who are righteous are not responsible for their judgement, but to remind; perhaps they will be aware
Leave alone those who have taken their system for play and distraction, and this worldly life has tempted them. And remind with it that a soul will suffer for what it has earned, it will not have besides God any supporter nor intercessor; and even if it brings all justice, none will be accepted from it. These are the ones who have suffered with what they have earned; for them will be a boiling drink, and a painful retribution for what they had rejected
Say: "Shall we call upon other than God what cannot benefit us or harm us, and we turn back on our heels after God has guided us?" This is like the one whom the devils have managed to mislead on the earth, he is confused, having friends who call him to the guidance: "Come to us!" Say: "The guidance is the guidance of God, and we have been ordered to submit to the Lord of the worlds
And you shall hold the contact prayer, and be aware; and to Him you will be gathered
And He is the One who has created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and the day He says: "Be," then it is! His saying is truth; and to Him is the sovereignty the Day the horn is blown. Knower of the unseen and the seen; He is the Wise, the Expert
And Abraham said to his father, Azar: "Will you take statues as gods? I see you and your people are clearly misguided
And it is such that We showed Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, so that he will be of those who have certainty
When the night covered him, he saw a planet, and he said: "This is my Lord." But when it disappeared he said: "I do not like those who disappear
So when he saw the moon rising, he said: "This is my Lord." But when it disappeared he said: "If my Lord does not guide me, then I will be among the wicked people
So when he saw the sun rising, he said: "This is my Lord, this is bigger." But when it disappeared he said: "My people, I am innocent of what you have set up
I shall turn my face to the One who initiated the heavens and the earth, in monotheism, and I am not of the polytheists
And his people debated with him. He said: "Do you debate with me regarding God, when He has guided me? I do not fear that which you have set up except if my Lord wills; my Lord encompasses all things in knowledge; will you not remember
And how can I possibly fear what you have set up; yet you do not fear that you have set up partners with God, for which He has not sent down upon you any authority! So which of our two groups is more worthy of security if you know
Those who believe and do not confound their belief with wrongdoing; they will have security, and they are guided
And such was Our argument that We gave Abraham over his people; We raise the degree of whom We please. Your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable
And We granted him Isaac and Jacob, both of whom We guided; and Noah We guided from before; and from his progeny is David, and Solomon, and Job, and Joseph, and Moses, and Aaron. It is such that We recompense the good doers
And Zachariah and John, and Jesus, and Elias; all were from the upright
And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot; and each We have preferred over the worlds
And from their fathers and their progeny and their brothers We have also chosen; and We guided them to a straight path
Such is the guidance of God, He guides with it whom He pleases of His servants. And if they set up partners, then all that they had worked would fall away from them
Those to whom We have given the Book, and the law, and the prophethood, if they reject it, then We will entrust it to a people who will not reject it
These are the ones guided by God; so let their guidance be an example. Say: "I do not ask you for any wage; this is but a reminder for the worlds
And they did not appreciate God as He deserves to be appreciated, for they said: "God has never sent down anything to any human being." Say: "Who then has sent down the Book which Moses had come with, a light and a guidance for the people? You treat it simply as paper for display, and you conceal much; and you were taught what neither you nor your fathers knew." Say: "God has." Then leave them playing in their folly
And this is a Book which We have sent down, blessed, authenticating what is between his hands, and that you may warn the capital of the towns and those around it. And those who believe in the Hereafter believe in it, and they maintain their contact prayer
And who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God, or says: "It has been inspired to me," when We did not inspire anything to him; or who says: "I will bring down the same as what God has sent down." And if you could only see the wicked at the moments of death when the angels have their arms opened: "Bring yourselves out, today you will be given the severest punishment for what you used to say about God without truth, and you used to be arrogant towards His revelations
And you have come to Us individually, just as We had created you the first time; and you have left behind you all that We have provided for you; and We do not see your intercessors with you that you used to claim were with you in partnership; all is severed between you, and what you have claimed has abandoned you
God is the splitter of the seeds and the grains; He brings the living out from the dead and He brings the dead out from the living. Such is God; so why are you deluded
Initiator of the morning and Maker of the night to reside in; and the sun and the moon for counting. Such is the measure of the Noble, the Knowledgeable
And He is the One who made for you the stars, to guide you by them in the darkness of the land and the sea. We have explained the signs to a people who know
And He is the One who initiated you from one person; with a place for stability and development. We have explained the signs to a people who understand
And He is the One who sent down water from the heaven, and We brought out with it plants of every kind. We brought out from it the green, from which We bring out multiple seeds; and what is from the palm trees, from its sheaths hanging low and near; and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, similar and not similar. Look at its fruit when it blossoms and its ripeness. In this are signs for a people who believe
And they set up partners with God from among the Jinn, while He had created them. And they invented for Him sons and daughters without them having any knowledge! Be He glorified and exalted above what they describe
Originator of the heavens and the earth, how can He have a son when He did not take a wife? And He created all things and He is knowledgeable in all things
Such is God, your Lord, there is no god except He; creator of all things, so serve Him. And He is Caretaker over all things
The eyesight cannot reach Him, yet He can reach all eyesight; and He is the Subtle, the Expert
Visible proofs have come to you from your Lord; so whoever can see, does so for himself, and whoever is blinded, will be such. I am not a watcher over you
It is thus that We dispatch the signs and that they may say: "You have studied," and We will make it clear for a people who know
Follow what is inspired to you from your Lord; there is no god except He, and turn away from the polytheists
And if God had willed, they would not have set up partners. And We did not place you over them as a guardian, nor are you over them as a sponsor
And do not insult those who call on other than God, lest they insult God out of ignorance. And We have similarly adorned for every nation their works; then to their Lord is their return and He will inform them of what they had done
And they swore by God using their strongest oaths; that if a sign came to them they would believe in it. Say: "The signs are from God; and how do you know that once it comes, that they will not disbelieve
And We divert their hearts and eyesight, as they did not believe in it the first time; and We leave them wandering in their transgression
And if We had sent down to them the angels, and the dead spoke to them, and We had gathered before them everything, they still would not believe except if God wills. Alas, most of them are ignorant
And as such, We have permitted the enemies of every prophet  mankind and Jinn devils  to inspire each other with fancy words in order to deceive. Had your Lord willed, they would not have done it. You shall disregard them and their fabrications
That is so the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter will listen to it, and they will accept it, and they will take of it what they will
Shall I seek other than God as a judge when He has sent down to you the Book fully detailed?" Those to whom We have given the Book know it is sent down from your Lord with the truth; so do not be of those who have doubt
And the word of your Lord has been completed with truth and justice; there is no changing His words. He is the Hearer, the Knower
And if you obey most of those on the earth they will lead you away from the path of God; that is because they follow conjecture, and that is because they only guess
Your Lord is fully aware of who strays from His path, and He is fully aware of the guided ones
So eat from that on which the name of God has been mentioned, if you indeed believe in His revelations
And why should you not eat that on which the name of God has been mentioned, when He has fully detailed to you what has been made unlawful; except what you are forced to? Many misguide by their desires without knowledge; your Lord is fully aware of the transgressors
And leave alone, publicly and privately, that which is a sin; those who earn sin will be punished for what they have taken
And do not eat from that which the name of God has not been mentioned, for it is wickedness. And the devils they inspire their supporters to argue with you; and if you obey them, then you are polytheists
Is he who was dead and to whom We gave life, and We made for him a light to walk with among the people, as he whose example is in darkness and he will not exit from it? It is such that the work of the rejecters has been adorned for them
And as such, We have permitted in every town the influential from its criminals, to scheme in it. They only scheme their own souls without perceiving
And if a sign comes to them they say: "We will not believe until we are given the same as what the messengers of God were given!" God is fully aware of where He makes His message; those criminals will have debasement with God and a painful retribution for what they had schemed
Whoever God wishes to guide, He will comfort his chest to submission; and whoever He wishes to misguide, He will make his chest tight and constricted, as one who is ascending towards the heaven. It is such that God lets taint those who do not believe
And this is the straight path of your Lord. We have fully detailed the revelations to a people who remember
They will have the abode of peace with their Lord; He is their supporter because of what they used to do
And the Day We gather them all: "O assembly of Jinn, you have managed to take many from mankind." Their supporters from mankind said: "Our Lord, we have indeed enjoyed one another, and we have reached our destiny to which You delayed us." He said: "The Fire is your dwelling, abiding therein, except as your Lord wishes." Your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable
It is such that We make the wicked as supporters to one another for what they have earned
O assembly of Jinn and mankind, did not messengers come to you from among you and tell to you My revelations, and warn you of the meeting of this Day?" They said: "Yes, we bear witness upon ourselves;" and the worldly life deceived them, and they bore witness upon themselves that they were rejecters
That is because your Lord was not to destroy any town because of its wickedness while its people were unaware
But there are degrees for what they had done; and your Lord is not unaware of what they do
And your Lord is the Rich, possessor of Mercy. If He wished, He could remove all of you and bring after you whom He pleases, just as He established you from the seed of another people
What you have been promised will come, you cannot escape it
Say: "My people, work as you see fit, for I too am working. You will then know to whom will be the punishment of the Hereafter. The wicked will not succeed
And they made for God a portion of what He provided them from the crops and the livestock; they said: "This is for God," by their claims, "And this is for our partners." So what was for their partners did not reach God, and what was for God, it reached their partners! Miserable is how they judged
And it was adorned for the polytheists, by their partners, to kill their children in order to turn them and to confound their system for them. Had God willed they would not have done this, so ignore them and what they invent
And they said: "These livestock and crops are reserved, and none shall eat from them except as we please," by their claims; and livestock whose backs are unlawful, and livestock over which they do not mention the name of God as an innovation against Him. He will recompense them for what they invented
And they said: "What is in the bellies of these livestock is purely for our males and unlawful for our wives, and if comes out dead, then they will be partners in it." God will recompense them for what they describe. He is Wise, Knowledgeable
Losers are those who have killed their children foolishly, without knowledge, and they forbade what God had granted them by lying about God. They have strayed and they were not guided
And He is the One Who initiated gardens; both trellised and untrellised; and palm trees, and plants, all with different taste; and olives and pomegranates, similar and not similar. Eat from its fruit when it blossoms and give its due on the day of its harvest; and do not waste. He does not like the wasteful
And from the livestock are those for burden, and also for clothing. Eat from what God has provided you and do not follow the footsteps of the devil; he is to you a clear enemy
Eight in pairs: from the lambs two, and from the goats two. Say: "Is it the two males that He forbade or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females bore? Inform me if you are truthful
And from the camels two, and from the cattle two. Say: "Is it the two males that He forbade or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females bore? Or were you witnesses when God ordered you with this?" Who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God to misguide the people without knowledge. God does not guide the wicked people
Say: "I do not find in what is inspired to me to be unlawful for any eater to eat except that it be already dead, or running blood, or the meat of pig - for it is tainted - or what is a wickedness, dedicated to other than God." But whoever is forced to, without seeking disobedience or transgression, then your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
And for those who are Jewish We have made unlawful all that have claws; and from the cattle and the sheep We made unlawful their fat except what is attached to the back, or entrails, or mixed with bone. That is a punishment for their rebellion, and We are truthful
If they deny you, then say: "Your Lord has vast Mercy, but His Might will not be turned away from the criminal people
Those who are polytheists will say: "If God wished, we would not have set up partners, nor would have our fathers, nor would we have made anything unlawful." Those before them lied in the same way, until they tasted Our might. Say: "Do you have any knowledge to bring out to us? You only follow conjecture, you only guess
Say: "With God is the greatest argument. If He wished He would have guided you all
Say: "Bring forth your witnesses who bear witness that God has made this unlawful." If they bear witness, then do not bear witness with them, nor follow the desires of those who deny Our revelations, and those who do not believe in the Hereafter; and they make equals with their Lord
Say: "Come let me recite what your Lord has made unlawful for you: that you should not set up anything with Him - and do good to your parents; and do not kill your children for fear of poverty, We provide for you and for them; and do not come near immorality, what is public of it and private; and do not take the life which God has made forbidden, except in justice. That is what He enjoined you that you may comprehend
And do not come near the money of the orphan, except for what is best, until he reaches his independence; and give honestly full measure and weight equitably. We do not burden a soul except with what it can bear, and if you speak then be just even if against a relative; and regarding the pledges made to God, you shall observe them. This He has enjoined you that you may remember
And this is My path, a straight one. "So follow it, and do not follow the other paths lest they divert you from His path. That is what He has enjoined you to that you may be righteous
Then We gave Moses the Book, to complete for those who do right, and to fully detail all things, and a guide and mercy that they may believe in the meeting of their Lord
And this is a Book that We have sent down which is blessed, so follow it and be aware, that you may receive mercy
Lest you say: "The Book was only sent down to two groups before us, and we were unaware of their study
Or you say: "If the Book was sent to us we would have been more guided than they!" Clarity has come to you from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy. Who is more wicked than he who denies the revelations of God and turns away from them? We will punish those who turn away from Our revelations with the pain of retribution for what they turned away
Do they wait until the angels come to them, or your Lord comes, or certain signs come from your Lord? The day certain signs come from your Lord, it will do no good for any soul to believe if it did not believe before, or it gained good through its belief. Say: "Wait, for we are waiting
Those who have divided their system and become sects, you are not with them in anything. Their matter will be with God, then He will inform them of what they had done
Whoever comes with a good deed, he will receive ten times its worth, and whoever comes with a sin, he will only be recompensed its like; they will not be wronged
Say: "My Lord has guided me to a straight path, an upright system, the creed of Abraham the monotheist; he was not of the polytheists
Say: "My contact prayer, and my rites, and my life, and my death, are all to God, Lord of the worlds
He has no partner, and it is to this that I was commanded, and I am the first of those who have submitted
Say: "Shall I seek other than God as a Lord when He is the Lord of everything?" And every soul earns what is for it, and none will carry the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return and He will inform you of what you disputed in
And He is the One who made you inheritors on the earth, and He raised some of you over others in grades, to test you with what He had given you. Your Lord is swift to punishment, and He is Forgiving, Merciful
ALMS
A Book that has been sent down to you, so let there not be any burden in your chest from it, that you may warn with it; and a reminder to the believers
Follow what was sent down to you from your Lord, and do not follow besides Him any supporters. Little do you remember
And how many a town have We destroyed; for Our punishment came to them while sleeping, or while resting
Then their only saying when Our punishment came to them was: "We were wicked
We will question those to whom We have sent, and We will question the messengers
We will tell to them with knowledge; We were not absent
And the balance on that Day will be the truth. So, those whose weights are heavy on the balance, those are the successful ones
And whoever has light weights, then these are the ones who lost their souls for what they transgressed of Our revelations
And We granted you dominion on the earth, and made for you in it a habitat; little do you give thanks
And We created you, then We shaped you, then We said to the angels: "Yield to Adam;" so they yielded except for Satan, he was not of those who yielded
He said: "What has prevented you from yielding when I have ordered you?" He said: "I am far better than him, You created me from fire and created him from clay
He said: "Descend from it, for it is not for you to be arrogant here; depart, for you are disgraced
He said: "Grant me respite until the Day they are resurrected
He said: "You are granted
He said: "For that which You have caused me to be misled, I will stalk for them on Your straight path
Then I will come to them from between their hands, and from behind them, and from their right, and from their left; and You will find most of them unthankful
He said: "Get out from this, you are despised and banished. As for those of them who follow you, I will fill Hell with you all
And O Adam, reside you and your mate in the paradise, and eat from it as you both wish, and do not come near this tree, else you will be of those who have wronged
But the devil whispered to them, to reveal to them what was not apparent to them of their bodies; and he said: "Your Lord did not prohibit you from this tree except that you would become angels, or you would be immortal
And he swore to them: "I am giving good advice
So he misled them with deception; and when they tasted the tree, their bodies became apparent to them, and they rushed to cover themselves with the leaves of the paradise; and their Lord called to them: "Did I not prohibit you from that tree, and tell you that the devil is your clear enemy
They said: "Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves and if You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, then we will be of the losers
He said: "Descend; for you are enemies to one another; and on the earth you will have residence and provisions until the appointed time
He said: "In it you will live and in it you will die, and from it you will be brought forth
O Children of Adam, We have sent down for you garments to alleviate your bodies, and feathers; and the garment of righteousness is the best. That is from the signs of God, perhaps they will remember
O Children of Adam, do not let the devil afflict you as he evicted your parents from the paradise; he removes from them their garments to show them their bodies. He and his tribe see you from where you do not see them. We have made the devils as allies for those who do not believe
And if they commit immorality, they say: "We found our fathers doing such, and God ordered us to it." Say: "God does not order immorality! Do you say about God what you do not know
Say: "My Lord orders justice, and that you set yours faces at every temple, and that you call on Him, while being faithful to Him in the system; as He initiated you, so you will return
A group He has guided and a group have deserved misguidance; that is because they have taken the devils as allies besides God; and they think they are guided
O Children of Adam, dress nicely at every temple, and eat and drink and do not indulge; He does not like the indulgers
Say: "Who has made unlawful the nice things that God has brought forth for His servants and the good provisions?" Say: "They are meant for those who believe during this worldly life, and they will be exclusive for them on the Day of Resurrection." It is such that We explain the revelations for those who know
Say: "My Lord has made unlawful immorality; what is public of it and private; and sin, and aggression without cause, and that you set up partners with God that which He has never authorized, and that you say about God what you do not know
And for every nation will be an appointed time; when their time is reached, they will not delay by one hour nor advance
O Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among yourselves and tell to you My revelations; then for those who are aware, and upright, there will be no fear over them nor will they grieve
As for those who reject Our revelations, and become arrogant towards them; then these are the dwellers of the Fire, in it they will abide
Who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God, or denies His revelations? These will receive their recompense from the record; so that when Our messengers come to terminate their lives, they will say: "Where are those whom you used to call on besides God?" They said: "They have abandoned us!" And they bore witness upon themselves that they were rejecters
He said: "Enter with the multitude of nations before you from mankind and Jinn to the Fire!" Every time a nation entered, it cursed its sister nation, until they are all gathered inside it; then the last of them says to the first: "Our Lord, these are the ones who have misguided us, so give them double the retribution of the Fire!" He replied: "Each will receive double, but you do not know
And the first of them said to the last: "You have no preference over us, so taste the retribution for what you have earned
Those who have denied Our revelations, and became arrogant towards them, the gates of the heavens will not open for them, nor will they enter the Paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle. It is such that We recompense the criminals
They will have Hell as an abode, and from above them will be barriers. It is thus We recompense the wicked
As for those who believe and do good; We do not burden a soul except with what it can bear; those are the dwellers of the Paradise, in it they will abide
And We removed what was in their chests of hate; rivers will flow beneath them; and they will say: "Praise be to God who has guided us to this, and we would not have been guided unless God guided us. The messengers of our Lord had come with the truth." And it was called to them: "This is the Paradise; you have inherited it for what you have done
And the dwellers of the Paradise called the dwellers of the Fire: "We have found what our Lord promised us to be true; did you find what your Lord promised to be true?" They said: "Indeed!" Then a caller announced between them: "The curse of God is on the wicked
The ones who repel from the path of God, and sought to make it crooked; and regarding the Hereafter they were rejecters
And between them is a barrier, and on the elevated platform are men who recognized others by their features. And they called out to the dwellers of the Paradise: "Peace be upon you!" They have not yet entered it, but they are hoping
And when their eyes are turned towards the dwellers of the Fire, they say: "Our Lord, do not place us with the wicked people
And the people standing on the elevated platform called on men they recognized by their features, they said: "What good did your large number do for you, or what you were arrogant for
Were these not the ones whom you swore God would not grant them of His mercy?" Enter the Paradise, there is no fear for you nor will you grieve
And the dwellers of the Fire called on the dwellers of the Paradise: "Give us some water, or what God has provided for you?" They said: "God has made it forbidden for the rejecters
The ones who took their system for distraction and play, and were preoccupied with this worldly life. Today We forget them as they forgot their meeting on this Day, and they did not heed Our revelations
And We have come to them with a Book which We have detailed with knowledge; a guidance and a mercy to those who believe
Are they waiting for what it says to come true? On the day it comes true, those who previously forgot it will say: "The messengers of our Lord have come with the truth! Are there any intercessors to intercede for us? Or can we be sent back and we will work differently than what we did?" They have lost their souls and what they have invented has abandoned them
Your Lord is God who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He settled upon the Throne. The night runs away from the day, which seeks it continually; and the sun and the moon and the stars are commissioned by His command; to Him is the creation and the command. Glory to God, Lord of the worlds
Call on your Lord in humility and in secret. He does not like the aggressors
And do not corrupt the earth after it has been made right; and call on Him fearing and hoping. Surely the mercy of God is near the righteous
He is the One who sends the winds to be dispersed between His hands of mercy; so when it carries a heavy cloud, We drive it to a dead land, and We send down the water with it and We bring forth fruits of all kind. It is thus that We will bring out the dead, perhaps you will remember
And the good land, its plants are brought forth with the permission of its Lord. And for the one that is bad, it does not bring forth except very little. It is such that We dispatch the signs for a people who are thankful
We had sent Noah to his people, so he said: "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. I fear for you the retribution of a great Day
The leaders from his people said: "We see that you are clearly misguided
He said: "My people, I am not misguided, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I deliver to you the messages of my Lord, and I advise you, and I know from God what you do not know
Are you surprised that a reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man from among you to warn you, that you may be righteous, and that you may receive mercy
They denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and We drowned those who denied Our revelations; they were a blind people
And to 'Aad We sent their brother Hud, he said: "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. Will you not be righteous
The leaders who rejected from among his people said: "We see you in foolishness, and we think you are one of the liars
He said: "My people, there is no foolishness in me, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
To deliver to you the messages of my Lord, and to you I am a trustworthy advisor
Are you surprised that a reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man from among you to warn you? And remember that He made you successors after the people of Noah, and He increased you in status. So remember the grace of God, that you may succeed
They said: "Have you come to us to serve God alone and abandon what our fathers had served? Bring us what you promise if you are of the truthful ones
He said: "A tainting and wrath shall befall you from your Lord. Do you argue with me over names which you and your fathers have created with no authority being sent down by God? Wait then, and I will wait with you
We saved him and those with him by a mercy from Us, and We destroyed the remnant of those who rejected Our revelations, they were never believers
And to Thamud, We sent their brother Saleh, he said: "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him; clarity has come to you from your Lord, this is the camel of God, in her you have a sign, so leave her to eat in God's earth, and do not harm her, else the painful retribution will take you
And remember that He made you successors after 'Aad, and He established you in the land so that you make palaces on its plains, and you carve homes in the mountains. So remember the grace of God, and do not roam the earth as corrupters
The leaders who were arrogant from among his people said to those who were weak and believed from among them: "How do you know that Saleh was sent from his Lord?" They said: "It is in that which he has been sent that we believe
Those who were arrogant said: "In that which you believe, we reject
They thus killed the camel and defied the command of their Lord, and they said: "O Saleh, bring us what you promised us if you are of the messengers
The earthquake took them, thus they became lifeless in their home
Thus he turned away from them, and said: "My people, I have delivered to you the message of my Lord and advised you; but you do not like the advisers
And Lot, he said to his people: "Do you commit immorality such as none of those of the worlds had done before
You are approaching the men out of desire instead of the women! Indeed, you are a transgressing people
The only response of his people was: "Drive them out of your town; they are a people who wish to be pure
We saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was of those who were destroyed
And We rained down upon them a rain, so see how was the punishment for the criminals
And to Midyan, their brother Shu'ayb, he said: "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. Clarity has come to you from your Lord, so give full weight and measure, and do not hold back from the people what belongs to them, and do not make corruption on the earth after it has been set right. That is better for you if you believe
And do not stand on every path, robbing, and turning away from the path of God those who believe in Him, and you seek to make it crooked. And remember that you were few and He multiplied you; and see how is the retribution of the corrupters
And if a group of you believes in what I have been sent with, and a group disbelieves, then wait until God judges between us. He is the best of judges
And the leaders who became arrogant from among his people said: "We will drive you out of our town Shu'ayb, along with those who have believed with you, or you shall return to our creed!" He said: "Will you force us
We will then be inventing lies about God if we return to your creed after God has saved us from it; and we will not return to it except if God our Lord wills, our Lord encompasses everything with knowledge, in God we put our trust. Our Lord, make an opening between us and between our people with the truth, you are the best of openers
And the leaders who rejected from among his people said: "If you follow Shu'ayb, then you are losers
The earthquake took them, thus they became lifeless in their home
Those who denied Shu'ayb, it is as if they had never prospered therein. Those who denied Shu'ayb, they were the losers
Thus he turned away from them, and said: "My people, I have delivered to you the messages of my Lord and advised you. How can I feel sorry over a rejecting people
And We do not send a prophet to any town, except afterwards We afflict its people with adversity and hardship that they may implore
Then We replaced the bad with good, until they neglected and said: "Our fathers were touched by both hardship and prosperity." We then take them suddenly, while they are unaware
And if only the people of the towns had believed and been aware, then We would have opened for them blessings from the heavens and the earth; but they denied, so We took them for what they had earned
Are the people of the towns sure that Our punishment will not come to them at night while they are sleeping
Or are the people of the towns sure that Our punishment will not come to them during the late morning while they are playing
Have they become secure about the scheming of God? None are secure about the scheming of God except the people who are the losers
Is it not a guide for those who inherited the land after them, that if We wished We could have punished them immediately for their sins? And We stamp on their hearts, so they do not hear
These are the towns whose news We told to you; their messengers had come to them with proofs, but they would not believe in what they had denied before. It is such that God stamps on the hearts of the rejecters
And We did not find most of them up to their pledge, rather, We found most of them wicked
Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his commanders. But they did wrong in them, so see how is the end of the corrupters
And Moses said: "O Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds
It is not proper for me to say about God except the truth; I have come to you with a proof from your Lord. So send with me the Children of Israel
He said: "If you have come with a sign then bring it, if you are of the truthful
He cast down his staff and it manifested into a serpent
And he drew out his hand, and it became pure white for the onlookers
The commanders from among the people of Pharaoh said: "This is a knowledgeable magician
He wishes to drive you out of your land; what is your command
They said: "Delay him and his brother, and send gatherers to the cities
They will come to you with every knowledgeable magician
And the magicians came to Pharaoh, they said: "We require a reward if we are the victors
He said: "Yes, and you will be made close to me
They said: "O Moses, either you cast, or we will cast
He said: "You cast." So when they cast, they bewitched the eyes of the people, and instilled terror in them, and they came with a great magic
And We inspired Moses: "Cast down your staff;" and it swallowed what they invented
Thus the truth was set, and what they did was made of no effect
They were thus defeated there and then, and they turned in disgrace
And the magicians went down prostrating
They said: "We believe in the Lord of the worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
Pharaoh said: "Have you become believers before I have given you permission? This is surely some scheme which you have schemed in the city to drive its people out; you will reveal what you know
I will cut off your hands and feet from alternate sides, then I will crucify you all
They said: "It is to our Lord that we will return
And you are only seeking revenge on us because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came to us. Our Lord, provide us with patience, and let us die as submitters
And the commanders from among the people of Pharaoh said: "Will you let Moses and his people corrupt the land, and abandon you and your gods?" He said: "We will kill their children and rape their women; we will be supreme over them
Moses said to his people: "Seek help with God, and be patient; the earth is for God, He will inherit it to whom He pleases of His servants; and the ending will be for the righteous
They said: "We were being harmed before you came to us and since you have come to us." He said: "Perhaps your Lord will destroy your enemy, and make you successors in the land, so He sees how you work
And We afflicted the people of Pharaoh with years of drought, and a shortage in crops, perhaps they would remember
When any good came to them, they said: "This is ours," and when any bad afflicted them, they blamed it on Moses and those with him. Their blame is with God, but most of them do not know
And they said: "No matter what you bring us of a sign to bewitch us with, we will never believe in you
So We sent them the flood, and the locust, and the lice, and the frogs, and the blood; all detailed signs; but they turned arrogant, they were a criminal people
And when the affliction befell them, they said: "O Moses, call on your Lord for what He has pledged with you, that if you remove this affliction from us, then we will believe in you and we will send with you the Children of Israel
So when We removed from them the affliction, until a future time, they broke their pledge
We thus took vengeance upon them by drowning them in the sea, for their denial of Our signs, and their disregard of them
And We let the people who were weak inherit the east of the land and the west of it which We have blessed. And the good word of your Lord was completed towards the Children of Israel for their patience; and We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were doing, and what they contrived
And We let the Children of Israel cross the sea, then they came upon a people who were devoted to statues made for them; they said: "O Moses, make for us a god like they have gods?" He said: "You are an ignorant people
These people are ruined for what they are in, and evil is what they do
He said: "Shall I seek other than God as a god for you when He has preferred you over the worlds
And We had saved you from the people of Pharaoh, they were afflicting you with the worst punishment; they used to kill your children and rape your women; and in that was a great test from your Lord
And We set a meeting for Moses in thirty nights, and We complemented them with ten, so the appointed time of his Lord was set at forty nights. And Moses said to his brother Aaron: "Be my successor with my people and be upright, and do not follow the path of the corrupters
So when Moses came to Our appointed time, and his Lord spoke to him, he said: "My Lord, let me look upon you." He said: "You will not see Me, but look upon the mountain, if it stays in its place then you will see Me." So when his Lord revealed Himself to the mountain, He caused it to crumble; thus Moses fell unconscious. When he awoke, he said: "Glory to You, I repent to You and I am the first of those who believe
He said: "O Moses, I have chosen you over the people with My message and My words; so take what I have given you and be of the thankful
And We wrote for him on the tablets from all things a lesson, and detailing all things. Take it with strength and order your people to take the best from it. I will show you the abode of the wicked
I will turn away from My revelations those who are arrogant on the earth without right, and if they see every sign they do not believe in it, and if they see the path of guidance they do not take it as a path; and if they see the path of mischief, they take it as a path. That is because they have denied Our revelations and were heedless of them
And those who deny Our revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter, their works have collapsed. Will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do
And the people of Moses, in his absence, made from their ornaments a sculpture of a calf that emitted a cry. Did they not see that it could not speak to them, nor guide them to any way? They took it and they were wicked
And when they realized what their hands had done, and they saw that they had gone astray, they said: "If our Lord will not have mercy on us and forgive us, then we will be of the losers
And when Moses returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said: "Miserable is what you have done after I was gone; do you wish to hasten the action of your Lord?" And he cast down the tablets, and took his brother by his head dragging him towards him. He said: "Son of my mother, the people overpowered me and nearly killed me, so do not make the enemies rejoice over me, and do not make me with the wicked people
He said: "My Lord, forgive me and my brother, and admit us in Your mercy; and you are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy
Those who took the calf will be dealt with a wrath from their Lord and a humiliation in this worldly life. It is such that We punish the fabricators
As for those who commit sin but then repent afterwards and believe; your Lord after that is Forgiving, Merciful
And when the anger subsided from Moses, he took the tablets; and in its inscription was a guidance and a mercy for those who reverence their Lord
And Moses selected from his people seventy men for Our appointed time; so when the earthquake seized them, he said: "My Lord, if You wished You could have destroyed them before this, and me as well. Will you destroy us for what the foolish among us have done? It is all Your test, You misguide with it whom You please and You guide with it whom You please. You are our Supporter, so forgive us and have mercy on us; You are the Best Forgiver
And decree for us good in this world, and in the Hereafter; we have been guided towards You." He said: "My punishment, I afflict with it whom I chose, and My mercy encompasses all things. I will thus decree it for those who are aware and contribute towards purification, and those who believe in Our revelations
Those who follow the Gentile messenger prophet whom they find written for them in the Torah and the Gospel; he orders them to kindness, and prohibits them from vice, and he makes lawful for them the good things, and he makes unlawful for them the evil things, and he removes their burden and the shackles that are upon them. So those who believe in him, and support him, and help him persevere, and follow the light that was sent down with him; these are the successful ones
Say: "O people, I am a messenger of God to you all. The One who has the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, there is no god except He; He gives life and causes death." So believe in God and His Gentile messenger prophet, who believes in God and His words; and follow him that you may be guided
And from among the people of Moses are a nation who guide with the truth and with it they become just
And We separated them into twelve patriarch nations; and We inspired Moses when his people wanted to drink: "Strike the stone with your staff," thus twelve springs burst out of it. Each people then knew from where to drink. And We shaded them with clouds and We sent down to them manna and quail: "Eat from the good things that We have provided for you." They did not wrong Us, but it was their souls that they wronged
And they were told: "Reside in this town and eat from it as you please, and say: "Our load is removed," and enter the passageway by crouching, We will forgive for you your wrongdoings, and We will increase for the good doers
Those who were transgressors among them altered what was said to them with something different; so We sent to them an affliction from the heaven for what transgression they were in
And ask them about the town which was by the sea, after they had transgressed the Sabbath; their fish would come to them openly on the day of their Sabbath, and when they are not in Sabbath, they do not come to them! It is such that We afflicted them for what wickedness they were in
And a nation from among them said: "Why do you preach to a people whom God will destroy or punish a painful retribution?" They said: "A plea to your Lord, and perhaps they may be aware
So when they forgot that which they were reminded of, We saved those who prohibited wickedness, and We took those who transgressed with a grievous retribution for what wickedness they were in
So when they persisted in that which they had been prohibited from, We said to them: "Be despicable apes
And your Lord has sworn that He will send upon them, until the Day of Resurrection, people who would inflict severe punishments on them. Your Lord is swift to punish, and He is Forgiving, Merciful
And We divided them through the land as nations. From them are the upright, and from them are other than that. And We tested them with good things and bad, perhaps they will return
Then, a generation came after them who inherited the Book, but they opted for the materialism of that which is lower; and they say: "It will be forgiven for us." And they continue to opt for the materialism if it comes to them; was not the covenant of the Book taken on them that they would only say the truth about God, and they studied what was in it? And the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who are aware. Do you not comprehend
As for those who hold fast to the Book, and they hold the contact prayer; We will not waste the reward of the righteous
And We raised the mountain above them as if it were a cloud, and they thought it would fall on them: "Take what We have given you with strength and remember what is in it that you may be righteous
And your Lord took for the children of Adam from their backs, their progeny; and He made them witness over themselves: "Am I not your Lord?" They said: "Yes, we bear witness." Thus you cannot say on the Day of Resurrection that you were unaware of this
Nor can you say: "It was our fathers who set up partners before and we were simply a progeny who came after them. Would You destroy us for what the innovators did
It is such that We explain the revelations, perhaps they will return
And recite to them the news of the person whom Our revelations were given to him, but he removed himself from them, and thus the devil followed him, and He became of those who went astray
And if We had wished, We could have raised him with it, but he stuck to the earth and he followed his desire. His example is like the dog, if you scold him he pants, and if you leave him he pants; such is the example of the people who deny Our revelations. So tell the stories, perhaps they will think
Miserable is the example of the people who denied Our revelations, and it was their souls that they had wronged
Whoever God guides, then he is the guided one; and whoever He misguides, then these are the losers
And We have given to Hell many of the Jinn and mankind; they had hearts with which they did not understand, and they had eyes with which they did not see, and they had ears with which they did not hear. They are like livestock; no, they are even more astray. These are the unaware ones
And to God belong the most beautiful names, so call Him by them; and leave alone those who deviate His names. They will be punished for what they used to do
And from among those We created is a nation who guides with the truth, and with it they are just
As for those who deny Our revelations, We will entice them from where they do not know
And I will encourage them, for My planning is formidable
Do they not reflect? Their companion has no madness; but he is a clear warner
Have they not looked at the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that God has created? Perhaps their time is drawing near; so in which narrative after this one will they believe
Whoever God misguides, then there is none to guide him; and He leaves them blindly wandering in their transgression
They ask you regarding the Hour: "When will be its time?" Say: "Its knowledge is with my Lord, none can reveal its coming except He. It is heavy through the heavens and the earth; it will not come to you except suddenly." They ask you, as if you are responsible for it! Say: "Its knowledge is with God, but most of the people do not know
Say: "I do not possess for myself any benefit or harm, except what God wills. And if I could know the future, then I would have increased my good fortune, and no harm would have come to me. I am but a warner and a bearer of good news to a people who believe
He is the One who has created you from one person, and He made from it its mate to reside with. When he dwelled with her, she became pregnant with a light load, and she continued with it; then when it became heavy, they called on God, their Lord: "If You give us an upright child, then we will be among the thankful
But when He gave them an upright child, they set up partners with Him in what He had given them. God be exalted above what they set up as partners
Do they set up those who do not create anything, while they are created
And they cannot give them aid, nor can they aid themselves
And if you invite them to the guidance they will not follow you. It is the same whether you invite them or simply keep quiet
Those whom you call on besides God are servants like you; so let them answer for you if you are truthful
Do they have feet with which to walk? Or, do they have hands with which to strike? Or, do they have eyes with which to see? Or, do they have ears with which to hear? Say: "Call on your partners, then plan against me. You will not be given respite
My supporter is God who sent down the Book; and He takes care of the righteous
As for those whom you call on besides Him, they cannot aid you, nor can they aid themselves
And when you invite them to the guidance, they do not listen. And you see them looking at you, while they do not see
Take to pardoning, and order what is good, and turn away from the ignorant ones
And if bitterness from the devil afflicts you, then seek refuge with God. He is the Hearer, the Knower
Those who are pious, when any evil from the devil touches them, they remember, then they can see
And their brethren attempt to drive them towards error, they do not cease
And because you do not bring them a sign, they say: "If only you had brought one." Say: "I only follow what is inspired to me from my Lord. This is an evidence from your Lord, and a guide and mercy to a people who believe
And if the Qur'an is being read, then listen to it and pay attention, that you may receive mercy
And remember your Lord within yourself, in humility and in reverence; and without loudness in words, during the morning and the evening. And do not be of the careless ones
Those who are at your Lord, they are never too proud to serve Him, and they glorify Him, and to Him they yield
They ask you regarding the spoils, say: "The spoils are for God and the messenger." So be aware of God, and be upright in matters between you; and obey God and His messenger if you are believers
The believers are those whom, when God is mentioned, their hearts reverence; and when His revelations are recited to them, it increases their faith; and they put their trust in their Lord
They hold the contact prayer, and from Our provisions to them they spend
These are the true believers; they will have grades with their Lord and a forgiveness and a generous provision
As your Lord made you go out from your home with the truth, but a party from among the believers disliked this
They argue with you about the truth when it has been made clear to them; as if they were being herded towards death while they are watching
And God promises you that one of the two parties will be defeated by you; and you wish that the one least armed be the one. But God wishes that the truth be manifest with His words, and that He eliminates the remnant of the rejecters
So that the truth will be manifest, and the falsehood will be finished; even if the criminals hate it
You called on help from your Lord and He answered you: "I will provide you with one thousand angels as defenders
And God did not do this except to give you good news, and that your hearts may be assured by it. And victory is only from God; for God is Noble, Wise
Sleep overcame you to give you tranquility from Him; and He sent down to you water from the sky to cleanse you with it and cause the affliction of the devil to leave you; and so that He may strengthen your hearts and set firm your feet
Your Lord inspired to the angels: "I am with you so keep firm those who believe. I will cast terror into the hearts of those who have rejected; so strike above the necks, and strike from them every one standing
That is because they have transgressed against God and His messenger. And whoever transgresses against God and His messenger, then God is severe in retribution
This is for you to sample, and for the rejecters will be a retribution of Fire
O you who believe; when you encounter those who have rejected on the battlefield, do not flee from them
And whoever on that day flees from them; unless it is part of the battle strategy or if he is retreating back to his group; then he has drawn the wrath of God upon him, and his abode will be Hell. What a miserable destiny
It was not you who killed them, but it was God who killed them. And it was not you who launched when you did, but it was God who launched. And so that the believers would be tested well by Him. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
That, and God weakens the plans of the rejecters
If you sought conquest, then conquest has come to you, but if you cease, then it is better for you. And if you return again, then We will also return, and your group will avail you nothing even if it is many. God is with the believers
O you who believe, obey God and His messenger, and do not turn away from him while you have heard
And do not be like those who have said: "We hear," but they do not hear
The worst creatures with God are the deaf and dumb who do not comprehend
And if God had found any good in them, then He would have made them listen. And if He had made them listen, they would have turned away while they are in aversion
O you who believe, answer the call of God and His messenger when he calls you to what will grant you life. And know that God comes between a person and his heart, and that to Him you will be gathered
And be aware of a test that will not only afflict those of you who were wicked; and know that God is severe in retribution
And remember when you were but a few who were weak in the land, you were fearful that the people might capture you. But He sheltered you, and He supported you with His victory, and He provided you with good provisions, so that you may be thankful
O you who believe, do not betray God and the messenger, nor betray your trust, while you know
And know that your money and your children are a test, and that God has the greatest reward
O you who believe, if you are aware of God, He will make a criterion for you, and He will cancel your sins and forgive you. God is possessor of great grace
And the rejecters plot against you to arrest you, or to kill you, or to expel you. And they plot, and God plots, and God is the best of plotters
And if Our revelations are recited to them, they say: "We have listened, and if we wish, we could have said the same thing. This is nothing except fictional tales of old
And they said: "Our god, if this is the truth from You, then send down upon us a rain of stones from the heaven or bring upon us a painful retribution
And God will not punish them while you are with them, nor will God punish them while they continue to seek forgiveness
And why should God not punish them when they are turning others away from the Restricted Temple, and they were never its protectors! Its protectors are the righteous; but most of them do not know
And their contact prayer at the Sanctuary was nothing but noise and aversion. Taste the retribution for what you have rejected
Those who have rejected, they spend their money to turn others away from the path of God. They will spend it, then it will become an anguish for them, then they will be defeated. Those who have rejected will be gathered to Hell
This is so that God will distinguish the bad from the good, and so that the bad will be gathered together into one heap then He will cast it all into Hell. These are the losers
Say to the rejecters: "If they cease, then what has passed before will be forgiven to them, and if they return to it, then the example of the previous generations has already been given
And fight them all until there is no more oppression, and the entire system is for God. But if they cease, then God is Seer over what they do
And if they turn away, then know that God is your Patron. What an excellent Patron, and what an excellent Victor
And know that anything you profit, one-fifth shall go to God and the messenger, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the poor, and the wayfarer. You will do this if you believe in God and in what We revealed to Our servant on the Day of the Criterion, the day the two armies clashed; and God is capable of all things
When you were on the near side, and they were on the far side, then the supply line became directly beneath you. And if you had planned for this meeting, you would have disagreed on its timing, but God was to enforce a command that was already done. So that He would destroy those to be destroyed with proof, and to let those who will live be alive with proof; and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
God showed them to you as being few in your dream, and if He had shown them to you to be many, then you would have failed and you would have disputed in the matter, but God saved you. He is the Knower of what is in the chests
And He showed them to you when you met as being few to your eyes, and He made you appear as being fewer to their eyes. That was so the decree of God would come to be; and to God all matters are returned
O you who believe, when you meet a force, stand firm and mention God excessively, that you may succeed
And obey God and His messenger, and do not dispute else you will fail and your momentum will depart, and be patient. God is with the patient
And do not be like those who came out from their homes to boast and to be seen by the people, and they repel others from the path of God; and God is aware of what they do
And the devil adorned their work for them, and he said: "No people can defeat you today, and I am by your side." But when the two forces came together, he turned back on his heels and he said: "I am innocent from you! I see what you do not see. I fear God, and God is severe in punishment
The hypocrites and those who have a disease in their hearts said: "These people have been deceived by their system." But whoever puts his trust in God, then God is Noble, Wise
And if you could only see as the angels terminate the lives of those who have rejected, they strike their faces and their backs: "Taste the punishment of the blazing Fire
This is for what your hands have delivered, and God does not wrong the servants
Like the behavior of the people of Pharaoh, and those before them; they rejected the signs of God, so God took them by their sins. God is Strong, severe in punishment
That is because God was not to change any blessing He bestowed upon a people, unless they change what is in themselves. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
Like the behavior of the people of Pharaoh, and those before them; they denied the signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them by their sins, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh; all of them were wicked
The worst creatures to God are those who reject, for they do not believe
Those of them with whom you made a pledge, then they break their pledge every time, and they do take heed
So, when you encounter them in battle, set them as an example for those who will come after them; perhaps they may remember
And if you are being betrayed by a people, then you shall likewise move against them. God does not love the betrayers
And let not those who have rejected think that they have escaped; they will never avail themselves
And prepare for them all that you can of might, and from the steeds of war, that you may instill terror with it towards the enemy of God and your enemy, and others besides them whom you do not know but God knows them. And whatever you spend in the cause of God will be returned to you, and you will not be wronged
And if they seek peace, then you also seek it, and put your trust in God. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
And if they wish to deceive you, then God is sufficient for you. He is the One who supported you with His victory and with the believers
And He made unity between their hearts. And if you had spent all that is on the earth, you would not have united between their hearts, but God united between them. He is Noble, Wise
O prophet, God is sufficient for you,and whoever followed you from the believers
O prophet, urge the believers to fight. If there are twenty of you who are patient, they will defeat two hundred. And if there are one hundred of you, they will defeat one thousand from among those who reject; that is because they are a people who do not understand
Now, God has alleviated for you, for He knows that there is weakness in you. If there are one hundred of you who are patient, they will defeat two hundred. And if there are one thousand of you, they will defeat two thousand with the permission of God. God is with the patient
And it was not for any prophet to take prisoners until he is bound by a campaign. You desire the materials of this world, while God wants the Hereafter for you. God is Noble, Wise
Had it not been previously ordained from God, then a severe punishment would have afflicted you for what you took
So consume what you have gained, lawful and good, and be aware of God. God is Forgiving, Merciful
O prophet, say to those prisoners whom you hold: "If God finds in your hearts any good, He will grant you better than what He took from you, and He will forgive you. God is Forgiving, Merciful
And if they want to betray you, then they had already betrayed God before, but He has overpowered them; and God is Knowledgeable, Wise
Those who have believed and emigrated and strived with their money and lives in the cause of God, and those who have sheltered and supported; these are the allies of one another. And those who believed but did not emigrate, you do not owe them any obligation until they emigrate. But if they seek your help in the system, then you must support them, except if it is against a people with whom there is a covenant between you and them. And God is Seer over what you do
As for those who reject, they are allies to one another. If you do not do this, then there will be oppression on the earth and great corruption
And those who have believed and emigrated and strived in the cause of God, and those who have sheltered and supported, these are truly the believers. They will have a forgiveness and a generous provision
And those who believed afterwards and emigrated and strived with you, then they are from you. And the relatives by birth are also supportive of one another in the Book of God. God is aware of all things
A revocation is made by God and His messenger to those with whom you have made a pledge from among the polytheists
Therefore, roam the land for four months and know that you will not escape God, and that God will humiliate the rejecters
And a proclamation from God and His messenger to the people, on the greater Pilgrimage day: "That God and His messenger are innocent from the polytheists." If you repent, then it is better for you, and if you turn away, then know that you will not escape God. And give news to those who have rejected of a painful retribution
Except for those with whom you had made a pledge from among the polytheists if they did not reduce anything from it nor did they support anyone against you; you shall continue the pledge with them until its expiry. God loves the righteous
So when the restricted months have passed, then you may kill the polytheists wherever you find them, and take them, and surround them, and stand against them at every point. If they repent, and they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards purification, then you shall leave them alone. God is Forgiving, Merciful
And if any of the polytheists seeks your protection, then you may protect him so that he may hear the words of God, then let him reach his sanctity. This is because they are a people who do not know
How can the polytheists have a pledge with God and with His messenger? Except for those with whom you made a pledge near the Restricted Temple, as long as they are upright with you, then you are upright with them. God loves the righteous
How is it that when they come upon you they disregard all ties, either those of kinship or of pledge. They seek to please you with their words, but their hearts deny, and the majority of them are wicked
They purchased with the revelations of God a cheap price, so they repel others from His path. Evil indeed is what they used to do
They do not respect those who are believers, nor a kinship, nor a pledge. These are the transgressors
If they repent, and they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards purification, then they are your brothers in the system. We explain the revelations for a people who know
And if they break their oaths after making their pledge, and they challenge the authority of your system; then you may kill the leaders of rejection. Their oaths are nothing to them, perhaps they will then cease
Would you not fight a people who broke their oaths, and obsessed to expel the messenger, especially while they were the ones who attacked you first? Are you concerned about them? It is God who is more deserving that you be concerned with if you are believers
Fight them; perhaps God will punish them by your hands and humiliate them and grant you victory over them and heal the chests of the believing people
And to remove the anger from their hearts; God pardons whom he pleases. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
Or did you think that you would be left alone? God will come to distinguish those of you who strived and did not take other than God and His messenger and the believers as helpers. God is Expert in what you do
It was not for the polytheists to maintain the temples of God while they bear witness over their own rejection. For these, their works have fallen, and in the Fire they will abide
Rather, the temples of God are maintained by he who believes in God and the Last Day, and he upholds the contact prayer, and he contributes towards purification, and is only concerned by God. It is these that will be of the guided ones
Have you made the watering of the pilgrim and the maintenance of the Restricted Temple the same as one who believes in God and the Last Day and he strives in the cause of God? They are not the same with God. And God does not guide the wicked people
Those who believed and emigrated and strived in the cause of God with their money and their lives are in a greater degree with God. These are the winners
Their Lord gives them good news of a mercy from Him, and acceptance, and gardens that are for them in which there is permanent bliss
Abiding therein eternally. With God there is a great reward
O you who believe, do not take your fathers nor brothers as allies if they prefer rejection to belief. And whoever of you takes them as such, then these are the wicked
Say: "If your fathers, and your sons, and your brothers, and your wives, and your kin, and money which you have gathered, and a trade which you would be concerned over its decline, and homes which you find pleasing; if these are dearer to you than God and His messenger and striving in His cause, then wait until God brings His decision. And God does not guide the wicked people
God has granted you victory in many battlefields. And on the day of Hunayn when you were pleased with your great numbers but it did not help you at all, and the land became tight around you for what it held, then you turned to flee
Then God sent down His tranquility upon His messenger and the believers, and He sent down soldiers which you did not see, and He punished those who rejected. Such is the recompense of the rejecters
Then God will accept the repentance of whom He pleases after that. God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe, the polytheists are impure, so let them not approach the Restricted Temple after this year of theirs; and if you fear poverty, then God will enrich you from His blessings if He wills. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
Fight those who do not believe in God or the Last Day, nor do they restrict what God and His messenger have restricted, nor do they uphold the system of truth; from among the people who have been given the Book; until they pay the reparation, willingly or unwillingly, and they are subdued
The Jews said: "Ezra is the son of God," and the Nazarenes said: "The Messiah is the son of God." Such is their utterances with their mouths, they imitate the sayings of those who rejected before them. God will fight them. They are deluded from the truth
They have taken their Priests and Monks to be patrons besides God, and the Messiah, son of Mary, while they were only commanded to serve One god, there is no god except He, be He glorified against what they set up
They want to extinguish the light of God with their mouths, but God refuses such and lets His light continue, even if the rejecters hate it
He is the One who has sent His messenger with the guidance and the system of truth, so that it will expose all other systems, even if the polytheists hate it
O you who believe, many of the Priests and Monks consume the money of the people in falsehood, and they repel from the path of God. And those who hoard gold and silver, and do not spend it in the cause of God, give them news of a painful retribution
On the Day when they will be seared in the fires of Hell, and their foreheads and sides and backs will be branded with it: "This is what you have hoarded for yourselves, so taste what you have hoarded
The count of the months with God is twelve months in the book of God the day He created the heavens and the earth; four of them are restricted. This is the correct system; so do not wrong yourselves in them; and fight the polytheists collectively as they fight you collectively. And know that God is with the righteous
Know that the use of the additional month causes an increase in rejection, for it is used by those who have rejected that they may misguide with it by making it lawful one year, and forbidden one year, so as to circumvent the count of what God has made restricted; thus they make lawful what God has made forbidden. Their evil works have been adorned for them, and God does not guide the rejecting people
O you who believe, what is wrong with you when you are told: "Mobilize in the cause of God," you become heavy on the earth. Have you become content with this worldly life over the Hereafter? The enjoyment of this worldly life compared to the Hereafter is nothing
If you do not mobilize, then He will punish you with a painful retribution, and He will replace you with another people, and you do not bother Him in the least. God is capable of all things
If you do not help him, then God has helped him. When those who rejected expelled him, he was one of only two, and when they were in the cave, he said to his friend: "Do not grieve, for God is with us." So God sent down His tranquility over him and He supported him with soldiers that you did not see, and He made the word of those who rejected be the lowest, and the word of God be the highest. God is Noble, Wise
Mobilize in light gear or heavy gear, and strive with your money and lives in the cause of God. That is best if only you knew
If it were a near gain, or an easy journey, they would have followed you; but the distance was too much for them. And they will swear by God: "If we could have, we would have gone with you." They destroy themselves, and God knows they are liars
God pardons you; why did you give them leave before it became clear to you who are truthful, and who are lying
Those who believe in God and the Last Day will not ask leave. They strive with their money and their lives. And God is aware of the righteous
Those who ask leave are the ones who do not believe in God and the Last Day, and their hearts are in doubt. In their doubts they are wavering
And if they had wanted to go then they would have taken all precautions for it, but God disliked them coming forth, so He made them lag behind, and they were told: "Stay with those who have stayed
Had they gone with you they would have added nothing except disruption, and they would have hurried about seeking to cause for you an ordeal; and there are some among you who listen to them. God is aware of the wicked
They wanted to cause an ordeal from before, and they turned matters upside down for you until the truth came and the command of God was revealed, while they hated it
And from them are those who say: "Grant me leave, and do not test me." But it is in the test that they have indeed fallen, and Hell is surrounding the rejecters
When any good befalls you, it upsets them, and if any bad befalls you, they say: "We have taken our precaution beforehand," and they turn away happy
Say: "Nothing will befall us except what God has decreed for us, He is our Patron." And in God the believers shall put their trust
Say: "You can only expect for us one of two good things; while we wait for you to be afflicted by God with a retribution from Him, or by our hands. So wait, we are with you waiting
Say: "Spend willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from you. You are a wicked people
And what prevented what they would spend from being accepted from them except that they rejected God and His messenger, and they do not attend the contact prayer except lazily, and they do not spend except unwillingly
So do not be impressed by their wealth or children; God only wishes to punish them with it in the worldly life, and so that their souls will be taken while they are rejecters
And they swear by God that they are with you, while they are not with you; but they are a people who are indecisive
If they find a refuge, or cave, or any place to enter, they will run to it while they are in haste
And from them are those who criticize you regarding the charities. If they are given from it, they are content; and if they are not given from it, they become enraged
And if they had only been content with what God and His messenger had given them, and they had said: "God suffices; God will give us from His bounty, and His messenger; it is towards God that we desire
Indeed, the charities are for the poor, and the needy, and those who work to collect them, and those whose hearts have been united, and to free the slaves, and those in debt, and in the cause of God, and the wayfarer. A duty from God, and God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And from them are those who harm the prophet, and they say: "He only listens!" Say: "What he listens to is best for you. He believes in God, and he has trust for the believers, and he is a mercy to those who believe among you." And those who harm the messenger of God will have a painful retribution
They swear to you by God in order to please you; while God and His messenger are more worthy to be pleased if they are believers
Did they not know that whoever is hostile towards God and His messenger, he will have the fire of Hell, abiding therein. Such is the greatest humiliation
The hypocrites fear that a chapter will be sent down which will expose what is in their hearts. Say: "Mock, for God will bring out what you fear
And if you ask them they say: "We were only jesting and playing." Say: "In God and His revelations and His messenger you were mocking
Do not apologize, for you have rejected after your belief. If We pardon one group from you, We will punish another group. That is because they were criminals
The hypocrite males and the hypocrite females, they are to each other. They order vice and prohibit good, and they close their hands. They forgot God, so He will forget them; indeed, the hypocrites are the wicked
God has promised the hypocrite males and the hypocrite females and the rejecters a Fire in Hell, in it they will abide; it will be enough for them. And God has cursed them and they will have a lasting retribution
Like those before them, they were more powerful than you, and with more wealth and children. They enjoyed their lives, and you enjoyed your lives as those before you enjoyed their lives; and you jested as they jested. They had their works crumble in this world and the next, and they were the losers
Did the news not come to them of those before them, the people of Noah and 'Aad and Thamud. And the people of Abraham, and the dwellers of Midyan, and those overthrown. Their messengers came to them with clarity; it was not God who wronged them, but it was themselves that they wronged
And the believing males and the believing females, they are allies to one another. They order good and prohibit vice, and they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards purification and they obey God and His messenger. God will have mercy on them; God is Noble, Wise
God has promised the believing males and the believing females estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein, and pleasing homes in gardens of delight. And the acceptance from God is the most important; such is the great triumph
O prophet, strive against the rejecters and the hypocrites and be firm against them. Their dwelling is Hell, what a miserable destiny
They swear by God that they did not say it, while they had said the word of rejection, and they rejected after they had submitted, and they were obsessed with what they could not possess; and they could not find any fault except that God and His messenger had enriched them from His bounty. If they repent it is better for them, and if they turn away, then God will punish them severely in this world and the next. They will not have on the earth any ally or supporter
And from them are those who pledged to God: "If He gives us from His bounty, then we will believe and we will be among the upright
So when He gave them from His bounty, they became stingy with it, and they turned away while they were averse
Thus, hypocrisy follows in their hearts until the Day they meet Him; that is for breaking what they promised God, and for what they were lying
Did they not know that God knows their secrets, and their private counsel, and that God is the Knower of all the unseen
Those who criticize the volunteers among the believers in charities; that they only have their efforts to give; so they mock them. God mocks them, and they will have a painful retribution
Whether you seek forgiveness for them, or do not seek forgiveness for them. If you seek forgiveness for them seventy times, God will not forgive them. That is because they have rejected God and His messenger; and God does not guide the wicked people
Those who have remained are happy with their position of lagging behind the messenger of God, and they disliked striving with their money and lives in the cause of God; and they say: "Do not mobilize in the heat." Say: "The fire of Hell is much hotter," if they could only understand
Let them laugh a little, and cry a lot, a recompense for what they have earned
So, if God sends you back to a group of them, and they ask your permission to come with you, then say: "You will not come with me ever; nor will you fight any enemy with me. You had accepted staying behind the first time, so stay with those who remain behind
And do not make the contact prayer for any of them who have died, nor stand at their grave. They have rejected God and His messenger and died while they were wicked
And do not be impressed by their wealth and their children; God only wishes to punish them with it in this world, and so their souls will be taken while they are rejecters
And if a chapter is sent down: "That you shall believe in God and strive with His messenger," those with wealth and influence ask your leave and they say: "Let us be with those who remain behind
They were content to stay with those who remained behind, and it was imprinted on their hearts, for they do not understand
But the messenger and those who believe with him have strived with their money and their lives. For them will be the good things, and they are the successful ones
God has prepared for them estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein. Such is the great gain
And those who had an excuse from among the Nomads came so leave would be given to them, and those who denied God and His messenger simply stayed behind. Those who rejected from them will be inflicted with a painful retribution
There is no blame to be placed upon the weak, or the sick, or those who do not find anything to spend on, if they are sincere towards God and His messenger. There is no argument against the good doers; and God is Forgiving, Merciful
Nor upon those who came to ride out with you, while you said: "I do not have any mounts for you;" they turned away while their eyes were flooded with tears out of sadness, for they could not find anything to contribute
Indeed, the argument is against those who sought your leave while they were rich. They accepted to be with those who remained behind, and God stamps their hearts, for they do not know
They will apologize to you when you return to them, say: "Do not apologize, we will not believe you, for God has told us of your news." And God will see your work, as will His messenger, then you will be returned to Knower of the unseen and the seen, He will inform you of what you did
They will swear by God to you, when you return to them, so that you would let them be. So let them be, for they are tainted, and their destiny is Hell as a recompense for what they earned
They swear to you so that you would accept them. Even if you accept them, God does not accept the wicked people
The Nomads are the worst in rejection and hypocrisy, and more likely not to know the boundaries of what God has sent down upon His messenger. God is Knower, Wise
And from the Nomads are some who look upon what they spend as a fine, and wait for misfortune upon you. They will have the misfortune of evil, and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
And from the Nomads are those who believe in God and the Last Day, and he looks upon what he spends to make him closer to God, and the contact prayers of the messenger. It indeed makes them closer. God will admit them in His mercy; God is Forgiving, Merciful
And those who came early and quickly from among the emigrants and the supporters, and those who followed them in goodness; God has accepted them, and they have accepted Him; and He has prepared for them estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein eternally. Such is the great triumph
And from among the Nomads around you are hypocrites, and from among the people of the city, they persist in hypocrisy. You do not know them, but We know them. We will punish them twice, then they will be returned to a great punishment
And others who have acknowledged their sins, they have mixed a good work with another that was bad. Perhaps God will pardon them. God is Forgiving, Merciful
Take from their money a charity to purify them and develop them with it, and make contact with them; for your contact is a tranquility for them; and God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
Did they not know that it is God who accepts repentance from His servants, and He takes the charities, and that God is the Pardoner, Merciful
And say: "Work, and God will see your work and His messenger and the believers. And you will be sent back to Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of what you did
And others are made to wait for the decision of God; either He will punish them, or He will pardon them. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And there are those who have taken a temple to do harm and cause rejection, and to divide between the believers, and as an outpost for those who fought God and His messenger before. They will swear that they only wanted to do good, and God bears witness that they are liars
Do not stand in it ever. A temple that is founded on righteousness from the first day is more worthy that you stand in it; in it are men who love to purify themselves. And God loves the purified
Is he who founds his building on obtaining righteousness from God and His acceptance better, or he who founds his building on the edge of a cliff which is about to crumble, so that it crumbled with him into the fires of Hell? And God does not guide the wicked people
Their buildings that they built continue to cause doubt in their hearts, until their hearts are severed. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise
God has purchased from the believers their very lives and their wealth, that they will have the Paradise; they fight in the cause of God so they kill and are killed; a promise that is true upon Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the Qur'an. And whoever fulfills this pledge with God, then have good news of the pledge which you are concluded with. Such is the great triumph
They are the repenters, the worshipers, the thankful, the devout, the kneeling, the prostrating, the advocates of good and the prohibiters of vice, and the caretakers of the boundaries of God; and give good news to the believers
It is not for the prophet and those who believe that they should seek forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they are relatives, after it has been made clear to them that they are the dwellers of Hell
And Abraham seeking forgiveness for his father was only because of a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear that he was the enemy of God, he disowned him. Abraham was kind, compassionate
And it is not for God to misguide a people after He guided them, until He makes clear to them what they should avoid. God is aware of all things
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, He brings life and death. You have none besides God as a supporter or victor
God has pardoned the prophet and the emigrants and the supporters who had followed him in the darkest hour, even though the hearts of some of them nearly deviated, but then He pardoned them. He is towards them Compassionate, Merciful
And also the three who were left behind, until the land, as vast as it is, became strained to them, and their very souls became strained, and they thought there was no shelter from God except to Him. Then He pardoned them that they may repent. God is the Redeemer, the Merciful
O you who believe, be aware of God and be with the truthful
It is not advisable for the dwellers of the city and those around them of the Nomads that they should lag behind after the messenger of God, nor should they yearn for themselves above him. That is because any thirst that will come to them, or fatigue, or hunger in the cause of God, or any step that they take which will annoy the rejecters, or any gain they have over any enemy; it will be recorded as a good deed for them. God does not waste the reward of the good doers
And anything small or large they spend, or any valley they cross, it will be recorded for them. God will recompense them with the best of what they did
And it is not advisable for the believers to mobilize in their entirety. For every battalion that marches out, let a group remain to study the system, and warn their people when they return to them, perhaps they will be aware
O you who believe, fight those who are around you of the rejecters, and let them find strength in you; and know that God is with the righteous
And when a chapter is sent down, some of them say: "Who has been increased in faith by this?" For those who believe, it has increased their faith, and they rejoice
As for those who have a disease in their hearts, it only increased tainting to their taint, and they died as rejecters
Do they not see they are tested every year once or twice? But then they do not repent, nor do they remember
And when a chapter is sent down, they look at one another: "Does anyone see you?" Then they turn away. God turns away their hearts, for they are a people who do not understand
A messenger has come to you from yourselves, troubled over your deviation, anxious over you, towards the believers he is compassionate, merciful
If they turn away, then say: "God is sufficient for me, there is no god except He, in Him I place my trust and He is the Lord of the great Throne
ALR, these are the signs of the Book of wisdom
Is it a surprise for the people who We inspired a man from among them: "Warn the people and give good news to those who believe, that they will have a footing of truth with their Lord." The rejecters said: "This is clearly magic
Your Lord is God who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He settled upon the Throne; He manages all affairs. There is no intercessor except after His permission. Such is God your Lord, so serve Him. Would you not remember
To Him is your return, all of you, for the promise of God is true. He initiates the creation then He returns it; to recompense with justice those who have believed and have done good works. As for those who have rejected, they will have a boiling drink, and a painful retribution for what they had rejected
He is the One who has made the sun a radiance, and the moon a light, and He has measured its phases; that you may know the number of the years and the count. God has not created this except with the truth. He clarifies the revelations for a people who know
In the difference between the night and the day and what God has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for a people who are aware
As for those who do not wish to meet Us, and they are content with the worldly life, and they feel secure by it, and they are unaware of Our signs
To these will be the destiny of the Fire for what they earned
Those who believe and do good works, their Lord will guide them by their faith. Rivers will flow beneath them in gardens of bliss
Their saying in it is: "Be you glorified, our god!" And their greeting in it is: "Peace," and the end of their saying is: "Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
And if God hastened for the people the evil as He hastens for them the good, then they would have been ruined. We thus leave those who do not wish to meet Us wandering in their transgression
And when hardship touches man, he calls upon Us on his side or sitting or standing. But when We remove his hardship from him, he carries on as if he never called upon Us for a hardship which touched him! Thus it was made to appear good to the transgressors what they had done
And We have destroyed the generations before you when they transgressed; and their messengers had come to them with clear proofs, but they would not believe. It is such that We recompense the criminal people
Then We made you successors on the earth after them to see how you would perform
And when Our clear revelations were recited to them, those who do not wish to meet Us said: "Bring a Qur'an other than this, or change it!" Say: "It is not for me to change it of my own accord, I merely follow what is inspired to me. I fear, if I disobeyed my Lord, the retribution of a great Day
Say: "If God had willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would you have known about it. I have been residing among you for nearly a lifetime before this; do you not comprehend
Who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God or denies His revelations? The criminals will never succeed
And they serve besides God what does not harm them or benefit them, and they say: "These are our intercessors with God." Say: "Are you informing God of what He does not know in the heavens or the earth?" Be He glorified and exalted above what they set up
The people were but one nation, then they differed. And had it not been for a previous command from your Lord, the matter would have been immediately judged between them for what they differed
And they say: "If only a sign was sent down to him from His Lord." Say: "The future is with God, so wait, and I will wait with you
And if We let the people taste a mercy after some hardship had afflicted them, they take to scheming against Our revelations! Say: "God is faster in scheming;" Our messengers record what you scheme
He is the One who carries you on land and on the sea. And when you are on the ships and We drive them with a good wind which they rejoice with, a strong gust comes to them and the waves come to them from all sides, and they think that they are finished, they implore God with loyalty and devotion to His system: "If You save us from this, we will be of the thankful
But when He saves them, they then traverse through the land with injustice. "O people, what you seek out is only the luxury of this worldly life, then to Us is your return and We will inform you of all that you had done
The example of the worldly life is like a water which has come down from the sky, so it mixed with the plants of the earth from what the people and the livestock eat. Then the earth takes its shape and becomes beautiful and its inhabitants think that they have mastered it; then Our judgment comes by night or by day, so We make it a wasteland as if it never prospered by the yesterday! It is such that We clarify the revelations for a people who think
God calls to the abode of peace, and He guides those whom He wishes to a straight path
For those who do good will be good and more, and their faces will not be darkened or humiliated. These are the people of the Paradise, in it they will abide
As for those who earn evil, the recompense of evil will be evil like it, and they will be humiliated. They do not have anyone to help them from God. It is as if their faces have been covered by a piece of darkness from the night. These are the people of the Fire, in it they will abide
And on the Day We gather them all, then We will say to those who were polytheists: "Stop where you are, you and your partners," then We will separate between them, and their partners will say: "It was not us that you served
God is enough as a witness between us and you, that we were unaware of you serving us
It is then that every soul will know what it has done, and they will be returned to God their true patron, and they have been abandoned by that which they had invented
Say: "Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth? Who possesses the hearing and the eyesight? And who brings the living out from the dead and brings the dead out from the living? And who manages all affairs?" They will say: "God." Say: "Will you not be righteous
Such is God, your true Lord. So what is after the truth except straying! Why then do you turn away
It was thus that the command of your Lord came against those who were wicked, for they did not believe
Say: "Are there any from those whom you have set up as partners who can initiate the creation and then return it?" Say: "God initiates the creation and then returns it." How are you deluded
Say: "Are there any of those whom you set up as partners who can guide to the truth?" Say: "God guides to the truth. Is He who guides to the truth more worthy of being followed, or he who does not guide except after he is guided? What is wrong with you, how do you judge
Most of them only follow conjecture. While conjecture does not avail against the truth in anything. God is aware of what they do
This Qur'an could not have been produced without God; it is to authenticate what is between his hands, and to give details of the Book in which there is no doubt, from the Lord of the worlds
Or do they say: "He has invented it!" Say: "Then bring a chapter like it, and call on whom you can besides God if you are truthful
No, they have lied about that which they had no knowledge, nor has its explanation come to them. It is also how those before them denied, so see how was the retribution of the wicked
And there are some of them who believe in it, and some of them do not believe in it. Your Lord is better aware of the transgressors
And if they deny you, then say: "I have my deeds, and you have your deeds. You are innocent from what I do, and I am innocent from what you do
And there are some of them who listen to you; but can you make the deaf hear, if they do not comprehend
And there are some of them who look at you; but can you guide the blind, if they do not see
God does not wrong the people in the least, but it is the people who wrong themselves
And the Day He gathers them, it will be as if they had stayed but an hour of a day. They will get to know one another. Losers will be those who have denied meeting God, and they have not been guided
And if We show you some of what We promise them, or We terminate your life, to Us is their return. Then God is a witness over what they do
And for every nation is a messenger; so when their messenger comes, the matter is decreed between them with justice, and they are not wronged
And they say: "When is this promise if you are truthful
Say: "I do not possess for myself any harm or benefit except what God wills. For every nation is a time. When their time comes, they cannot delay it one hour nor advance it
Say: "Do you see if His retribution will come to you by night or by day, then which portion would the criminals hasten in
Will you then, when it occurs, believe in it? While now you are hastening it on
Then it will be said to those who were wicked: "Taste the everlasting retribution. You are only recompensed for what you have earned
And they seek news from you: "Is it true?" Say: "Yes, by my Lord it is true, and you cannot escape from it
And if every soul who wronged had possessed all that is on the earth, it would have attempted to ransom it. And they declared their regret when they saw the retribution, and it was judged between them with fairness. They were not wronged
To God is what is in the heavens and the earth. The promise of God is true, but most of them do not know
He gives life, and He brings death, and to Him you will return
O people, advice has come to you from your Lord and a healing for what is in the chests, and a guidance and a mercy for the believers
Say: "By the grace of God and His mercy." For that let them rejoice, that is better than all that they gather
Say: "Have you seen what God has sent down to you from provisions, then you have made some of it forbidden and some lawful?" Say: "Did God authorize you, or do you invent lies about God
And what will those who invent lies about God think on the Day of Resurrection? God is with great bounty to the people, but most of them are not thankful
And any matter you are in, or any reciting you do of the Qur'an, or any work you do; We are witnesses over you when you undertake it. Nothing is hidden from your Lord, not even the weight of an atom on the earth or in the heavens, nor smaller than that nor larger, except it is in a clear record
For the allies of God, there is no fear over them nor will they grieve
Those who have believed and are aware
For them are glad tidings in the worldly life and in the Hereafter. There is no changing the words of God. Such is the great triumph
And do not be saddened by their speech, for all glory is to God. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
Certainly, to God belong all who are in the heavens and those who are on the earth. As for those who call on partners besides God, they only follow conjecture, and they only guess
He is the One who made the night for you to reside in, and the day to see. In that are signs for a people who listen
They said: "God has taken a son." Glory be to Him! He is the Rich. To Him is what is in the heavens and the earth. Do you have proof for this? Or do you say about God what you do not know
Say: "Those who invent lies about God, they will not be successful
A short pleasure in this world, then to Us is their return and We will make them taste the severe retribution for what they were rejecting
And recite to them the news of Noah, as he said to his people: "My people, if my station has become too troublesome for you, and my reminding you of the signs of God, then in God I place my trust. So gather your evidence and your partners, then make certain your evidence does not become against you, then come to judge me, and do not hold back
But if you turn away, then I have not asked you for any wage, for my wage is with God. And I have been commanded to be of those who have submitted
They denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and We made them successors, and We drowned those who denied Our revelations. So see how was the punishment of those who were warned
Then, after him, We sent messengers to their own people, so they came to them with proofs. But they did not want to believe in what they had already denied beforehand. Thus it is We stamp upon the hearts of the transgressors
Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs to Pharaoh and his leaders, but they turned arrogant, they were a criminal people
So when the truth came to them from Us, they said: "This is clearly magic
Moses said: "Would you say this about the truth when it came to you? Is this magic? The magicians will not be successful
They said: "Have you come to us to turn us away from that which we found our fathers upon, and so that you two would have greatness in the land? We will not believe in you
And Pharaoh said: "Bring me every knowledgeable magician
So, when the magicians came, Moses said to them: "Cast what you will cast
So when they cast, Moses said: "What you have brought is magic, God will disable it. God does not set right the works of the corrupters
And so that God will set the truth with His words, even if the criminals hate it
But none believed in Moses from his people except some from their descendants, because of their fear from Pharaoh and his commanders that he would persecute them. Pharaoh was high in the land, and he was of the tyrants
And Moses said: "O my people, if you believe in God, then put your trust in Him if you have submitted
They said: "In God we put our trust. Our Lord, do not make us a test for the wicked people
And save us by Your mercy from the rejecting people
And We inspired to Moses and his brother: "You shall seek out homes for your people in Egypt; and leave your homes to be a focal point, and hold the contact prayer. And give good news to the believers
And Moses said: "Our Lord, you have given Pharaoh and his commanders adornments and wealth in this worldly life so that they will misguide from Your path. Our Lord, wipe out their wealth and bring grief to their hearts; for they will not believe until they see the painful retribution
He said: "Your call has been responded to, so keep straight and do not follow the path of those who do not know
And We helped the Children of Israel cross the sea, and Pharaoh and his soldiers followed them out of hatred and animosity. But when he was certain to drown, he said: "I believe that there is no god except the One in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am of those who have submitted
Now you say this? While before you disobeyed and were of the corrupters
This day, We will preserve your body, so that you become a sign for those after you." But most of the people are unaware of Our signs
And We helped the Children of Israel reach a place of sanctity, and We provided them from the good things, and they did not differ until the knowledge came to them. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection for what they differed in
If you are in doubt regarding what We have sent down to you, then ask those who have been reading the Book from before you. The truth has come to you from your Lord, so do not be of those who doubt
And do not be of those who have denied the revelations of God, for you will be of the losers
Those who have deserved the retribution of your Lord do not believe
Even if every sign were to come to them; until they see the painful retribution
If there was any town that benefited from its belief, then that was the people of Jonah. When they believed, We removed from them the retribution of disgrace in this worldly life, and We let them enjoy until a time
And had your Lord willed, all the people on the earth in their entirety would have believed. Would you force the people to make them believe
And it is not for a soul to believe except with the permission of God. And He lets taint those who do not comprehend
Say: "Look at all that is in the heavens and the earth." But what good are the signs and warnings to a people who do not believe
Are they waiting for the days like those who have passed away before them? Say: "Wait, for I am with you waiting
Then We will save Our messengers and those who believe. It is thus binding upon Us that We save the believers
Say: "O people, if you are in doubt of my system, then I do not serve those whom you serve besides God. But I serve God; the One who will terminate your lives; and I have been commanded to be of the believers
And set your face to the system of monotheism, and do not be of the polytheists
And do not call upon other than God what does not benefit you or harm you; if you do, then you are of the wicked
And if God afflicts you with any harm, then none can remove it except He; and if He wanted good for you, then none can turn away His grace, He brings it to whom He wishes of His servants. And He is the Forgiver, the Merciful
Say: "O people, the truth has come to you from your Lord, so whoever is guided is being guided for himself, and whoever is misguided will remain so, and I am not a caretaker over you
And follow what is being inspired to you and be patient until God judges. And He is the best of judges
ALR, a Book in which its revelations have been made lawgiving, then detailed, from One who is Wise, Expert
That you shall serve none other than God. I am to you from Him a warner and a bearer of good news
And seek forgiveness from your Lord, then repent to Him; He will provide you with good provisions to an appointed term. And He bestows His grace upon those who are of grace." And if they turn away: "Indeed, I fear for you the retribution of a great day
To God is your return, and He is capable of all things
Alas, they have folded their chests to hide from it. Even when they cover themselves under their garments, He knows what they keep secret and what they declare. He is Knower of all that is in the chests
And there is not a creature on the earth but on God is its provision. And He knows where it dwells and where it hides. All is in a clear record
He is the One who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His Throne was upon the water; so as to test who from among you works the best. And when you say: "You will be resurrected after the death," those who have rejected say: "This is but clear magic
And if We delay for them the retribution to a near period, they will say: "What has kept it?" Alas, on the day it comes to them, nothing will turn it away from them, and they will be surrounded by that which they used to mock
And if We give man a taste of a mercy from Us, then We withdraw it from him; he becomes despairing, rejecting
And if We give him the taste of a blessing after hardship has afflicted him, he says: "Evil has gone from me!" He becomes happy, boastful
Except for those who are patient and do good works; these will have a pardon, and a great reward
So perhaps you wish to ignore some of what has been inspired to you, and you are depressed by it, because they say: "If only a treasure was sent down with him, or an angel had come with him!" You are but a warner, and God is Caretaker over all things
Or do they say: "He has invented it!" Say: "Then bring ten invented chapters like it, and call on whom you can besides God if you are truthful
So, if they do not respond to you, then know that it has been sent down with the knowledge of God, and that there is no god except He. Will you then submit
Whoever wants the worldly life and its adornments, then We will grant them their works in it, and they will not be short changed in it
These will have nothing but fire in the Hereafter, and what they have done will be in vain, and evil is what they have worked
For those who are on a clarity from their Lord, and are followed by a testimony from Him; and before it was the Book of Moses, a beacon and a mercy; they will believe in it. And whoever rejects it from among the Confederates, then the Fire is his meeting place. So do not be in any doubt about it. It is the truth from your Lord, but most of the people do not believe
And who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God? They will be displayed before their Lord, and the witnesses will say: "These are the ones who have lied about their Lord." Alas, the curse of God will be upon the wicked
Those who repel others from the path of God and they seek to twist it; and regarding the Hereafter they are in denial
These are the ones who will not escape on the earth, nor do they have besides God any allies. The retribution will be doubled for them. They were not able to hear, nor could they see
They are the ones who have lost their souls, and what they had invented has abandoned them
There is no doubt, that in the Hereafter they are the greatest losers
Those who believe and do good works, and are humble towards their Lord; they are the dwellers of the Paradise, in it they will remain
The example of the two groups is like the blind and deaf, and the seer and hearer. Are they the same when compared? Do you not take heed
And We had sent Noah to his people: "I am to you a clear warner
That you serve none except God. I fear for you the retribution of a painful day
The leaders who rejected from among his people said: "We do not see you except as a human being like us, and we see that only the lowest among our people who have no opinion have followed you. And we do not see a thing that makes you better than us; in fact, we think you are liars
He said: "O my people, do you see that should I be upon a clarity from my Lord, and He has given me a mercy from Himself, that you may be blinded to it? Shall we compel you to it while in-fact you hate it
And my people, I do not ask you for money, my wage is from God. Nor will I turn away those who believe, for they will meet their Lord. But I see that you are a people who are ignorant
And my people, who will give me victory against God if I turn them away? Will you not remember
Nor do I say to you that I have the treasures of God, nor do I know the future, nor do I say that I am an angel, nor do I say to those whom your eyes look down upon that God will not grant them any good. God is more aware of what is in their souls; in such case I would be among the wicked
They said: "O Noah, you have argued with us, and continued arguing with us, so bring us what you promise us if you are of the truthful ones
He said: "It is God who will bring it to you if He wishes; you will not have any escape
And my advice will not benefit you if I wanted to advise you and God wanted that you should go astray. He is your Lord, and to Him you will return
Or do they say: "He has invented it?" Say: "If I have invented it, then I am responsible for my crime, and I am innocent from your crimes
And it was inspired to Noah: "No more of your people will believe except those who have already believed. So do not be saddened by what they have done
And construct the ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration, and do not speak to Me regarding those who are wicked. They will be drowned
And as he was constructing the ship, every time any cluster from his people passed by, they mocked him. He said: "If you mock us, then we also mock you as you mock
You will know to whom the retribution will come to disgrace him, and upon him will be a lasting punishment
So, when Our command came and the chamber erupted. We said: "Carry in it a pair from each kind, and your family; except those against whom the word has been issued; and whoever has believed." But those who believed with him were few
And he said: "Ride in it, in the name of God shall be its running and its anchorage. My Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
And while it was running with them in waves like mountains, Noah called to his son, who was in an isolated place: "My son, ride with us, and do not be with the rejecters
He said: "I will take refuge to the mountain which will protect me from the water." He said: "There is no protection from the decree of God except for those He has granted mercy." And the wave came between them, so he was one of those who drowned
And it was said: "O land, swallow your water, and O sky, cease." And the water was diminished, and the matter concluded. And it came to rest on the Judi, and it was said: "Away with the wicked people
And Noah called on his Lord, and he said: "My Lord, my son is from my family, and your promise is the truth, and you are the Wisest of all Judges
He said: "O Noah, he is not from your family, he was of an unrighteous deed, so do not ask what you have no knowledge of. I advise you not to be of the ignorant
He said: "My Lord, I seek refuge with You from asking You what I do not have knowledge of. And if You do not forgive me and have mercy on me, I will be of the losers
It was said: "O Noah, descend in peace from Us and blessings upon you and upon nations to come from those with you. And nations whom We will give enjoyment, then a painful retribution will reach them from Us
This is from the news of the unseen that We inspire to you. Neither did you nor your people know this, so be patient; the ending will be for the righteous
And to 'Aad was sent their brother Hud. He said: "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him; you are simply conjecturing
My people, I do not ask you for any wage, my wage is from the One who has initiated me. Will you not comprehend
And my people, seek forgiveness from your Lord, then repent to Him; He will send the sky to you abundantly, and He will add might to your might. So do not turn away as criminals
They said: "O Hud, you have not come to us with any proof, nor will we leave our gods based on what you say. We will not believe in you
All we can say is that perhaps some of our gods have seized you with evil." He said: "I make God my witness, and all of you witness, that I am innocent of what you have set up
Besides Him, so plan against me all of you, then do not give me respite
I have placed my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is not a creature except He will seize it by its forelock. My Lord is on a straight path
So, if you turn away, then I have delivered what I have been sent to you with, and my Lord will bring after you a people who are not like you; and you cannot harm Him the least. My Lord is Guardian over all things
And when Our command came, We saved Hud and those who had believed with him by a mercy from Us, and We saved them from a mighty retribution
Such was the case of 'Aad. They disregarded the revelations of their Lord, and they disobeyed His messengers, and they followed the command of every stubborn tyrant
And they were followed by a curse in this world and on the Day of Resurrection, for 'Aad rejected their Lord. So away with 'Aad, the people of Hud
And to Thamud was their brother Saleh. He said: "O my people, serve God, you have no god besides Him. He has established you from the earth, and has made you settle in it; so seek His forgiveness, then repent to Him. My Lord is Near, Responsive
They said: "O Saleh, you were well liked among us before this. Do you prohibit us from serving what our fathers served? We are in serious doubt as to what you are inviting us
He said: "O my people, do you see that should I be upon a clarity from my Lord, and He has given me a mercy from Himself. Who would then support me against God if I disobey Him? You would only increase me in loss
And O my people, this is the camel of God, in her you have a sign. So leave her to eat from God's earth freely, and do not harm her, or else a close retribution will take you
But they slaughtered her. So he said: "Take enjoyment in your dwellings for three days. This is a promise not to be denied
So, when Our command came, We saved Saleh and those who had believed with him by a mercy from Us and against the disgrace of that day. Your Lord is the Powerful, the Noble
And those who had wronged were taken by the scream, thus they became lifeless in their homes
It is as if they had never lived there. For Thamud rejected their Lord. So away with Thamud
And Our messengers came to Abraham with good news, they said: "Peace" He said: "Peace," and he made no delay in bringing a roasted calf
But when he saw that their hands did not go towards it, he mistrusted them, and he began to have fear of them. They said: "Have no fear, we have been sent to the people of Lot
And his wife was standing, so she laughed when We gave her the good news of Isaac, and after Isaac, Jacob
She said: "O my! Shall I give birth when I am an old woman, and here is my husband an old man? This is indeed a strange thing
They said: "Do you wonder at the decree of God? The mercy of God and blessings are upon you O people of the Sanctuary. He is Praiseworthy, Glorious
So when the shock left Abraham, and the good news was delivered to him, he began to argue with Us for the people of Lot
Abraham was compassionate, kind, obedient
O Abraham, turn away from this. The command of your Lord has been passed, and a retribution that will not be turned back is coming for them
And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was grieved by them and he felt discomfort for them and he said: "This is a distressful day
And his people came rushing towards him, and before it they were committing sin, he said: "My people, these are my daughters, they are purer for you, so be aware of God and do not disgrace me regarding my guests. Is there no wise man among you
They said: "You know we have no interest in your daughters, and you are aware of what we want
He said: "If only I had strength against you, or I could find for myself some powerful support
They said: "O Lot, we are messengers of your Lord; they will not be able to harm you, so travel with your family during the cover of the night and let not any of you look back except for your wife, she will be afflicted with what they will be afflicted. Their scheduled time will be the morning. Is the morning not near
So when Our command came, We made its highest part become its lowest, and We rained on it with hardened fiery projectiles
Marked from your Lord, and they are never far from the wicked
And to Midyan was their brother Shu'ayb, he said: "My people, serve God, you have no god besides Him, and do not give short in the measure and the weight. I see you in prosperity, and I fear for you the retribution of a day that is surrounding
And my people, give full in the measure and the weight equitably, and do not hold back from the people what is theirs, and do not roam the land corrupting
What will remain for you with God is far better if you are believers. And I am not a guardian over you
They said: "O Shu'ayb, does your contact prayer order you that we leave what our fathers served, or that we do not do with our money as we please? It seems only you are the compassionate, the wise
He said: "O my people, do you see that if I am on clear evidence from my Lord, and He has provided me with good provision from Him, then I would not want to contradict by doing what I am prohibiting you from. I only want to make right what I can, and my guidance is only with God. To Him I place my trust, and to Him I repent
And my people, let not your hatred towards me incriminate you that you suffer the fate of what afflicted the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of Saleh; and the people of Lot were not far off from you
And seek forgiveness from your Lord then repent to Him. My Lord is Merciful, Loving
They said: "O Shu'ayb, we do not understand most of what you say, and we see you as weak among us; and if it were not for who your family is, we would have stoned you, and you would not be proud against us
He said: "My people, is who my family is more important to you than God, while you have cast Him away behind your backs? My Lord is encompassing what you do
And my people, continue to act as you do, and I will act. You will then come to know to whom the retribution will come to humiliate him and who is the liar. Watch then, and I will watch with you
And when Our command came, We saved Shu'ayb and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us; and the scream took those who had wronged, thus they became lifeless in their homes
It is as if they had never lived there. Away with Midyan as it was away with Thamud
And We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority
To Pharaoh and his commanders; but they followed the order of Pharaoh; and the order of Pharaoh was not wise
He will be at the head of his people on the Day of Resurrection, and he will lead them to the Fire. What a miserable place they will be brought in
And they were followed by a curse in this one, and on the Day of Resurrection. What a miserable path to follow
That is from the news of the towns which We tell to you; some are still standing and some have been wiped out
And We had not wronged them, but they had wronged themselves; their gods that they called on besides God did not rescue them at all when the command of your Lord came, and they only added to their destruction
And such is the seizing of your Lord when He seizes the towns while they are wicked. His taking is painful, severe
In this is a sign for he who fears the retribution of the Hereafter. That is a Day towards which all the people will be gathered, and that is a Day which will be witnessed
And We do not delay it except to a term already prepared for
On the Day it comes, no person will speak except with His permission. Some of them will be distraught, some will be happy
As for those who are distraught, they will be in the Fire; in it for them is a sighing and a wailing
Abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth exist, except for what your Lord wishes. Your Lord does as He pleases
As for those who are happy, they will be in the Paradise; abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth exist, except for what your Lord wishes, a giving without end
So do not be in doubt as to what these people serve. They serve nothing except what their fathers before them served. We will give them their recompense in full
And We gave Moses the Book, yet they disputed in it; and had it not been for a word which was already given by your Lord, their case would have been judged immediately. They are in grave doubt concerning it
And to each your Lord will recompense their works. He is expert in what they do
So stand straight as you were commanded, and those who have repented with you, and do not transgress. He is Seer over what you do
And do not lean towards those who have wronged else you will incur the Fire; and you will not have besides God any allies, and you will not be victorious
And hold the contact prayer at two parts of the day, and the near part of the night. The good deeds take away the bad. This is a reminder to those who remember
And be patient, for God does not waste the reward of the good doers
If only there was from the previous generations a people with wisdom who prohibited corruption on the earth, except the few that We saved of them. And those who were wicked followed the enjoyment they were in, and they were criminal
And your Lord will not destroy the towns unjustly, while its people are good doers
And if your Lord had wished, He could have made all the people one nation, but they still would have continued to disagree
Except whom your Lord has mercy upon; and for that He has created them. And the word of your Lord came true: "I will fill Hell with the Jinn and the people together
And We tell to you from the news of the messengers with which We strengthen your heart. In this has come to you the truth and a lesson and a reminder for the believers
And say to those who do not believe: "Continue to do what you will, we will also do
And wait, for we are also waiting
And to God is the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and to Him all matters return. So serve Him and put your trust in Him. Your Lord is not unaware of what you all do
ALR, these are the signs of the clarifying Book
We have sent it down an Arabic revelation, perhaps you will comprehend
We tell to you the best stories through what We have inspired to you in this Qur'an; and before it you were of those who were unaware
When Joseph said to his father: "My father, I have seen eleven planets and the sun and the moon, I saw them prostrating to me
He said: "O my son, do not tell your vision to your brothers, or they will plan against you. The devil is to man a clear enemy
And as such, your Lord has chosen you, and He teaches you the interpretation of the narrations, and He completes His blessings upon you and upon the descendants of Jacob, as He completed it for your fathers before that, Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is Knowledgeable, Wise
In Joseph and his brothers are signs for those who seek
For they said: "Joseph and his brother are more loved by our father than us, while we are a numerous group. Our father is clearly misguided
Kill Joseph or cast him in the land, so that the face of your father will be only for you, and after that you can be an upright people
One among them said: "Do not kill Joseph, but if you are going to do a thing, then cast him into the bottom of the well, so that anyone traveling by will pick him up
They said: "Our father, why do you not trust us with Joseph? And we will be giving him advice
Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and we will take care of him
He said: "It saddens me that you should take him, and I fear that the wolf will eat him if you will be absent of him
They said: "If the wolf eats him, while we are a numerous group, then we are the losers
So,when they went with him they had agreed to place him into the bottom of the well. And We inspired to him: "You will inform them of this act of theirs while they will not expect it
Andthey came to their father in the evening, crying
They said: "Our father, we went to race and left Joseph by our things, and the wolf ate him! But you would not believe us even if we were truthful
Andthey came with his shirt stained in false blood. He said: "You have invented this tale yourselves. So sweet patience, and God is sought for help against what you describe
Anda traveling caravan came and they sent their man to draw water, but when he drew he said: "Good news, there is a boy!" So they hid him as merchandise. And God is aware of what they did
Andthey sold him for a low price, a few coins of silver, and they regarded him as insignificant
Andhe from Egypt who had bought him said to his wife: "Make his stay generous, perhaps he will benefit us or we may take him as a son." And it was thus that We established Joseph in the land and to teach him the interpretation of the narrations. And God has full control over his situation, but most of the people do not know
Andwhen he reached his independence, We gave him judgement and knowledge. It is thus that We reward the good doers
Andthe woman, in whose house he was staying, attempted to seduce him away from himself. And she closed the doors and said: "I have prepared myself for you." He said: "I seek refuge with God, He is my Lord, He has made good my stay; the wicked do not succeed
Andshe was obsessed with him, and he did obsess with her - had it not been that he saw the proof of his Lord - it was thus that We turned evil and immorality away from him; he is of Our loyal servants
Andas they rushed towards the door, she tore his shirt from behind; and they found her master at the door. She said: "What is the punishment for he who wanted evil for your family? Is it not that he be imprisoned or punished painfully
He said: "She is the one who seduced me from myself," and a witness from her family gave testimony: "If his shirt was torn from the front, then she is truthful, and he is the liar
And if his shirt is torn from behind, then she is lying, and he is truthful
So when he saw that his shirt was torn from behind, he said: "This is from your female planning, your female planning is indeed great
Joseph, turn away from this. And you woman, seek forgiveness for your sin; you were of the wrongdoers
Andsome women in the city said: "The wife of the governor is trying to seduce her young man from himself; she is taken by love. We see her clearly misguided
So when she heard of their scheming, she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them, and she gave each one of them a knife. And she said: "Come out to them," so when they saw him they exalted him and cut their hands, and they said: "Praise be to God, this is not a human being, but a blessed angel
Shesaid: "This is the one whom you blamed me for, and I have seduced him from himself but he refused. And if he does not do as I command him, he will be imprisoned, and he will be one of those disgraced
He said: "My Lord, prison is better to me than what they are inviting me to do. And if You do not turn their plans away from me, I will fall for them and be of the ignorant
So his Lord responded to him, and He turned away their plans from him. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
But it appealed to them, even after they had seen the signs, to imprison him for a time
Andwith him in the prison entered two young men. One of them said: "I dreamt that I was pressing alcohol," and the other said: "I dreamt that I was carrying bread on top of my head, and that the birds were eating from it." "Tell us its interpretation, for we see that you are of the good doers
He said: "No provision of food will come to you, except that I would have informed you both about its interpretation before it comes to you. That is from what my Lord has taught me. I have just left the creed of a people who do not believe in God, and they are rejecting the Hereafter
And I have followed the creed of my fathers Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. It was not for us to set up partners with God at all. That is the blessings of God over us and over the people, but most of the people are not thankful
Omy fellow inmates, are various lords better, or God, the One, the Supreme
What you serve besides Him are nothing except names which you have created, both you and your fathers, God has not sent down any authority for such. The judgment is for none except God. He has ordered that none be served except He. That is the true system, but most of the people do not know
Myfellow inmates, one of you will be serving alcohol for his lord, while the other will be crucified so that the birds will eat from his head. The matter which you have sought is now concluded
Andhe said to the one of them whom he thought would be saved: "Mention me to your lord." But the devil made him forget to mention to his lord, so he remained in prison for a few years
Andthe king said: "I continue to dream of seven fat cows being eaten by seven thin ones, and seven green pods and others which are dry. O you commanders, tell me what my vision means if you are able to interpret the visions
They said: "It is nothing except bad dreams; and we are not knowledgeable in the interpretation of dreams
Andthe one of them who had been saved and remembered after all this time said: "I will tell you of its interpretation, so let me be sent
Joseph, O man of truth, explain to us the matter regarding seven fat cows being eaten by seven thin ones, and seven green pods and others which are dry? Then perhaps I may go back to the people so they will know
He said: "You will plant regularly for seven years, and whatever you harvest you must leave it in its pods, except for the little that you will eat
Then there will come seven after that which are severe and which will consume all that you plant except for what you have stored
Then after that will come a year in which the people will have abundant rain and which they will be able to produce once again
Andthe king said: "Bring him to me." So when the messenger came to him, he said: "Go back to your lord and ask him what was the matter regarding the women who cut their hands? Indeed, my Lord is aware of their plans
He said: "What is your plea that you tried to seduce Joseph from himself?" They said: "God be sought! We know of no evil on his part." The wife of the governor said: "Now the truth must be known, I did seek to seduce Joseph from himself and he is of the truthful ones
That is so he knows that I will not betray him while he is not present and that God does not guide the planning of the betrayers
And I do not make myself free of blame, for the soul is inclined to sin, except that which my Lord has mercy upon. My Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
Andthe king said: "Bring him to me so that I may employ him to my person." So when he spoke to him, he said: "Today you are with us in a high standing and trusted
He said: "Appoint me over the granaries of the land, for I know how to keep records and I am knowledgeable
Andit was such that We gave Joseph authority in the land, to travel in it as he pleases. We bestow Our mercy upon whom We please, and We do not waste the reward of the good doers
Andthe reward of the Hereafter is better for those who believe and are aware
Andthe brothers of Joseph came and entered upon him, and he recognized them, but they did not recognize him
So,when he furnished them with their provisions, he said: "Bring me a brother of yours who is from your father. Do you not see that I give full measure of grain and that I am the best of hosts
But if you do not bring him to me, then there shall be no measure of grain for you with me, and do not come near me
They said: "We will try to get him away from his father, and we shall be successful
Andhe said to his servants: "Return their goods into their saddlebags, so that they may recognize it when they return to their family so that they may come back
So when they returned to their father, they said: "Our father, we have been banned from getting anymore measure of grain, so send our brother with us so we may be given a measure of grain, and we will be his guardians
He said: "Shall I trust him with you as I trusted you with Joseph before that? God is the best guardian, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy
So when they opened their baggage, they found their goods had been returned to them, and they said: "Our father, what more can we desire, these are our goods returned to us, so we can get more for our family, and be guardians over our brother, and increase a measure of grain to load a camel. That is truly an easy measure
He said: "I will not send him with you until you come to me with a covenant to God that you will bring him back unless you are completely overtaken." So when they brought him their covenant, he said: "God is placed in trust over what we say
Andhe said: "My sons, do not enter from one gate, but enter from separate gates; and I cannot avail you anything against God, for the judgment is to God. In Him I place my trust, and in Him those who place their trust should trust
Andwhen they entered from where their father had commanded them, it would not have availed them in the least against God, but it was out of a concern in the soul of Jacob that he brought out. And he is with knowledge for what We taught him, but most of the people do not know
Andwhen they entered upon Joseph, he called his brother to himself and said: "I am your brother, so do not be saddened by what they have done
So when he furnished them with their provisions, he placed the measuring bowl in the saddlebag of his brother, then a caller cried out: "O you in the caravan, you are thieves
They said, while coming towards them: "What is it you are missing
They said: "We are missing the measuring bowl of the king, and whoever can produce it, will be given the load of a camel; and I will be bound by this
They said: "By God, you know we have not come to cause corruption in the land, and we are not thieves
They said: "What shall be the punishment, if you are not truthful
They said: "The punishment is that he in whose saddlebag it is found will himself serve as the punishment. It is so that we punish the wicked
So he began with their bags before the bag of his brother. Then he brought it out of the bag of his brother. It was such that We planned for Joseph, for he would not have been able to take his brother under the system of the king, except that God wished it so. We raise the degrees of whom We please, and over every one of knowledge is the All Knowledgeable
They said: "If he has stolen, there was a brother of his before who also had stolen." Joseph kept this all inside himself, and did not reveal anything to them. He said: "You are in an awkward position, and God best knows what you describe
They said: "O governor, he has an elderly father, so take one of us in his place. Indeed we see you as one of the good doers
He said: "Refuge is sought with God that we would take anyone except he whom we found our belongings with. Indeed, we would then be wrong doers
So when they gave-up from him, they held a conference in private. The eldest of them said: "Did you not know that your father has taken a covenant over you with God, and before this you also failed in your duty with Joseph? I will not leave this land until my father permits me to do so or that God will judge for me. He is the best of judges
Return to your father, and tell him: "Our father, your son has stolen, and we did not witness except what we learned, and we could not know the unseen
And ask the people of the town which we were in, and the caravan which we have returned with. We are being truthful
He said: "No, for it is your own souls that have conspired you to this. So patience is most fitting, perhaps God will bring them all to me. He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise
Andhe turned away from them and said: "Oh, my sorrow over Joseph." And his eyes turned white from sadness, and he became blind
They said: "By God, you will never cease to remember Joseph until you become senile or become dead
He said: "I merely complain my grief and sorrow to God, and I know from God what you do not know
Mysons, go and inquire about Joseph and his brother, and do not despair from the spirit of God. The only ones who would despair from the spirit of God are the people who are rejecters
So when they entered upon him, they said: "O governor, we have been afflicted with harm, us and our family, and we have come with poor goods to trade, so give us a measure of grain, and be charitable towards us, for God rewards the charitable
He said: "Do you know what you have done with Joseph and his brother, while you were ignorant
They said: "Are you indeed Joseph?" He said: "I am Joseph, and this is my brother. God has been gracious to us. For anyone who reverences and is patient, God will not waste the reward of the good doers
They said: "By God, God has indeed preferred you over us and we have been wrongdoers
He said: "There is no blame on you this day, may God forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy
Take this shirt of mine and cast it over the face of my father, and he will have sight; and bring to me all your family
Andwhen the caravan departed, their father said: "I do indeed feel the scent of Joseph, except that you may think me senile
They said: "By God, you are back to your old misguidance
Then, when the bearer of good news came, he cast it over his face and he regained sight. He said: "Did I not tell you that I know from God what you do not know
They said: "Our father, ask forgiveness for our sins, indeed we were wrongdoers
He said: "I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord, He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
So when they entered upon Joseph, he took his parents to him and he said: "Enter Egypt, God willing, in security
And he raised his parents upon the throne, and they fell in prostration to Him. And he said: "My father, this is the interpretation of my vision from before. My Lord has made it true, and He has been good to me that he took me out of prison and brought you out of the wilderness after the devil had made bitterness between me and my brothers. My Lord is Kind to whom He wills. He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise
My Lord, You have given me sovereignty and taught me the interpretation of the narrations. Initiator of the heavens and the earth, You are my protector in this world and the Hereafter. Let me die as one who has submitted, and join me with the good doers
Thatis from the news of the unseen that We inspire to you. You were not among them when they arranged their plan and were scheming
And most of the people, even if you are diligent, will not believe
And you are not asking them for any wage, it is but a reminder to the worlds
And how many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by, while they are turning away from it
And most of them will not believe in God except while setting up partners
Are they secure against the coming of an enveloping retribution from God, or that the Hour will come to them suddenly while they do not perceive
Say:"This is my way, I invite to God in full disclosure, myself and whoever follows me. And glory be to God; and I am not of the polytheists
And We have not sent before you except men, to whom We gave inspiration, from the people of the towns. Will they not roam the earth and see how was the punishment of those before them? And the abode of the Hereafter is far better for those who are aware. Do you not comprehend
Then, when the messengers gave up, and they thought that they have been denied, Our victory came to them. We then save whom We wish, and Our punishment cannot be swayed from the wicked people
In their stories is a lesson for those who possess intelligence. It is not a narration that has been invented, but an authentication of what is between his hands and a detailing of all things, and a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe
ALMR, these are the signs of the Book. And what has been sent down to you from your Lord is the truth; but most of the people do not believe
God, Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see, then He settled upon the Throne, and He commissioned the sun and the moon, each running for an appointed term. He manages all affairs, and He details the signs so that you will be aware of the meeting with your Lord
And He is the One who has spread out the land, and made in it stabilizers and rivers, and all the fruits He made in pairs. The night covers the day. In that are signs for a people who think
And on the earth are neighboring pieces of land with gardens of grapes and plants and palm trees, some of which may be twin sharing the same root, or single, even though they are being watered with the same water source; and We make preference for some of them over others in what they consume. In that are signs for a people who comprehend
And if you are surprised, then what is more surprising is their saying: "Can it be that when we are dust, we will be created anew!" These are the ones who have rejected their Lord, and they will have shackles around their necks, and they are the dwellers of the Fire, in it they will abide
And they hasten towards you with evil before good, and the examples of those before them have already been given. And your Lord is with forgiveness towards the people for their transgression, and your Lord is severe in retribution
And those who reject say: "If only a sign was sent down to him from his Lord." You are but a warner, and to every people is a guide
God knows what every female carries, and how short her pregnancy is or how long. And everything with Him is measured
The Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Great, the Most High
It is the same whether any of you openly declares what he says, or conceals it; whether he is hiding in the night or going openly in the day
Present with him and behind him are retainers, they preserve him from the command of God. God does not change the condition of a people until they change the condition of their souls. And if God wanted to harm a people, then there is no turning Him back, nor will they have any protector against Him
He is the One who shows you the lightning, giving you fear and hope. And He establishes the heavy clouds
Andthe thunder glorifies His praise, and the angels are in awe of Him, and He sends the thunderbolts, and strikes with them whom He wills. Yet they are still arguing regarding God, while He is severe in punishment
To Him is the call of truth. And those who are called on besides Him, they will not respond to them in anything; like one who places his hands openly in the water to drink, except it never reaches his mouth. The call of the rejecters is nothing but in misguidance
Andto God will prostrate all who are in the heavens and the earth, willingly and unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening
Say: "Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?" Say: "God." Say: "Have you taken besides Him allies who do not possess for themselves any benefit or harm?" Say: "Is the blind and the seer the same? Or do the darkness and the light equate? Or have they set up partners with God who have created like His creation, so the creations all seemed the same to them?" Say: "God has created all things, and He is the One, the Supreme
He sends down water from the sky, so valleys flow according to their capacity, and the flood produces foam. And from what they burn to smelt jewelry or goods is produced a similar foam. It is in such a manner that God strikes the falsehood with the truth. As for the foam, it passes away, and as for what benefits the people, it remains in the earth. It is such that God puts forth the examples
Forthose who have responded to their Lord is goodness. As for those who have not responded to Him, if they had all that is on the earth twice over, they would ransom it to be saved. For these will be a terrible reckoning, and their abode is Hell; what a miserable abode
Is he who knows that the truth has been sent down to you from your Lord like he who is blind? Only those who possess intelligence will remember
Those who fulfill the pledge of God, and they do not break the covenant
Andthose who deliver what God has ordered to be delivered, and they are concerned towards their Lord and they fear a terrible reckoning
Andthose who are patient seeking the face of their Lord; and they hold the contact prayer, and they spend from what We have bestowed upon them secretly and openly, and they counter evil with good; these will have an excellent abode
The gardens of delight; which they will enter with those who are good doers from their fathers and their mates and their progeny. And the angels will enter upon them from every gate
Peace be upon you for what you have been patient for. Excellent indeed is the final abode
As for those who break their pledge with God after having made its covenant, and they withhold what God has ordered to be delivered, and they cause corruption on the earth; upon those is a curse and they will have a miserable abode
Godgives the provisions for whom He wishes, and He is Capable. And they were happy with the worldly life, but the worldly life compared to the Hereafter is nothing except a brief enjoyment
Andthose who have rejected say: "If only a sign were sent down to him from his Lord!" Say: "God misguides whom He wishes and guides to Him whoever is repenting
The ones who have believed, and their hearts are relieved by the remembrance of God; for in the remembrance of God the hearts are relieved
The ones who have believed, and have done good works, there will be happiness for them and a wonderful abode
Thus, We have sent you to a nation, as with other nations before it, so that you may recite to them that which has been inspired to you; while they are still rejecting the Almighty. Say: "He is my Lord, there is no god except He, in Him I place my trust and to Him is my repentance
Andif a revelation were to be used to move mountains, or to slice the earth, or the dead were spoken to with it! Indeed, to God are all matters. Did not those who have believed know that if God had wished He would have guided all the people? As for those who reject, they continue to be stricken with disaster or it comes near to their homes, until the promise of God comes true. God does not break the appointment
Andmessengers before you were mocked, but I gave time to those who had rejected, then I took them; so how was My punishment
It is He who is standing upon every soul for what it has earned; yet they set up partners with God. Say: "Name them?" Or are you informing Him of what He does not know on the earth or is it just a show of words? Indeed, to the rejecters, their scheming is made to appear pleasing, and they are repelled from the path. And whoever God misguides will have no guide
They will have a punishment in the worldly life, and the punishment of the Hereafter is more difficult. And they will have no defender against God
Theexample of the Paradise which the righteous are promised, is that rivers flow beneath it, and its provisions are continuous as is its shade. Such is the abode of those who were righteous, while the abode of the rejecters is the Fire
Andthose to whom We have previously given the Book rejoice at what has been sent down to you, but there are some from the Confederates who reject parts of it. Say: "I am only ordered to serve God and not set up any partner with Him. Towards Him I implore and towards Him is the return
Andas such, We have sent it down a law which is in Arabic. And if you follow their desires after what has come to you of the knowledge, then you will not have any ally or defender against God
AndWe have sent messengers before you and We have made for them mates and offspring. It was not for a messenger to come with any sign except with the permission of God; for each period there is a Book
Goderases and confirms what He wishes, and with Him is the source of the Book
Andif We show you some of what We promise them, or We terminate your life, then you are only to deliver while for Us is the reckoning
Do they not see that We come to the land and reduce it from its ends? And God gives judgment and there is none to override His judgment. And He is swift to reckoning
Andthose before them had schemed, but to God is all scheming. He knows what every soul earns and the rejecters will come to know to whom is the better abode
Andthose who reject say: "You are not a messenger." Say: "God is enough as a witness between me and you; the One who has the knowledge of the Book
ALR, a Book which We have sent down to you so that you may bring the people out of the darkness and into the light with the permission of their Lord, to the path of the Noble, the Praiseworthy
God, to whom belong all that is in the heavens and the earth. And woe to the rejecters from a severe retribution
The ones who have preferred the worldly life over the Hereafter, and they repel from the path of God, and they seek to make it crooked. Those are the ones who are in misguidance
And We have not sent any messenger except in the language of his people, so he may clarify for them. But God misguides whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. And He is the Noble, the Wise
And We sent Moses with Our signs: "You shall bring your people out of the darkness and into the light, and remind them of the days of God." In this are signs for everyone patient and thankful
And Moses said to his people: "Remember the blessings of God upon you that He saved you from the people of Pharaoh; they were afflicting you with the worst punishment, and they used to slaughter your children, and rape your women. And in that was a great test from your Lord
And your Lord proclaimed: "If you give thanks, I will increase for you, but if you are rejecting, then My retribution is severe
And Moses said: "If you reject, you and all who are on the earth together, then know that God is Rich, Praiseworthy
Did not news come to you of those before you: the people of Noah, and 'Aad, and Thamud, and those after them whom none know except God? Their messengers came to them with clarity, but they placed their hands onto their mouths and said: "We are rejecting what you have been sent with, and we are in doubt as to what you are inviting us to
Their messengers said: "Is there doubt regarding God, the initiator of the heavens and the earth? He invites you so that He may forgive some of your sins, and delay you to an appointed term." They said: "You are merely human beings like us; you wish to turn us away from what our fathers used to serve. So come to us with a clear proof
Their messengers said: "We are indeed human beings like you, but God will bestow His grace upon whom He pleases from His servants. And it is not up to us to bring you proof except with the permission of God. And in God the believers should place their trust
And why should we not place our trust in God, when He has guided us in our paths. And we will be patient to the harm you inflict upon us. And in God those who trust should place their trust
Andthose who rejected said to their messengers: "We will expel you from our land, or you will return to our creed." It was then that their Lord inspired to them: "We will destroy the wicked
And We will let you reside in the land after them. That is for those who fear My station and fear My warning
Andthey sought victory, and every arrogant tyrant was then made to lose
From behind him is Hell, and he will be poured from a putrid water
He tries to drink it, but it cannot be swallowed, and death comes to him from everywhere, but he will not die; and from behind him is a powerful retribution
Theexample of those who reject their Lord is that their works are like ashes, upon which the wind blows strongly on a stormy day, they cannot get anything of what they earned. Such is the farthest misguidance
Didyou not see that God created the heavens and the earth with the truth? If He wished, He would remove you and bring a new creation
Andthat for God is not difficult to do
Andthey appeared before God, all of them. And the weak ones said to those who were arrogant: "We were following you, so will you avail us anything from the retribution of God?" They said: "If God had guided us, then we would have guided you. It makes no difference if we cry out or are patient, for we have no refuge
Andthe devil said when the matter was complete: "God had promised you the promise of truth, and I promised you and broke my promise. And I had no power over you except that I invited you and you responded to me. So do not blame me, but blame yourselves; I cannot help you nor can you help me. I reject that you have set me up as a partner before this; the wicked will have a painful retribution
Andthose who believed and did good works were admitted to estates with rivers flowing beneath them. In them they will abide with the permission of their Lord. Their greeting therein is "Peace
Have you not seen how God puts forth the example that a good word is like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in the sky
It bears its fruit every so often with the permission of its Lord; and God puts forth the examples for the people, perhaps they will remember
Andthe example of a bad word is like a tree which has been uprooted from the surface of the earth, it has nowhere to settle
Godmakes firm those who believe with firm sayings in the worldly life, and in the Hereafter. And God misguides the wicked, and God does what He wishes
Didyou not see those who replaced the blessings of God with rejection, and they caused their people to dwell in the abode of destruction
Hell is where they will burn, what a miserable place to settle
Andthey made to God equals in order that they may misguide from His path. Say: "Enjoy, for your destiny is to the Fire
Sayto My servants who believe, that they should hold the contact prayer, and spend from what provisions We granted them secretly and openly, before a Day comes when there is no trade therein, nor will there be any friends
Godis the One who has created the heavens and the earth, and He has sent down water from the sky thus bringing out with it fruits as provisions for you, and He has commissioned for you the ships to run in the sea by His command, and He has commissioned for you the rivers
AndHe has commissioned for you the sun and the moon, in continuity; and He has commissioned for you the night and the day
AndHe has given you from all that you have asked Him. And if you count the blessings of God, you will not be able to number them. Man is indeed transgressing, disbelieving
AndAbraham said: "My Lord, make this a land of peace, and keep me and my sons away from serving statues
MyLord, they have misguided many from among the people. So, whoever follows me, then he is of me, and whoever disobeys me, then You are Forgiving, Merciful
OurLord, I have resided part of my progeny in a barren valley near your Restricted Sanctuary. Our Lord, that they may hold the contact prayer, so let the hearts of the people incline towards them and give provisions to them of the fruits that they may give thanks
Our Lord, you know what we hide and what we declare. And nothing at all is hidden from God on the earth or in the heavens
Praise be to God who has granted me to my old age Ishmael and Isaac; my Lord is Hearer of the prayer
MyLord, let me hold the contact prayer, and also from my progeny. Our Lord, and accept my prayer
Our Lord, forgive me and my parents, and the believers on the Day the judgment is called
Anddo not think that God is unaware of what the wicked do. He is merely delaying them to a Day when all eyes are watching
They will approach with their heads bowed, and their eyes will not blink, and their hearts will be void
Andwarn the people of the Day when the retribution will come to them, and those who have been wicked will say: "Our Lord, delay this for us until a short time, and we will heed your call and follow the messengers!" Did you not swear before this that you would last forever
Andyou resided in the dwellings of those who had wronged themselves, and it was made clear to you what We did to them; and We had put forth the examples for you
Andthey schemed their scheming, and their scheming is known to God; and their scheming was enough to make the mountains cease to exist
So do not think that God will fail to keep His promise to His messengers. God is Noble, capable of seeking revenge
TheDay the earth is replaced with another earth, as are the heavens, and they will appear before God, the One, the Supreme
Andyou will see the criminals that Day bound together in fetters
Their clothes will be of tar, and the fire will overwhelm their faces
Thus God will recompense every soul for what it had earned. God is swift to reckoning
This is a proclamation for the people and so that they are warned with it, and so that they know that there is but One god, and so that those who possess intelligence will remember
ALR, these are the signs of the Book, and a clear Qur'an
Ultimately, those who have rejected will wish they had submitted
Leave them to eat and enjoy, and let them be preoccupied with wishful thinking. They will come to know
Wehave not destroyed any town except that it had an appointed time
Nonation can quicken its fate, nor can they delay it
And they said: "O you upon whom the Reminder has been sent down, you are crazy
Why not bring us the angels if you are of the truthful ones
Wedo not send down the angels except with the truth, and then they would have no more delay
Indeed it is Wewho have sent down the Reminder, and indeed it is We who will preserve it
AndWe had sent before you, among the groups of old
And no messenger would come to them, except that they would mock him
It is such that We let it seep into the hearts of the criminals
They do not believe in it, while the way of the earlier generations has gone before
Andif We opened for them a gate in the heaven and they were to continue ascending into it
They would have said: "Our sight has been fogged. No, we are a people being bewitched
AndWe have placed towers in the heaven and We have made them pleasant to the onlookers
AndWe have guarded it from every outcast devil
Except he who manages to eavesdrop, he will be pursued by a visible flame
Andthe land We have stretched, and placed stabilizers in it, and We have planted in it from everything in balance
AndWe have made for you in it a habitat, and for those to whom you are not providers
Andthere is not a thing, except that We have vaults of it, and We do not send it down except in a precise measure
AndWe send the winds to pollinate, so We send down water from the sky, so We give to you to drink; and it is not you who are its storers
Andit is indeed We who bring to life and make to die, and We are the inheritors
AndWe know those who have advanced among you, and We know those who have lagged
Andit is your Lord who will gather them. He is Wise, Knowledgeable
AndWe have created man from a sludge from hot sediment
Andthe Jinn, We created him before that from the fire of the fierce hot winds
Andyour Lord said to the angels: "I am creating a human being from a sludge from hot sediment
Sowhen I evolve him, and blow from My Spirit in him, you shall yield to him
Thus, all of the angels yielded
Except for Satan, he refused to be of those who yielded
He said: "O Satan, what is the matter that you are not of those who yielded
He said: "I am not to yield to a human being whom You have created from a sludge from hot sediment
He said: "Exit from here, you are cast out
And a curse shall be upon you until the Day of Recompense
He said: "My Lord, respite me until the Day they are resurrected
He said: "You are given respite
Until the Day of the time appointed
He said: "My Lord, for that by which You have caused me to be misled, I will beautify for them what is on the earth, and I will mislead them all
Except Your servants from among them, the devoted ones
He said: "This shall be a straight path to Me
For My servants, you shall have no authority over them, except those who are misled and follow you
And that Hell shall be their appointment, all of them
Ithas seven gates, for every gate will be an assigned segment from them
Therighteous will be in gardens and springs
Enter it in peace and security
AndWe removed what animosity was in their chests, they are brothers in quarters facing one another
No fatigue shall touch them, nor will they be evicted from it
Inform My servants that I am the Forgiver, the Merciful
Andthat My punishment is a painful retribution
Andinform them of the guests of Abraham
When they entered upon him, they said: "Peace." He said: "We are worrisome of you
They said: "Do not worry, we bring you good news of a knowledgeable son
He said: "What good news can you bring me when old age has come upon me? Is that your good news
They said: "We have brought you good news with the truth, so do not be of those in denial
He said: "And who would deny the mercy of his Lord except the misguided ones
He said: "What then is your affair, O messengers
They said: "We have been sent to a people who are criminals
Except for the family of Lot, we will save them all
Except for his wife, we have evaluated that she will be with those destroyed
So when the messengers came to the family of Lot
He said: "You are an unknown people
They said: "Alas, we have come to you with that which they are doubting
And we have come to you with the truth, and we are forthcoming
Solet your family leave during the late hours of the night, and you follow just behind them, and do not let any of you look back, and go to where you are commanded
AndWe made the matter known to him, that the remainder of these people would be wiped out by the morning
Andthe people of the city came seeking good news
He said: "These are my guests, so do not embarrass me
And be aware of God, and do not disgrace me
They said: "Did we not prohibit you from the world
He said: "Here are my daughters if it is your intention
By your life, they are in their intoxication, blundering
So the scream took them at sunrise
Thus We made its highest part become its lowest, and We rained upon them fiery projectiles
In this are signs for those who see
Andit was on an established path
In that is a sign for the believers
Andthe people of the Sycamore were wicked
So,We sought revenge from them. And they are in a clear ledger
Andthe dwellers of the enclosure disbelieved the messengers
AndWe gave them Our signs, but they turned away from them
Andthey used to carve from the mountains homes, to be secure
So the scream took them in the morning
What benefit did what they earn make for them
AndWe have not created the heavens and the earth and what is in between except with the truth. And the Hour is coming, so overlook their faults gracefully
Your Lord is the Creator, the Knower
And We have given you seven of the pairs, and the great Qur'an
Do not linger with your eyes on what We have bestowed upon some couples from them, and do not grieve for them, and lower your wing for the believers
Andsay: "I am the clarifying warner
As for the dividers in what We sent down
Theones who have made the Qur'an partial
By your Lord, We will ask them all
Regarding what they used to do
So proclaim what you have been commanded and turn away from the polytheists
We will relieve you from those who mocked
Those who place with God another god. They will come to know
AndWe know that your chest is strained by what they say
So glorify the praiseof your Lord, and be of those who prostrate
Andserve your Lord until certainty comes to you
The command of God will come, so do not hasten it. Be He glorified and exalted above the partners they set up
He sends down the angels with the Spirit by His command upon whom He wishes of His servants: "That you shall warn that there is no god except I, so be aware of Me
He has created the heavens and the earth with the truth. Be He exalted above the partners they set up
He has created man from a seed, but then he becomes clearly in opposition
And the livestock He has created them for you, in them is warmth and benefits, and from them you eat
And for you in them is beauty, when you relax and when you travel
And they carry your loads to a land that you would not have been able to reach except with great strain. Your Lord is Compassionate, Merciful
And the horses and the mules and the donkeys, that you may ride them and as an adornment; and He creates what you do not know
And upon God the path is sought; and from it are deviations. And if He had wished, He could have guided you all
He is the One who has sent down water from the sky for you, from it you drink, and from it are woods in which you pasture
He brings forth with it the vegetation and the olives and the palm trees and the grapes, and of all the fruits; in that are signs for a people who think
And He has commissioned for you the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, and the stars are commissioned by His command. In that are signs for a people who comprehend
And what He has placed for you on the earth in various colors.In that are signs for a people who remember
And He is the One who has commissioned the sea, that you may eat from it a tender meat, and that you may extract from it pearls that you wear. And you see the ships flowing through it, so that you may seek from His bounty, and that you may be thankful
And He has cast onto the earth stabilizers so that it would not tumble with you, and rivers, and paths, perhaps you will be guided
And landmarks, and by the star they are guided
Is He who creates the same he who does not create? Will you not remember
And if you count the blessings of God, you will not be able to number them. God is Forgiving, Merciful
And God knows what you conceal and what you reveal
As for those they call on besides God, they do not create a thing, but are themselves created
They are dead, not alive, and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected
Your god is One god. Those who do not believe in the Hereafter, their hearts are denying, and they are arrogant
Certainly, God knows what they hide and what they reveal. He does not like the arrogant
And if they are told: "What has your Lord sent down?" They say: "Fictional tales of old
They will carry their burdens in full on the Day of Resurrection, and also from the burdens of those whom they misguided without knowledge. Evil indeed is what they bear
Those before them had schemed, so God came to their buildings from the foundation, thus the roof fell on top of them; and the retribution came to them from where they did not know
Then, on the Day of Resurrection He will humiliate them, and say: "Where are My partners regarding whom you used to dispute?" Those who have received the knowledge said: "The humiliation today and the misery are upon the rejecters
Those whom their lives are terminated by the angels, while they had wronged themselves: "Amnesty, we have not done any evil!" "Alas, God is aware of what you have done
So enter the gates of Hell, in it you shall reside; such is the abode of the arrogant
And it was said to those who were righteous: "What has your Lord sent down?" They said: "All goodness." For those who have done good in this world there is good; and the Hereafter is goodness. Excellent indeed is the home of the righteous
Gardens of delight; which they will enter, with rivers flowing beneath them, in it they will have what they wish. It is such that God rewards the righteous
Those whom their lives are terminated by the angels, while they had been good, they will say: "Peace be upon you, enter the Paradise because of that which you have done
Are they waiting for the angels to come for them, or a command from your Lord? It was exactly the same as what those before them did. God did not wrong them, but it was their own souls that they wronged
Thus is was, that the evil of their work has afflicted them, and they will be surrounded by that which they used to mock
And those who were polytheists said: "If God had wished, we would not have served a thing other than Him; neither us nor our fathers; nor would we have made unlawful anything other than from Him." Those before them did exactly the same thing; so are the messengers required to do anything except deliver with clarity
And We have sent a messenger to every nation: "You shall serve God and avoid evil." Some of them were guided by God, and some of them deserved to be misguided. So travel the earth, and see how the punishment was of those who denied
If you are concerned for their guidance, God does not guide whom He misguides; and they will have no supporters
And they swore by God, in their strongest oaths, that God will not resurrect he who dies. No, it is a promise of truth upon Him, but most of the people do not know
So that He will clarify for them that in which they have disputed, and so that those who have rejected will know that they were liars
Indeed, Our saying to a thing, if We wanted it, is that We say to it: 'Be,' and it is
And those who have emigrated for God, after they were oppressed, We will grant them good in the world, and the reward of the Hereafter will be greater, if only they knew
Those who are patient, and put their trust in their Lord
And We did not send any except men before you whom We inspired, so ask the people who have received the Reminder if you do not know
With proofs and the scriptures. And We sent down to you the Reminder to reveal to the people what was sent to them, and perhaps they will think
Have those who schemed evil guaranteed that God will not make the earth swallow them, or the retribution come to them from where they do not expect
Or that He will take them in their sleep? For they cannot stop it
Or that He will take them while they are in a state of fear? Your Lord is Compassionate, Merciful
Have they not seen that what God has created of a thing, its shadow inclines to the right and the left in prostration to God; and they are humbled
And to God prostrate all those in the heavens and all those on the earth, from the creatures and the angels, and they are not arrogant
They fear their Lord from above them, and they do what they are commanded
And God said: "Do not take two gods, there is only One god, so it is Me that you shall reverence
And to Him is what is in the heavens and the earth, and the system shall be to Him. Is it other than God that you shall be aware of
And any blessing that is with you is from God. Then, when harm afflicts you, to Him you cry out
Then, when He removes the harm from you, a group of you set up partners with their Lord
So they reject what We have given them. Enjoy, for you will come to know
And they allocate a portion from what We provide for them to that which they have no knowledge of. By God, you will be asked about the lies you have invented
And they assign daughters to God; be He glorified; and to them is what they desire
And when one of them is given news of a female, his face becomes darkened and he is in grief
He hides from his people because of the bad news he has received. Shall he keep her with dishonor, or bury her in the sand? Miserable indeed is how they judge
To those who do not believe in the Hereafter is the worst example, and to God is the highest example, and He is the Noble, the Wise
And if God were to call the people to account for their transgression, He would not have left on it a single creature. But He delays them to a determined time; so when their time comes, they do not delay by one hour and they do not advance
And they assign to God what they hate, and their tongues describe with lies that they will have what is good. No doubt they will have the Fire, for they have rebelled
By God, We had sent to nations before you, but the devil adorned their work for them. So he is their ally today, and they will have a painful retribution
And We have not sent down the Book to you except that you may clarify for them that in which they have disputed, and as a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe
And God has sent down water from the sky, so He revives the land with it after its death. In that is a sign for a people who listen
And for you there is a lesson in the livestock; We give you to drink from what is in its belly between the digested food and the blood, a pure milk which is relieving for the drinkers
And from the fruits of the palm trees and the grapes you make strong drink and a good provision. In that is a sign for a people who comprehend
And your Lord inspired to the bees: "You shall take homes of the mountains and of the trees and of what they erect
Then you shall eat from every fruit, so seek the path your Lord has made easy." From its belly will emerge a liquid that has different colors, in it is a healing for the people. In that is a sign for a people who will think
And God has created you, then He will terminate your lives. And some of you will continue to old age so that he will not know anything more after his knowledge. God is Knowledgeable, Capable
And God has preferred some of you over others in provision. Yet, those who have been preferred will not relinquish their provision to those who are maintained by their oaths, that they may become equal in it. Is it the favor of God that they deny
And God has made for you mates from among yourselves, and He has made from your mates sons and grandchildren, and He has provided you from the good provisions. Is it the falsehood that they believe in,while the favor of God they reject
And they serve besides God that which does not and cannot possess anything of the provisions from the heaven or the earth
So do not give examples to God. God knows while you do not know
God puts forth the example of a slave who is owned and cannot achieve anything, against one whom We have provided a good provision which he spends of it secretly and openly. Are they the same? Praise be to God, but most of them do not know
And God puts forth the example of two men, one of them is mute and he cannot achieve anything, and he is a burden to his guardian. Wherever he points him, he does not come with any good. Is he the same as one who orders good and he is upon a straight path
And to God is the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and the matter of the Hour is like the blink of the eye or nearer. God is capable of all things
And God brought you out of the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing. And He has made for you the hearing and the eyesight and the heart, perhaps you would be thankful
Have they not looked at the birds held in the atmosphere of the sky? No one holds them up except God. In that are signs for a people who believe
And God has made your homes a habitat, and He has made for you from the hides of the livestock homes which you find light when you travel and when you camp; and from its wool, fur, and hair you make furnishings and goods, until a time
And God has made for you shade from what He has created, and He has made from the mountains a refuge for you, and He has made for you garments which protect you from the heat, and garments which protect you from attack. It is such that He completes His blessings upon you, that perhaps you may submit
So if they turn away, then you are only required to deliver clearly
They recognize the blessings of God, then they deny them. And most of them are rejecters
And the Day We send from every nation a witness, then those who have rejected will not be given leave, nor will they be allowed to repent
And then those who were wicked will see the retribution; it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be given respite
And when those who were polytheists saw their partners, they said: "Our Lord, these are our partners that we used to call upon besides You." But they returned in answer to them: "You are liars
And they offered submission to God on that Day; and what they had invented abandoned them
Those who rejected, and repelled others from the path of God, We have added them retribution over the retribution, for what they had corrupted
And the Day We send to every nation a witness against them from themselves, and We have brought you as a witness against these. And We have sent down to you the Book as a clarification for all things, and a guidance and a mercy and good tidings to those who have submitted
God orders justice and goodness and that you shall help your relatives, and He prohibits immorality and vice and transgression. He warns you that you may remember
And fulfill your pledge to God when you pledge so, and do not break your oath after making it, for you have made God a sponsor over you. God is aware of what you do
And do not be like she who unraveled her knitting after it had become strong, by breaking your oaths as a means of deception between you. That a nation shall be more numerous than another nation, for God puts you to the test by it. And He will show you on the Day of Resurrection that which you were disputing in
And if God had wished, He would have made you one nation, but He misguides whom He wishes, and He guides whom He wishes. And you will be asked about what you used to do
And do not use your oaths as a means of deception between you, that a foot will slip after it has been made firm, and you will taste the evil of turning away from the path of God, and you will have a great retribution
And do not purchase with the pledge of God a cheap price. What is with God is far better for you if you know
What you have will run out, while what God has will remain. And We will deliver to those who are patient their reward for the best of what they used to do
Whoever does good works, whether male or female, and is a believer, We will give him a good life and We will reward them their dues with the best of what they used to do
When you read the Qur'an, you shall seek refuge with God from the outcast devil
He has no authority over those who believe, and who put their trust in their Lord
His authority is over those who follow him, and set him up as a partner
And if We exchange a revelation in place of another revelation; and God is more aware of what He is revealing; they say: "You are making this up!" Alas, most of them do not know
Say: "The Holy Spirit has brought it down from your Lord with the truth, so that those who believe will be strengthened, and as a guidance and good news for those who have submitted
And We are aware that they say: "A human being is teaching him." The tongue of the one they refer to is foreign, while this is a clear Arabic tongue
Those who do not believe in the revelations of God, God will not guide them, and they will have a painful retribution
Inventing fabrications is only done by those who do not believe in the revelations of God; and these are the liars
Whoever rejects God after having believed - except for he who is forced while his heart is still content with belief - and has comforted his chest towards rejection, then these will have a wrath from God and they will have a great retribution
That is because they have preferred the worldly life over the Hereafter, and God does not guide the rejecting people
Those are the ones whom God has stamped on their hearts, and their hearing, and their sight, and these are the unaware ones
Without doubt, in the Hereafter they are the losers
Then your Lord is; for those who emigrated after they were persecuted, then they strived and were patient; your Lord is, after that, Forgiver, Merciful
The Day every soul will come to argue for itself, and every soul will be paid in full for what it did, and they will not be wronged
And God puts forth the example of a town which was peaceful and content, its provisions were coming to it bountifully from all places, but then it rebelled against the blessings of God, and God made it taste hunger and fear for what they used to do
And a messenger came to them from themselves, but they denied him, so the punishment took them while they were wicked
So eat from what God has provided you, that which is good and lawful, and be thankful for the blessing of God, if it is indeed He whom you serve
He has only forbidden for you what is already dead, and the blood, and the meat of pig, and what was dedicated to other than God. But whoever is forced to, without seeking disobedience or transgression, then God is Forgiver, Merciful
And do not say, as to what your tongues falsely describe: "This is lawful, and that is forbidden;" that you seek to invent lies about God. Those who invent lies about God will not succeed
A small enjoyment, and they will have a painful retribution
And for those who are Jewish, We forbade what We told to you before. And We did not wrong them, but they were wronging themselves
Then your Lord to those who do evil out of ignorance, then they repent after that and they make good, your Lord after that is Forgiver, Merciful
Abraham was a nation, dutiful to God, a monotheist, and he was not of the polytheists
Thankful for His blessings. He chose him and guided him to a straight path
And We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter he is of the upright ones
Then We inspired to you: "You shall follow the creed of Abraham, monotheism, and he was not of the polytheists
Indeed, the Sabbath was only decreed for those who had disputed in it, and your Lord will judge between them for that in which they had disputed
Invite to the path of your Lord with wisdom and good advice, and argue with them in that which is better. Your Lord is fully aware of who is misguided from His path, and He is fully aware of the guided ones
And if you punish, then punish with equivalence to that which you were punished. And if you are patient then it is better for the patient ones
And be patient, for your patience is on none except God. And do not grieve for them, and do not be depressed by what they scheme
God is with those who are aware and are good doers
Glory be to the One who took His servant by night from the Restricted Temple to the most distant temple which We had blessed around, so that We may show him of Our signs. Indeed, He is the Hearer, the Seer
And We gave Moses the Book and We made it a guidance for the Children of Israel: "Do not believe in any besides Me
The progeny of those whom We carried with Noah, he was a thankful servant
And We decreed to the Children of Israel in the Book, that you will make corruption twice on the earth, and that you will become very high and mighty
So, when the promise of the first one comes to pass, We would send against you servants of Ours who are very powerful, thus they managed to breach your very homes, and this was a promise which has come to pass
Then We gave back to you your independence from them, and We supplied you with wealth and sons, and We made you more influential
If you do good, then it will be good for you, and if you do bad, then so be it. But when the promise of the second time comes, they will make your faces filled with sorrow and they will enter the Temple as they did the first time, and they will strike down all that was raised up
Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you, and if you revert then will We will also revert. And We made Hell a gathering place for the rejecters
This Qur'an guides to that which is more upright, and it gives glad tidings to the believers who do good works that they will have a bountiful reward
And for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have prepared for them a painful retribution
And man calls to evil as much as he calls to good, and man was always hasty
And We made the night and the day as two signs, so We erased the sign of night and We made the sign of day to see-in, that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and that you may know the number of the years and the count. And everything We have detailed completely
And We have attached to the neck of every man his deeds, and We bring forth for him a record on the Day of Resurrection which he will find on display
Read your record! It is sufficient for you that you are aware of yourself today
Whoever is guided is guided for himself, and whoever is misguided is for his own loss. And no person shall carry the burdens of another, and We were not to punish until We send a messenger
And if We wish to destroy a town, We allow its carefree to rule it, then they commit wickedness in it, then it deserves the punishment, then We destroy it completely
And how many a generation have We destroyed after Noah? And it is enough for your Lord to have knowledge and sight over the sins of His servants
Whoever seeks the life of haste, We will make for him what he wishes, then We will make Hell for him a place which he will reach disgraced and rejected
And whoever seeks the Hereafter and strives for it as it deserves, and is a believing person, then to those what they have sought is given in thanks
For both groups We will bestow from the bounty of your Lord. And the bounty of your Lord is never restricted
See how We have preferred some of them over the others; and in the Hereafter are greater levels, and greater preference
Do not make with God another god, or you will find yourself disgraced, abandoned
And your Lord decreed that you shall not serve except He, and do good to your parents. When one of them or both of them reach old age, do not say to them a word of disrespect nor shout at them, but say to them a kind saying
And lower for them the wing of humility through mercy, and say: "My Lord, have mercy upon them as they have raised me when I was young
Your Lord is fully aware of what is in your souls. If you are good, then He is to the obedient a Forgiver
And give the relative his due, and the poor, and the wayfarer; and do not waste excessively
Those who waste excessively are brothers to the devils, and the devil was to his Lord a rejecter
And if you turn away from them to seek a mercy from your Lord which you desire, then say to them a gentle saying
And do not make your hand stingy by holding it to your neck, nor shall you lay it fully open so you become in despair and regret
Your Lord lays out openly the provision for whom He wishes, and He is able to do so. He is Expert and Seer over His servants
And do not kill your children out of concern of poverty; We shall provide for you and them. The killing of them was a big mistake
And do not come near adultery, for it is immoral and an evil path
And do not take a life, for God has made this forbidden, except in the course of justice. And whoever is killed innocently, then We have given his heir authority, so let him not transgress in the taking of a life, for He will be given victory
And do not come near the money of the orphan, except for that which is best, until he reaches his independence. And fulfill the pledge, for the pledge brings great responsibility
And give full measure when you deal, and weigh with a balance that is straight. That is good and better in the end
And do not uphold what you have no knowledge of; for the hearing, eyesight, and heart - all these you are responsible for
And do not walk in the land arrogantly, for you will not penetrate the earth, nor will you reach the mountains in height
All of this is bad, and disliked by your Lord
That is from what your Lord has inspired to you of the wisdom. And do not make with God another god, or you will be cast into Hell, blameworthy and regretting
Has your Lord preferred for you the males, while He takes the females as angels? You are indeed saying a grave thing
And We have dispatched in this Qur'an that they may remember, but it only increases their aversion
Say: "If there had been gods with Him as they say, then they would have tried to gain a way to the Throne
Be He glorified and exalted above what they say, a great falsehood
He is glorified by the seven heavens and the earth and that which is in them, and there is not a thing except it glorifies His praise, but you do not comprehend their glorification. He is Compassionate, Forgiving
And when you read the Qur'an, We place between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter an invisible barrier
And we place shields over their hearts, that they should not understand it, and a deafness in their ears. And if you mention your Lord in the Qur'an alone, they run away turning their backs in aversion
We are fully aware of what they are listening to, for they are listening to you but while they are in private counsel the wicked say: "You are following a man who is bewitched
See how they put forth the examples for you. They have gone astray, and cannot come to the path
And they said: "When we are bones and fragments, will we then be resurrected to a new creation
Say: "Even if you be stones or metal
Or a creation that is held dear in your chests." They will say: "Who will return us?" Say: "The One who initiated you the first time." They will shake their heads to you and say: "When is this?" Say: "Perhaps it is near
The Day He calls you and you respond by His grace, and you think that you only stayed a little while
And say to My servants to speak that which is best. The devil makes bitterness between them. The devil is to man a clear enemy
Your Lord is fully aware of you, if He wishes He will have mercy on you, or if He wishes He will punish you. And We have not sent you as a guardian over them
And your Lord is fully aware of who is in the heavens and the earth. And We have preferred some prophets over others, and We gave David the Psalms
Say: "Call on those you have claimed besides Him. For they have no power to remove harm from you or shift it
The ones you call on, they are themselves seeking a path to their Lord which is nearer, and they desire His mercy, and they fear His retribution. The retribution of your Lord is to be feared
And there is not a town before the Day of Resurrection that We will not destroy it, or punish it with a severe punishment. This has been written in the record
And what stopped Us from sending the signs except that the previous people disbelieved in them. And We sent to Thamud the camel with foresight, but they did her wrong. And We do not send the signs except to make them fearful
And when We said to you: "Your Lord has encompassed the people." And We did not make the vision that We showed you except as a test for the people, and the tree that was cursed in the Qur'an. And We are making them fearful, but it only increases their transgression
And We said to the angels: "Yield to Adam." So they yielded except for Satan, he said: "Shall I yield to one you have created from clay
He said: "Shall I show You this one whom You have preferred over me, that if You respite me until the Day of Resurrection, I will seize his progeny, except for a few
He said: "Go, and whoever follows you from them. Hell shall be the reward to you all, a reward well deserved
And entice whoever you can of them with your voice, and mobilize all your forces and men against them, and you may share with them in their money and children, and promise them." But the devil promises nothing but deceit
As for My servants, you will have no power over them." And your Lord is enough as a Caretaker
Your Lord is the One Who drives the ships for you in the sea so that you may seek of His bounty. He is Merciful towards you
And if harm should afflict you at sea, then all those whom you called on besides Him suddenly vanish from you except for Him. So when He saves you to dry land, you turn away. Man is ever rejecting
Are you confident that He will not cause this side of the land to swallow you up, or that He would not send a violent storm against you? Then you will find no caretaker for yourselves
Or are you confident that He would not send you back again in it, then He would send against you a violent wind and cause you to drown for your rejection? Then you will not find a second chance with Us
And We have honored the Children of Adam and carried them in the land and the sea, and We have provided for them of the good things, and We have preferred them over many of those We created in a marked preference
The Day We call every people by their beacon. Then, whoever are given their book by their right, they will read their book, and they will not be wronged in the least
And whoever is blind in this, then he will be blind in the Hereafter and more astray from the path
And they nearly diverted you from what We inspired to you so that you would fabricate something different against Us, and then they would have taken you as a friend
And if We had not made you stand firm, you were about to lean towards them a little bit
Then, We would have made you taste double the retribution in this life and double the retribution in death. And then you would not find for yourself any victor against Us
And they nearly intimidated you so they could drive you out of the land. But then they would have been destroyed shortly after you were gone
Such was the way of those whom We had sent before you of Our messengers. And you will not find any change in Our way
Hold the contact prayer till the setting of the sun; to the murkiness of the night; and the Qur'an at dawn - the Qur'an at dawn is witnessed
And from the night, as an addition, you shall reflect upon it for yourself, perhaps your Lord would grant you a station that is praiseworthy
And say: "My Lord, admit me an entrance of truth and let me exit an exit of truth, and grant me from Yourself a support to victory
And say: "The truth has come and falsehood has perished. Falsehood is always bound to perish
And We send down from the Qur'an what is a healing and mercy to the believers. And it only increases the wicked in their loss
And if We bless man, he turns away and turns his side. But when adversity touches him, he is despairing
Say: "Let each work according to his own. Your Lord is fully aware of who is best guided to the path
And they ask you concerning the Spirit. Say: "The Spirit is from the authority of my Lord; and the knowledge you were given was but very little
And if We wished, We would take away that which We have inspired to you. Then you would not find for yourself with it against Us a caretaker
Except for a mercy from your Lord. His grace upon you has been great
Say: "If all mankind and the Jinn were to gather to bring a Qur'an like this, they could not come with its like, even if they were helping one another
And We have dispatched to the people in this Qur'an from every example, but most of the people refuse to be anything but rejecters
And they said: "We will not believe unto you until you cause a spring of water to burst out of the ground
Or that you have an estate of palm trees and grapes, and you cause gushing rivers to burst through it
Or that you make the heaven fall upon us in pieces as you claimed, or that you bring God and the angels before us
Or that you have a luxurious home, or that you can ascend into the heavens. And we will not believe in your ascension unless you bring for us a book that we can read." Say: "Glory be to my Lord. Am I anything other than a human messenger
And what stopped the people from believing when the guidance came to them, except that they said: "Has God sent a human messenger
Say: "If the earth had angels walking about in security, We would have sent down to them from the heaven an angel as a messenger
Say: "God suffices as a witness between me and you. He is Expert and Seer over His servants
Whoever God guides is the truly guided one. And whoever He misguides then you will not find for them any allies except for Him. And We gather them on the Day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, mute, and deaf; their abode will be Hell. Every time it dies down, We increase for them the fire
Such is their recompense that they rejected Our revelations, and they said: "If we are bones and fragments, will we be sent into a new creation
Did they not see that God who has created the heavens and the earth is able to create their like? And He has made an appointed time for them in which there is no doubt. But the wicked refuse anything except rejection
Say: "If you were the ones possessing the vaults of the mercy of my Lord, you would have held back for concern of spending. And man was always stingy
And We had given Moses nine clear signs. So ask the Children of Israel, when he came to them, then Pharaoh said: "I think that you Moses are bewitched
He said: "You know that no one has sent these down except for the Lord of the heavens and the earth as visible proofs. And I think that you Pharaoh are doomed
So he wanted to entice them out of the land. But We drowned him and all those with him
And We said after him to the Children of Israel: "Dwell on the earth, then, when the time of the second promise comes, We will bring you all together as a mixed crowd
And it is with the truth that We have sent it down, and with the truth it came down. And We have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner
And a revelation that We have separated, so that you may read it to the people over time; and We have brought it down gradually
Say: "Believe in it or do not believe in it. Those who have been given the knowledge before it, when it is recited to them, they fall to their chins prostrating
And they say: "Praise be to our Lord. Truly, the promise of our Lord was fulfilled
And they fall upon their chins crying, and it increases them in humility
Say: "Call on God or call on the Almighty; by whichever you call on, to Him are the best names." And do not be too loud in making your contact prayer, nor too quiet; but seek a path in between
And say: "Praise be to God who has not taken a son, nor does He have a partner in sovereignty, nor does He have an ally out of weakness." And magnify Him greatly
Praise be to God who has sent down the Book to His servant, and He has not made in it any crookedness
It is valuable, giving warning of the severe punishment from Him; and it gives glad tidings to the believers who do good works, that they will have an excellent reward
In which they will remain eternally
And to warn those who said: "God has taken a son
They have no knowledge of this, nor do their fathers. Tremendous indeed is the word coming out of their mouths. They are but saying a lie
Perhaps you will torment yourself in grief over them, because they will not believe in this narrative at all
We have made what is on the earth an adornment for them, so that We will test them as to which of them is best in works
And We will surely make what is on it completely barren
Did you perceive that the dwellers of the cave and the numbers related were of Our wondrous signs
When the youths hid in the cave, and they said: "Our Lord, bring us a mercy from Yourself, and help us in our affair
So We sealed their ears in the cave for many years
Then We sent them to know which of the two groups had remained for as long as they stayed
We tell to you their news with the truth. They were youths who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance
And We made firm their hearts when they stood and said: "Our Lord, the Lord of the heavens and the earth, we will not call besides Him any god. If we have done so then it was in error
Here are our people, they have taken gods besides Him, while they do not come with any clear authority. Who then is more wicked than he who invents lies about God
So when you withdraw from them and what they serve besides God, seek refuge in the cave, and your Lord will spread His mercy upon you and prepare for your problem a solution
And you see the sun when it rises, it visits their cave from the right, and when it sets, it touches them from the left, while they are in an enclosure from it. That is from the signs of God. Whoever God guides is the guided one, and whoever He misguides, you will not find for him any ally to give direction
And you would think they are awake while they are asleep. And We turn them on the right-side and on the left-side, and their dog has his arms outstretched at the threshold. If you looked upon them you would have run away from them and you would have been filled with terror from them
And it was thus that We delivered them so they would ask themselves. A speaker from among them said: "How long have you stayed?" They said: "We stayed a day or part of a day." He said: "Your Lord is surely aware how long you stayed, so send one of you with these stamped coins of yours to the city, and let him see which is the tastiest food, and let him come with a provision of it. And let him be careful and let no one notice you
If they discover you, they will stone you or return you to their creed. Then you will never be successful
And as such, We revealed their case so that they would know that the promise of God is true and that there is no doubt regarding the Hour. They argued among themselves regarding them, so they said: "Erect a monument for them!" Their Lord is fully aware of them, those who managed to win the argument said: "We will construct a temple over them
They will say: "Three, the fourth is their dog." And they say: "Five, the sixth is their dog," guessing at what they do not know. And they say: "Seven, and the eighth is their dog." Say: "My Lord is fully aware of their number, none know them except for a few." So do not argue regarding them except with proof, and do not seek information regarding them from anyone
And do not simply say of something: "I will do this tomorrow
Except if God wills." And remember your Lord if you forget and say: "Perhaps my Lord will guide me to what is nearer than this in wisdom
And they remained in their cave for three hundred years, and increased by nine
Say: "God is fully aware how long they remained, to Him is the unseen of the heavens and the earth, He sees and hears. They do not have besides Him any ally, and He does not share in His judgment with anyone
And recite what has been inspired to you from the Book of your Lord, there is no changing His words, and you will not find besides Him any refuge
And have patience upon yourself regarding those who call on their Lord at dawn and dusk seeking His face, and let not your eyes overlook them that you seek the beauty of this worldly life. And do not obey he whom We have made his heart heedless of Our remembrance and he followed his desire, and his fate was lost
And say: "The truth is from your Lord, so let whoever desires believe, and whoever desires reject." We have prepared for the wicked a Fire whose walls will be surrounding them. And if they cry out, they are given a water like boiling oil which burns their faces. What a dreadful drink and what a miserable place
Those who believe and do good works, We do not waste the reward of those who have done good work
They will have gardens of delight with rivers flowing beneath them, and they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and they will wear green garments of fine silk. They will sit in it on raised thrones. Beautiful is the reward, and beautiful is the dwelling
And give them the example of two men: We made for one of them two gardens of grapes, and We surrounded them with palm trees, and We made crops in their midst
Each of the two gardens brought forth its produce, and none failed in the least. And We caused a river to gush through them
And he had fruit, so he said to his friend while discussing with him: "I am better off than you financially, and of great influence
And he went back into his garden while he had wronged himself. He said: "I do not think that this will ever perish
And I do not think that the Hour is coming. And if I am indeed returned to my Lord, then I will surely find even better things for me
His friend said to him while discussing with him: "Have you disbelieved in the One who has created you from dust, then from a seed, then He evolved you into a man
But He is God, my Lord, and I do not set up any partners at all with my Lord
And if you enter your garden, you should say: 'Thisis what God has given, there is no power except by God.' You see me as being less than you in wealth and in children
Perhaps my Lord will give me better than your garden, and He will send upon it a tornado from the sky, so it becomes completely barren
Or that its water becomes deep under-ground, so you will not be capable of seeking it
So his fruits were ruined, and he began turning his hands at that which he had spent on it while it remained destroyed upon its branches. And he said: "I wish I had not set up any partner with my Lord
And he had no group which could help against God, and he would not have had victory
Such is the true authority of God. He is best to reward, and best to end
And give them the example of this worldly life is like a water which We have sent down from the sky, so that the plants of the earth mix with it and it becomes murky being moved by the wind. And God is capable of all things
Wealth and sons are a beauty of this worldly life. But the good deeds that remain behind are better with your Lord for a reward, and better for hope
And the Day We move the mountains, and you see the earth level, and We gather them; so We will not leave out anyone of them
And they are displayed before your Lord as a column: "You have come to Us as We had created you the first time. No, you claimed We would not makefor you an appointed time
And the record was displayed, so you see the criminals fearful of what is in it. And they say: "Woe to us! What is with this record that it does not leave out anything small or large but has counted it." And they found what they had done present. And your Lord does not wrong anyone
And We said to the angels: "Yield to Adam." So they all yielded except for Satan. He was of the Jinn, he disobeyed the order of his Lord. Will you take him and his progeny as allies besides Me, while they are your enemy? Miserable for the transgressors is the substitute
I did not make them witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor the creation of themselves. Nor do I take the misleaders as helpers
The Day when He says: "Call on your partners that you had claimed." So they called them, but they did not respond to them. And We made between them a barrier
And the criminals saw the Fire, and they realized they will be placed in it, and they did not find any way to avert it
And We have dispatched in this Qur'an for the people from every example; but man has always been most argumentative
And what prevented the people from believing when the guidance came to them, and to seek forgiveness from their Lord? Are they waiting for what happened to the people of old to come to them, or that the retribution be brought to them face to face
And We do not send the messengers except as bearers of good news and warners. But those who reject will argue using falsehood to overshadow the truth with it. And they took My revelations and what they have been warned by for mockery
And who is more wicked than he who was reminded of the revelations of his Lord but he turned away from them, and he forgot what his hands had done. We have made veils upon their hearts from understanding it, and a deafness in their ears. And if you invite them to the guidance, they will never be guided
And your Lord is forgiving, with mercy. If He were to evaluate the people for what they had already earned, He would hasten for them the retribution. No, they have an appointment, beyond which they will find no escape
And those towns, We destroyed them when they transgressed. And We made for their destruction an appointed time
And Moses said to his youth: "I will not stop until I reach the junction of the two seas, or I spend a lifetime trying
But when they reached the junction that was in-between, they forgot their fish, and it was able to make its way back to the sea in a stream
And when they passed further on, he said to his youth: "Bring us our lunch; we have found much fatigue in this journey of ours
He said: "Do you remember when we rested upon the rock? I forgot the fish, and it was the devil who made me forget to remember it. It made its way back to the sea amazingly
He said: "That is what we have been seeking!" So they went back retracing their steps
So they came upon a servant of Ours whom We had given him mercy from Us and We had taught him knowledge from Us
Moses said to him: "Can I follow you so that you will teach me from the guidance you have been taught
He said: "You will not be able to have patience with me
And how can you be patient about that which you have not been given any news
He said: "You will find me, God willing, to be patient. And I will not disobey any command of yours
He said: "If you follow me, then do not ask about anything until I relate it to you
So they ventured forth until they rode in a boat and he made a hole in it. He said: "Have you made a hole in it to drown its people? You have done something dreadful
He said: "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to have patience with me
He said: "Forgive me for what I forgot, and do not be hard upon my request with you
So they ventured forth until they came upon a youth, and he killed him. He said: "Have you killed an innocent person without justice? You have done something awful
He said: "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to have patience with me
He said: "If I ask you about anything after this, then do not keep me in your company. You will then have a reason over me
So they ventured forth until they came to the people of a town. They requested food from its people but they refused to host them. Then they found a wall which was close to collapsing, so he built it. He said: "If you had wished, you could have asked a wage for it
He said: "For this, we will now part ways. I will inform you of the meanings of those things that you could not have patience over
As for the boat, it belonged to some poor people who were working the sea, so I wanted to damage it as there was a king coming who takes every boat by force
And as for the youth, his parents were believers, so we were concerned that he would oppress them by his transgression and disbelief
So we wanted their Lord to replace for them with one who is better than him in purity and closer to mercy
And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphaned boys in the city, and underneath it was a treasure for them, and their father was a good man, so your Lord wanted that they reach their independence and bring out their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. And none of what I have done was of my own accord. That is the meaning of what you could not have patience for
And they ask you about the Two Horned One, say: "I will recite to you a remembrance of him
We had facilitated for him in the land, and We had given him the means to all things
So he followed the means
Until he reached the setting of the sun; he found it setting at a hot spring, and he found a people near it. We said: "O Two Horned One, either you shall punish, or you shall do them good
He said: "As for he who has done wrong, we will punish him then he will be returned to his Lord and He will punish him an awful punishment
And as for he who believes and does good, then he will have the reward of goodness, and we will speak to him simply of our plan
Then he followed the means
So when he reached the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We did not make any cover except it
So it was, and We knew ahead of time about what he intended
Then he followed the means
Until he reached the area between the two barriers, he found no one besides them except a people who could barely understand anything said
They said: "O Two Horned One, Gog and Magog are destroyers of the land, so shall we make a tribute for you that you will make between us and them a barrier
He said: "What my Lord has given me is far better. So help me with strength and I will make between you and them a barrier
Bring me iron ore." Until he leveled between the two walls, he said: "Blow," until he made it a furnace, he said: "Bring me tar so I can pour it over
So they could not come over it, and they could not make a hole in it
He said: "This is a mercy from my Lord. But when the promise of my Lord comes, He will make it rubble. And thepromise of my Lord is truth
And We left them until that day to surge like waves on one another. And the horn was blown, so We gathered them together
And We displayed Hell on that Day to the rejecters openly
Those whose eyes were covered against My remembrance, and they were unable to hear
Did those who reject think that they could take My servants as allies besides Me? We have prepared Hell for the rejecters as a dwelling
Say: "Shall we inform you of the greatest losers
Those whose efforts in the worldly life were wasted while they thought they were doing good
These are the ones who rejected the revelations of their Lord and His meeting. So their works were in vain, and We will not give them any value on the Day of Resurrection
That is their recompense, Hell; for what they rejected and for taking My revelations and My messengers for mockery
Those who believe and do good works, they will have the gardens of Paradise as a dwelling
Abiding therein. They will not want to be moved from it
Say: "If the sea were an inkwell for the words of my Lord, then the sea would run out before the words of my Lord run out;" even if We were to bring another like it as an extension
Say: "I am but a human being like you, being inspired that your god is One god. So whoever looks forward to meeting his Lord, then let him do good works, and not serve anyone besides his Lord
KH'YA'S
A reminder of the mercy of your Lord to His servant Zachariah
When he called out to his Lord secretly
He said: "My Lord, my bones have gone frail, and my hair has turned white, and I have never been mischievous in imploring You my Lord
And I fear the kinfolk after I am gone, and my wife is infertile, so grant me from Yourself an ally
To inherit from me, and inherit from the descendants of Jacob. And make him my Lord, well pleasing
O Zachariah, We give you glad tidings of a son whose name is John. We have not given that name before to anyone
He said: "My Lord, how can I have a son when my wife is infertile, and I have reached a very old age
He said: "It is such that your Lord has said. It is an easy thing for Me. And I had created you before, when you were not a thing
He said: "My Lord, make for me a sign." He said: "Your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights consecutively
So he went out among his people from the temple enclosure, and he indicated to them that they should glorify Him at dawn and dusk
O John, take the Book with confidence." And We gave him authority while in his youth
And tenderness from Us, and purity, and he was ever righteous
And dutiful to his parents, and never was he a disobedient tyrant
And peace be upon him the day he was born, and the day he dies, and the Day he is resurrected alive
And relate in the Book, Mary, when she withdrew herself from her family to a place which was to the east
So she took a barrier to separate her from them, so We sent Our Spirit to her, and he took on the shape of a human being in all similarity
She said: "I seek refuge with the Almighty from you if you are righteous
He said: "I am the messenger of your Lord, to grant you the gift of a pure son
She said: "How can I have a son when no human being has been with me, nor have I desired such
He said: "It is such that your Lord has said, it is easy for Me. And We shall make him a sign for the people and a mercy from Us. It is a matter already ordained
So she was pregnant with him, and she went to deliver in a far place
Then the birth pains came to her, by the trunk of a palm tree. She said: "I wish I had died before this, and became totally forgotten
But then he called to her from beneath her: "Do not be sad, your Lord has made below you a stream
And shake the trunk of this palm tree, it will cause ripe dates to fall upon you
So eat and drink and be content. If you see any human being, then say: 'I have vowed an abstinence for the Almighty, so I will not talk today to any of mankind
Then she came to her people carrying him. They said: "O Mary, you have come with a thing totally unexpected
O sister of Aaron, your father was not a wicked man, and your mother has never been unchaste
So she pointed to him. They said: "How can we talk to someone who is a child in a cradle
He said: "I am a servant of God, He has given me the Book and made me a prophet
And He has made me blessed wherever I am, and He has charged me with the contact prayer and purification as long as I am alive
And to be dutiful to my mother, and He has not mademe a mischievous tyrant
And peace be upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the Day I am resurrected alive
Such was Jesus, son of Mary, and this is the truth of the matter in which they doubt
God was never to take a son, be He glorified. If He decrees a matter, then He simply says to it: 'Be,' and it is
And God is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him. This is a straight path
Thus the Confederates disputed between them. Therefore, woe to those who have rejected from the scene of a terrible Day
Listen to what they say and watch on the Day they come to Us. But the wicked today are in a clear misguidance
And warn them of the Day of Remorse. When the matter is decided while they are oblivious, and they do not believe
It is We who will inherit the earth and all that is on it. And to Us they will return
And recall in the Book, Abraham; he was a man of truth, a prophet
When he said to his father: "O father, why do you serve what does not hear or see, nor help you in anything
My father, knowledge has come to me which did not come to you. So follow me that I will guide you to a level path
My father, do not serve the devil. For the devil was ever disobedient to the Almighty
My father, I fear that a retribution will inflict you from the Almighty and that you will become an ally to the devil
He said: "Have you abandoned my gods O Abraham? If you do not stop this, I will stone you; and let me be
He said: "Peace be upon you, I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord. He has been most kind to me
And I will abandon you and what you call on besides God. And I will implore my Lord, hoping that I will not be mischievous in imploring my Lord
So when he abandoned them and what they served besides God, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and each of them We made a prophet
And We granted them from Our mercy, and We made for them a tongue of truthfulness to be heard
And recall in the Book, Moses; he was loyal, and he was a messenger prophet
And We called him from the right side of the mount, and We brought him close to talk with
And We granted him from Our mercy his brother Aaron as a prophet
And recall in the Book, Ishmael; he was truthful to his promise, and he was a messenger prophet
And he used to instruct his family to the contact prayer and purification, and his Lord was pleased with him
And recall in the Book, Enoch; he was a man of truth, a prophet
And We raised him to a high place
Those are the ones whom God has blessed from among the prophets from the progeny of Adam, and those We carried with Noah, and from the progeny of Abraham and Israel, and from whom We have guided and chosen. When the revelations of the Almighty are recited to them, they fall down prostrating, and in tears
Then, generations came after them who lost the contact prayer, and followed desires. They will find their consequences
Except for whoever repents and believes and does good works; they will be admitted to the Paradise, and they will not be wronged in the least
Gardens of delight; that the Almighty had promised His servants in the unseen. His promise must come to pass
They will not hear in it any nonsense, only peace. And they will have their provision in it morning and evening
Such is the Paradise that We inherit to any of Our servants who are righteous
And we are not sent except by the authority of your Lord. To Him are our present and our future, and all that is in-between. And your Lord was never to forget
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them. So serve Him and be patient in His service. Do you know anything that is like Him
And man says: "Can it be that when I am dead, I will be brought out alive
Does man not remember that We created him before, when he was not a thing
By your Lord, We will gather them and the devils, then We will place them around Hell on their knees
Then We will drag out from every clan the ones which were most in opposition to the Almighty
Then, it is We who are best aware of those who deserve to be burnt therein
And every single one of you will encounter it. This for your Lord is a certainty that will come to pass
Then We will save those who were righteous, and We will leave the wicked in it on their knees
And when Our clear revelations were recited to them, those who rejected said to those who believed: "Which of our two groups is in a better station and more prosperous
And how many a generation have We destroyed before them? They had more wealth and more influence
Say: "Whoever is in misguidance, then the Almighty will lead them on." Until they see what they have been promised, either the retribution or the Hour. Then they will know who is in a worse place and weaker in power
And God increases the guidance of those who are guided. And the goodness that endures is better with your Lord as a reward and a far better return
Did you see the one who rejected Our revelations and said: "I will be given wealth and children
Did he look into the future? Or has he taken a pledge with the Almighty
No, We will record what he says, and We will increase for him the retribution significantly
Then We inherit from him all that he said, and he shall come to Us all alone
And they have taken gods besides God to be for them their glory
On the contrary, they will reject their service of them and they will be standing against them
Did you not see that We send the devils upon the rejecters to push them with incitement
So do not be in haste towards them; We are preparing for them a preparation
The Day We gather the righteous to the Almighty as a delegation
And We drive the criminals to Hell as a herd
None will possess intercession, except for he who has taken a pledge with the Almighty
And they said the Almighty has taken a son
You have come with a gross blasphemy
The heavens are about to shatter from it, and the earth crack open, and the mountains fall and crumble
That they claimed that the Almighty had a son
And what need does the Almighty have to take a son
When all there is in the heavens and the earth will come to the Almighty as servants
He has encompassed them, and counted them one by one
And all of them will come to Him on the Day of Resurrection, all alone
Those who believe and do good works, the Almighty will make for them affection
Thus We have made this easy in your tongue so that you may give good news with it to the righteous and that you may warn with it the quarrelsome people
And how many a generation have We destroyed before them? Do you perceive any of them or hear from them a sound
T'H
We did not send down to you the Qur'an so you may suffer
It is but a reminder for he who is concerned
Sent down from the One who has created the earth and the heavens above
The Almighty, upon the Throne He settled
To Him is what is in the heavens and what is on the earth, and what is between them, and what is beneath the ground
And if you will declare openly what you say, then surely He knows the secret and what is hidden
God, there is no god except He, to Him are the beautiful names
And did the narrative of Moses come to you
When he saw a fire, he said to his family: "Stay here, I have seen a fire, perhaps I can bring a piece from it, or find at the fire some guidance
So when he came to it he was called: "O Moses
I am your Lord, so take off your slippers; you are in the holy valley Tuwa
And I have chosen you, so listen to what is being inspired
I am God, there is no god except Me, so serve Me and hold the contact prayer for My remembrance
The Hour is coming, I am nearly keeping it hidden, so that every soul will be recompensed with what it strived
So do not be deterred from it by he who does not believe in it and followed his desire and perished
And what is in your right hand O Moses
He said: "It is my staff, I lean on it, and I guide my sheep with it, and I have other uses in it
He said: "Cast it down O Moses
So he cast it down, and it became a moving serpent
He said: "Take it and do not be fearful, We will turn it back to its previous form
And place your hand under your arm, it will come out white without blemish, as another sign
This is to show you Our great signs
Go to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed
He said: "My Lord, comfort for me my chest
And make my mission easy
And remove the knot in my tongue
So they can understand what I say
And allow for me an advisor from my family
Aaron, my brother
So that I may strengthen my resolve through him
And share with him my mission
So that we may glorify You plenty
And remember You plenty
You Have been seer over us
He said: "You have been given what you asked O Moses
And We have graced you another time
When We inspired to your mother what was inspired
That she should cast him in the basket, and cast the basket in the sea, so the sea will place him on the shore, where an enemy of Mine and his will take him. And I placed upon you a love from Me. And that you shall be raised under My eye
That your sister should follow, and say: 'Shall I guide you to a person who will nurse him.' Thus We returned you to your mother, so that she may be pleased and not be sad. And you killed a person, but We saved you from harm and We tested you greatly. So it was that you stayed with the people of Midyan for many years, then you came here by fate O Moses
And I Have raised you for Myself
Go, you and your brother with Our signs, and do not linger from My remembrance
Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed
So say to him soft words, perhaps he will remember or be concerned
They said: "Our Lord, we fear that he would let loose upon us, or transgress
He said: "Do not fear, I am with you, I hear and I see
So come to him and say: "We are messengers from your Lord, so send with us the Children of Israel, and do not punish them. We have come to you with a sign from your Lord, and peace be upon those who follow the guidance
It has been inspired to us that the retribution will be upon he who denies and turns away
He said: "So who is the lord of you both O Moses
He said: "Our Lord is the One who gave everything its creation, then guided
He said: "What then has happened to the previous generations
He said: "The knowledge of it is with my Lord, in a record. My Lord does not err or forget
The One who made for you the earth habitable and He made ways for you in it, and He brought down water from the sky, so We brought out with it pairs of vegetation of all types
Eat and raise your livestock, in that are signs for those of thought
From it We created you and in it We return you, and from it We bring you out another time
And We showed him Our signs, all of them, but he denied and refused
He said: "Have you come to us to take us out of our land with your magic O Moses
We will bring you a magic like it, so let us make an appointment between us and you which neither of us will break, a place where we both agree
He said: "Your appointment is the day of festival, and when the people start crowding during the late morning
So Pharaoh went away, and he gathered his plan then he came
Moses said to them: "Woe to you, do not invent lies about God, else the retribution will take you, and miserable is the one who invents
So they disputed in their matter between themselves, and they kept private their counsel
They said: "These are but two magicians who want to take you out of your land with their magic, and they want to do away with your ideal way
So agree your plan, then come as one front. Whoever wins today will succeed
They said: "O Moses, either you cast down or we will be the first to cast down
He said: "You cast down." So their ropes and staffs appeared from their magic as if they were moving
And Moses held some fear in himself
We said: "Do not fear, you will best them
And cast down what is in your right hand it will consume what they have made. They have only made the plans of a magician, and the magician will not succeed no matter what he does
So the magicians went down in prostration. They said: "We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses
He said: "Have you believed to him before taking my permission? He is surely your great one who has taught you magic. So, I will cut off your hands and feet from alternate sides, and I will crucify you on the trunks of the palm trees, and you will come to know which of us is greater in retribution and more lasting
They said: "We will not prefer you over the proofs that have come to us, and over the One who initiated us. So issue whatever judgment you have, for you only issue judgment in this worldly life
We have believed in our Lord that He may forgive us our wrongdoings, and what you had forced us into doing of magic; and God is better and more lasting
He who comes to his Lord as a criminal, he will have Hell, where he will neither die in it nor live
And he who comes to Him as a believer doing good works, for those will be the highest ranks
Gardens of delight, with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein. Such is the reward of he who is developed
And We inspired to Moses: "Take My servants out, and strike for them a path through the sea that is dry. You shall not fear being overtaken, nor be concerned
So Pharaoh followed them with his soldiers, but the sea came-over them and covered them
Thus, Pharaoh misled his people and he did not guide
O Children of Israel, We have saved you from your enemy, and We summoned you at the right side of the mount, and We sent down to you manna and quail
Eat from the good things that We have provided for you and do not transgress in this else My wrath will be upon you. Whoever has incurred My wrath is lost
And I am forgiving for whoever repents and does good works, then is guided
And what has caused you to rush ahead of your people O Moses
He said: "They are coming in my tracks, and I came quickly to you my Lord so you would be pleased
He said: "We have tested your people after you left, and the Sumerian misguided them
So Moses returned to his people angry and disappointed. He said: "My people, did not your Lord promise you a good promise? Has the waiting for the pledge been too long, or did you want that the wrath of your Lord be upon you? Thus you broke the promise with me
They said: "We did not break the promise by our own will, but we were loaded down with the jewelry of the people so we cast them down, and it was such that the Sumerian suggested
He then produced for them a sculpture of a calf that emitted a cry. So they said: "This is your god and the god of Moses, but he had forgotten
Did they not see that it did not respond to them? Nor did it possess for them any harm or benefit
And Aaron said to them before: "My people, you are being tested with it. Your Lord is the Almighty, so follow me and obey my command
They said: "We will remain devoted to it until Moses comes back to us
He said: "O Aaron, what prevented you when you saw them being astray
Do you not follow me? Have you disobeyed my command
He said: "O son of my mother, do not grab me by my beard nor by my head. I was concerned that you would say that I separated between the Children of Israel, and that I did not follow your orders
He said: "So what do you have to say O Sumerian
He said: "I noticed what they did not notice, so I took a handful from where the messenger was standing, and I cast it in. This is what my soul inspired me to do
He said: "Then be gone, for you will have it in this life to say: "I am not to be touched" And you will have an appointed time which you will not forsake. And look to your god that you remained devoted to, we will burn him, then we will destroy him in the sea completely
Surely your god is God; for which there is no god except He. His knowledge encompasses all things
And it is such that We tell to you the news of what has passed. And We have given you from Us a remembrance
Whoever turns away from it, then he will carry a load on the Day of Resurrection
They will remain therein; and miserable for them on the Day of Resurrection is what they carry
The Day the horn is blown, and We gather the criminals on that Day white eyed
They whisper among themselves: "You have only been away for a period of ten
We are fully aware of what they say, for the best among them will say: "No, you have only been away for a day
And they ask you about the mountains, so say: "My Lord will annihilate them completely
Then He will leave it as a smooth plain
You will not see in it any crookedness or curves
On that Day, they will follow the caller, there is no crookedness to him. And all voices will be humbled for the Almighty, you will not be able to hear except whispers
On that Day, no intercession will be of help, except for he whom the Almighty allows and accepts what he has to say
He knows their present and their future, and they do not have any of His knowledge
And the faces shall be humbled for the Eternal, the Living. And whoever carried wickedness with him has failed
And whoever does any good works, while he is a believer, then he should not fear injustice nor being given less than his due
And it was such that We sent it down an Arabic revelation, and We dispatched in it the warnings, perhaps they will become aware or it will cause them to remember
Then High above all is God, the King, the True. And do not be hasty with the Qur'an before its inspiration is completed to you, and say: "My Lord, increase my knowledge
And We had entrusted to Adam from before, but he forgot, and We did not find in him the will power
And We said to the angels: "Yield to Adam." They all yielded except for Satan, he refused
So We said: "O Adam, this is an enemy to you and your mate. So do not let him take you out from the paradise, else you will have hardship
You will have in it that you will not go hungry nor need clothes
And you will have in it that you will not go thirsty nor suffer from heat
But the devil whispered to him, he said: "O Adam, shall I lead you to the tree of immortality and a kingdom which will not waste away
So they both ate from it, and their bodies became apparent to them, and they began to place leaves on themselves from the paradise. Adam had disobeyed his Lord, and had gone astray
Then his Lord recalled him, and He forgave him, and gave guidance to him
He said: "Descend from this, all of you, for you are enemies to one another. So, when My guidance comes to you, then, whoever follows My guidance, he will not go astray nor suffer
And whoever turns away from My remembrance, then he will have a miserable life, and We will raise him blind on the Day of Resurrection
He said: "My Lord, you have raised me blind while I used to be able to see
He said: "It was the same when Our revelations came to you, you forgot them, and similarly today you will be forgotten
And it is such that We recompense he who transgresses, and did not believe in the revelations of his Lord. And the retribution of the Hereafter is more severe and more lasting
Is it not a guide to them how many generations We had destroyed before them, which they are walking now in their homes? In that are signs for the people of understanding
And had it not been for a word already given by your Lord, they would have been held to account immediately
So be patient to what they are saying and glorify the grace of your Lord before the rising of the sun, and before its setting, and at the approach of the night - you shall glorify - and at parts of the day, perhaps you may be content
And do not crave with your eyes what We have bestowed upon some couples from them; the flower of the worldly life; so as to test them in it; and the provision of your Lord is better and more lasting
And instruct your family to the contact prayer, and be patient for it. We do not ask you for provision, for We provide for you. And the ending will be for righteousness
And they said: "If only he would bring us a sign from his Lord!" Did not proof come to them from what is in the previous scripts
And if We had destroyed them with a retribution before this, they would have said: "Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger so we could follow Your revelations before we are humiliated and shamed
Say: "All are waiting, so wait, and you will come to know who are the people upon the even path and who are guided
The judgment for the people has come near, while they are turning away unaware
When a reminder comes to them from their Lord that is recent, they listen to it while playing
Their hearts are preoccupied, and those who are wicked confer privately: "Is he not but a human being like you? Would you accept this magic while you know
Say: "My Lord knows what is said in the heavens and on the earth, and He is the Hearer, the Knower
They said: "No, these are just bad dreams; no, he made it up; no, he is a poet. So let him bring us a sign like those who were sent before
None of the towns which We destroyed before them had believed. Will they be the ones who believe
And We did not send before you except men whom We inspired to. So ask the people of the Reminder if you do not know
And We did not make for them bodies that do not need to eat, nor were they immortal
Then We fulfilled the promise to them, so We saved them and whom We pleased, and We destroyed those who transgressed
We have sent down to you a Book in which is your remembrance. Do you not comprehend
And how many a town have We destroyed because it was wicked, and We established after them a different people
So it was that when they perceived Our power, they were running from it
Donot run, and come back to that which you were living lavishly in and your homes; so that you will be questioned
They said: "Woe to us, we have been wicked
So that remained their cry until We took them all, and they became still
AndWe did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them for entertainment
If We wanted to be amused, We could have done so from what is already with Us, if that is what We wished to do
No,We cast with the truth upon the falsehood, so it disrupts it, and then it retreats. And woe to you for what you have described
Andto Him is whoever is in the heavens and on the earth. And those who are near Him are not too proud to serve Him, nor do they complain
They glorify in the night and the day, they do not cease
Or have they taken earthly gods who can resurrect
If there were gods in them except for God, then they would have been ruined. Glory be to God, the Lord of the Throne from what they describe
He is not questioned about what He does, while they will be questioned
Or have they taken gods besides Him? Say: "Bring your proof. This is a reminder of those with me and a reminder of those before me." But, most of them do not know the truth, so they turn away
AndWe did not send any messenger before you except that We inspired him that: "There is no god except Me, so serve Me
Andthey said: "The Almighty has taken a son!" Be He glorified, they are all but honored servants
They do not speak ahead of Him, and on His command they act
He knows their present and their future, and they cannot intercede unless it is for those whom He is pleased with. And, from His concern, they are worried
Andwhoever of them says: "I am a god besides Him," then that person We will punish with Hell. It is such that We punish the wicked
Have those who rejected not seen that the heavens and the earth were one piece, so We split them apart? And that We have made from the water everything that lives. Will they not believe
AndWe made on the earth stabilizers so that it would not tumble with you, and We made in it wide paths that they may be guided
AndWe made the sky a protective ceiling; and yet, from its signs they are turning away
And He is the One who has created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, each swimming in an orbit
AndWe did not give immortality to any human being that came before you. If you are going to die, would they be immortal
Every soul will taste death. And We burden you with evil and good as a test, and it is to Us that you will return
Andwhen those who reject see you, they take you for mockery: "Is this the one who speaks about your gods!" While in the remembrance of the Almighty they are rejecters
Man has been created from haste. I will show you My signs, so do not be hasty
Andthey say: "When will this promise come to pass if you are truthful
If only those who reject knew, that they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces, nor from their backs, nor will they be helped
No,it will come to them suddenly. And they will not be able to turn it away, nor will they be delayed
Andmessengers before you were mocked, but those who ridiculed were then surrounded by that which they mocked
Say: "Who can protect you during the night and the day from the Almighty?" No, they are turning away from the remembrance of their Lord
Or do they have gods that will protect them from Us? They cannot help themselves, nor can they be protected from Us
It was Us who gave luxury to these and their fathers, until they grew old with age. Do they not see that We come to the land and reduce it from its edges? Will they be able to win
Say: "I am merely warning you with the inspiration." But the deaf do not hear the call when they are being warned
Andif a trace of the torment of your Lord touches them, they will say: "Woe to us, we have been wicked
AndWe place the balances of justice for the Day of Resurrection, so that no soul will be wronged in the least. Even if it was the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it. And We are enough as a Reckoner
AndWe had given Moses and Aaron the Criterion, a shining light, and reminder for the righteous
Those who are concerned towards their Lord in the unseen, and they are weary of the Hour
Andthis is a blessed reminder which We have sent down. Will you be deniers of it
Andbefore that We gave Abraham his understanding, and We were aware of him
As he said to his father and people: "What are these images to which you are devoted
They said: "We found our fathers worshipping them
He said: "You and your fathers have been clearly misguided
They said: "Have you come to us with the truth, or are you simply playing
He said: "No, your lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the One who initiated them. And I bear witness to such
And by God, I will plan against your statues after you have gone away and given your backs
So he broke them into pieces except for the biggest of them, so that they may turn to him
They said: "Who has done this to our gods? He is surely one of the wicked
They said: "We heard a young man mentioning them. He was called Abraham
They said: "Bring him before the eyes of the people so that they may be witness
They said: "Did you do this to our gods O Abraham
He said: "It was the biggest one of them here who did it, so ask them, if they do speak
So they turned and said to themselves: "It is indeed ourselves who have been wicked
Then they returned to their old ideas: "You know that they do not speak
He said: "Do you serve besides God that which does not benefit you at all nor harm you
I am fed-up of you and to what you serve besides God! Do you not comprehend
They said: "If you are to do anything, then burn him, and give victory to your gods
We said: "O fire, be cool and safe upon Abraham
Andthey wanted to plan against him, but We made them the losers
AndWe saved him and Lot to the land which We have blessed in for the worlds
AndWe granted him Isaac and, as an addition, Jacob. And each of them We made a good doer
AndWe made them leaders who guide by Our command, and We inspired them to do good works and hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification, and they were in service to Us
AndLot, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We saved him from the town that used to do vile things. They were a people of evil, wicked
AndWe admitted him into Our mercy. He was of the good doers
AndNoah when he called out before that, thus We responded to him, and We saved him and his family from the great distress
AndWe granted him victory against the people who denied Our revelations. They were a people of evil, so We drowned them all
AndDavid and Solomon, when they gave judgment in the case of the crop that was damaged by the sheep of the people, and We were witness to their judgment
So We gave Solomon the correct understanding, and both of them We have given wisdom and knowledge. And We commissioned the mountains with David to praise, and the birds. This is what We did
AndWe taught him the making of armor for you to protect you from your enemy. Are you then thankful
Andto Solomon the gusting winds run by his command all the way to the land which We have blessed in. And We were aware of everything
Andfrom the devils are those who dive for him, and they perform other tasks, and We were guardian over them
AndJob when he called his Lord: "I have been afflicted with harm, and you are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy
So We answered him, and We removed what was afflicting him, and We brought him back his family and others with them as a mercy from Us and a reminder to those who serve
AndIshmael and Enoch and Isaiah, all of them were patient
AndWe admitted them in Our mercy, they were of the good doers
Andthe one with 'N,' when he went off in anger, and he thought that We would not be able to take him. Then he called out in the darkness: "There is no god except You! Glory be to You, I was of the wicked
So We responded to him and We saved him from distress. And it is such that We save the faithful
AndZachariah when he called out to his Lord: "My Lord, do not leave me without an heir, and You are the best inheritor
So We responded to him, and We granted him John, and We cured his wife. They used to hasten to do good, and they would call to Us in joy and in fear. And of Us they were reverent
Andthe one who protected her chastity, so We blew into her from Our Spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for the worlds
This is your nation, one nation, and I am your Lord so serve Me
Andthey disputed in the matter among themselves. Each of them will be returned to Us
So whoever does good works and he is a believer, then his efforts will not be rejected and We will record it for him
And it is forbidden for a town that We destroy, that they return
Until Gog and Magog is opened, and from every elevated place they will race forth
Andthe promise of truth draws near. Then, when it is seen by the eyes of those who rejected: "Woe to us, we have been oblivious to this. Indeed, we were wicked
Both you and what you serve besides God shall be fuel for Hell; you will enter it
If these had been gods, then they would not have entered it! And all will abide therein
They will be breathing heavily in it, and they will not be heard therein
As for those who deserved good from Us, they will be removed far away from it
Theyshall not hear the slightest sound from it, and they will be in what their soul desires abiding therein
The great horror will not sadden them, and the angels will receive them: "This is your Day which you have been promised
On the Day when We roll up the heavens like the scroll of a book is rolled up. As We initiated the first creation, so shall We return it. It is a promise of Ours that We will do this
And We have written in the Psalms: "After the remembrance, that the earth will be inherited by My servants who do good
In this is a proclamation for a people who serve
And We have not sent you except as a mercy to the worlds
Say:"It is inspired to me that your god is but One god, so will you submit to Him
So if they turn away, then say: "I have given you notice sufficiently, and I do not know if what you are promised is near or far
He knows that which is spoken publicly and He knows that which you keep secret
Andfor all I know, it may be a test for you and an enjoyment for a while
He said: "My Lord, judge with the truth. And our Lord, the Almighty, is sought for what you describe
Opeople, be aware of your Lord, for the quaking of the Hour is a terrible thing
The moment you see it, every nursing mother will leave her suckling child, and every pregnant one will miscarry, and you will see the people intoxicated while they are not intoxicated, but the retribution of God is most severe
And from the people is he who argues regarding God without knowledge, and he follows every rebellious devil
Itwas decreed for him that any who follow him, he will mislead him, and guide him to the retribution of Fire
O people, if you are in doubt as to the resurrection, then We have created you from dust, then from a seed, then from an embryo, then from a fetus developed and undeveloped so that We make it clear to you. And We settle in the wombs what We wish to an appointed time, then We bring you out a child, then you reach your maturity, and of you are those who will pass away, and of you are those who are sent to an old age where he will not be able to learn any new knowledge after what he already has. And you see the land still, but when We send down the water to it, it vibrates and grows, and it brings forth of every lovely pair
That is because God is the truth, and He gives life to the dead, and He is capable of all things
And the Hour is coming, there is no doubt in it, and God will resurrect those who are in the graves
And from the people are those who argue regarding God with no knowledge nor guidance nor enlightening Book
Bending his side to misguide from the path of God. He will have humiliation in the world and We will make him taste on the Day of Resurrection the retribution of burning
That is for what your hands have delivered, and God does not wrong the servants
Andfrom the people there is he who serves God nervously. So if good comes to him, he is content with it; and if an ordeal comes to him, he makes an about-face. He has lost this world and the Hereafter. Such is the clear loss
He calls upon besides God what will not harm him and what will not benefit him. Such is the far straying
He calls on those who harm him more than they benefit him. What a miserable patron, and what a miserable companion
Godadmits those who believe and do good works to estates with rivers flowing beneath them. God does as He wishes
Whoever thinks that God will not grant him victory in this world and the Hereafter, then let him extend his reasons to the heavens, then let him cease and see whether this action has removed the cause of his anger
Andas such, We have sent down clear revelations, and God guides whoever He wishes
Surely those who believe; and those who are Jewish, and the Sabians, and the Nazarenes, and the Majoos; and those who were polytheists; God will separate between them on the Day of Resurrection. For God is witness over all things
Didyou not see that to God yields what is in the heavens and what is on the earth, and the sun and the moon and the stars and the mountains and the trees and what moves, and many of the people, and many who have deserved the retribution. And whoever God disgraces, then none can honor him. God does what He pleases
Here are two opponents who have disputed regarding their Lord; as for those who rejected, outer garments made from fire are cut out for them, and boiling water is poured from above their heads
It melts the inside of their bellies and their skin
Andthey will have hooked rods of iron
Every time they want to escape the anguish, they are returned to it. Taste the retribution of the burning
Godwill admit those who believe and do good works to estates with rivers flowing beneath them, wherein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be of silk
Andthey are guided to the good sayings, and guided to the path of the Praiseworthy
Surely, those who have rejected and repel from the path of God, and from the Restricted Temple that We have made for the people  for the one devoted therein and the one who visits it  and whoever inclines to evil action in it, We will let them taste a painful retribution
And We have appointed to Abraham the location of the Sanctuary: "Do not set up anyone with Me, and purify My Sanctuary for those who visit, and those who are standing, and the kneeling, the prostrating
Andcall out to the people with the Pilgrimage, they will come to you walking and on every transport, they will come from every deep enclosure
So that they may witness benefits for themselves, and mention the name of God in the appointed days over what He has provided for them of the animal livestock. So eat from it and feed the needy and the poor
Then let them complete their duties and fulfill their vows, and let them traverse at the ancient Sanctuary
Thus, and whoever honors the restrictions of God, then it is better for him with His Lord. And the livestock has been made lawful for you; except what is being recited to you; so avoid the taint of idols and avoid saying false statements
Monotheists to God, not setting up anything with Him. And whoever sets up partners with God, then it is as if he has fallen from the sky and the birds snatch him or the wind takes him to a place far off
Thus, and whoever honors the symbols of God, then it is from the piety of the hearts
In them are benefits to an appointed time, then their place is to the ancient Sanctuary
Andfor every nation We have established rites that they may mention the name of God over what He has provided for them of the animal livestock. Your god is One god; submit to Him and give good tidings to those who obey
Those who, when God is mentioned, their hearts reverence, and they are patient to what befalls them, and they hold the contact prayer, and from what We provide them they spend
And the plump livestock, We have made them for you to be among the symbols of God; you will have benefit in them. So mention the name of God upon them in succession; then, once their sides have become still, you may eat from them and feed with them the poor and the needy. It was thus that We have made them in service to you, that you may be thankful
Neither their meat nor their blood reaches God, but what reaches Him is the righteousness from you. It was thus that He made them in service to you, so that you may magnify God for what He has guided you to, and give news to the good doers
Goddefends those who believe. God does not love any betrayer, rejecter
Permission has been given to those who are being fought - for they have been wronged. And God is able to give them victory
The ones who were driven out of their homes without justice, except that they said: "Our Lord is God!" And if it were not for God defending the people against themselves, then many places of gathering, and markets, and contact prayers, and temples where the name of God is frequently mentioned, would have been destroyed. God will give victory to those who support Him. God is Powerful, Noble
Those whom, if We allow them to have authority in the land, they hold the contact prayer, and they contribute towards purification, and they prohibit vice. And to God is the conclusion of all matters
Andif they deny you, then before them the people of Noah and 'Aad and Thamud had also denied
Andthe people of Abraham and the people of Lot
Andthe dwellers of Midyan; and Moses was denied. So I granted respite to the rejecters then I took them, how then was My punishment
So how many a town have We destroyed while it was doing wrong, so that it is lying in ruins with its wells abandoned, and empty palaces
Have they not roamed the earth and had hearts with which to comprehend and ears with which to hear? No, it is not the sight which is blind, but it is the hearts that are in the chests that are blind
Andthey seek you to hasten the retribution; and God will not break His promise. And a day with your Lord is like one thousand of the years which you count
Andmany a town I have given it respite while it was doing wrong, then I seized it! And to Me is the destiny
Say: "O people, I am but a clear warner to you
As for those who believe and do good works, for them is a forgiveness and a great provision
Andthose who seek to obstruct Our revelations, those are the dwellers of Hell
AndWe did not send before you any messenger or prophet, without having the devil interfere with his wishes. God then duplicates what the devil has cast, and God secures His revelations. And God is Knower, Wise
That He may make what the devil has cast as a test for those who have a disease in their hearts and those whose hearts are hardened. And the wicked are far away in opposition
Andto let those who have been given knowledge knowthat it is the truth from your Lord, and they will believe in it, and their hearts will soften to it. And God will guide those who believe to a straight path
Andthose who have rejected will remain to be in doubt from it until the Hour comes to them suddenly, or the retribution of a barren Day comes to them
Thesovereignty on that Day is to God, He will judge between them. So as for those who have believed and did good works, they are in gardens of bliss
And those who rejected and disbelieved Our revelations, those will have a humiliating retribution
Andthose who emigrated in the cause of God, then they were killed or died, God will provide them with a good provision, and God is the best of providers
He will admit them an entrance that they will be pleased with, and God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate
It is decreed that whoever retaliates with equal measure as was retaliated against him, then he was persecuted for this, God will give him victory. God is Pardoning, Forgiving
That is because God merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. And God is Hearer, Seer
That is because God is the truth, and what they call on besides Him is falsehood. And God is the Most High, the Great
Didyou not see that God sends down water from the sky, and then the land becomes green? God is Compassionate, Expert
To Him is what is in the heavens and what is on the earth. And God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy
Didyou not see that God commits to you what is on the earth? And the ships sail in the sea with His permission. And He holds the sky so that it would not collapse upon the earth, except by His permission. Indeed, God is Kind towards the people, Merciful
He is the One who gave you life, then He makes you die, then He gives you life. But man is always rejecting
Forevery nation We have established rites which they are to fulfill. So do not let the matter fall into dispute. And call upon your Lord, for you are on a guidance which is straight
Andif they argue with you, then say: "God is fully aware of what you do
God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection in what you dispute therein
Didyou not know that God knows what is in the heavens and the earth? All is in a record. All that for God is easy
Andthey serve besides God what He did not send any authority upon, and what they have no knowledge of. And the wicked will not have any helper
Andif Our clear revelations are recited to them, you see denial in the faces of those who have rejected. They are nearly close to attacking those who are reciting to them Our revelations! Say: "Shall I inform you of what is worse than this? The Fire, which God has promised to those who have rejected. What a miserable destiny
O people, an example is being put forth so listen to it: those you call upon besides God will not create a fly even if they all gathered to do so. And if the fly takes anything from them, they will not be able to return anything from it. Weak is both the seeker and the sought
They have truly underestimated the power of God; for God is Powerful, Noble
Godchooses messengers from among the angels and from among the people. God is Hearer, Seer
He knows their present and their future. And to God all matters are returned
O you who believe, kneel and prostrate and serve your Lord and do good that you may succeed
Andstrive in the cause of God its truly deserved striving. He is the One who has chosen you, and He has made no hardship for you in the system, the creed of your father Abraham; He is the One who named you 'those who have submitted' from before and in this. So let the messenger be witness over you and you be witness over the people. So hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification and hold tight to God, He is your patron. What an excellent Patron, and what an excellent Supporter
The believers are indeed successful
Those who are humble when making their contact prayer
And they abstain from vain talk
And they are active towards purification
And they keep covered their private parts
Except around their mates, or those who are maintained by their oaths, they are free from blame
But whoever seeks anything beyond this, then these are the transgressors
And those who look after what they have been entrusted to and to their pledges
And those who maintain their contact prayers
These are the inheritors
Theones who shall inherit the Paradise, in it they will abide
And We have created man from an extract from clay
Then We made him a seed in a safe lodging
Then We created the seed into an embryo, then We created the embryo into a fetus, then We created the fetus into bone, then We covered the bone with flesh, then We brought forth a new creation. So glory be to God, the best of creators
Then after that, you will die
Then you will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection
AndWe have created above you seven paths; and We were never, with regards to the creation, unaware
AndWe sent down from the sky water in due measure, then We let it reside in the land, and We are capable of taking it away
So We brought forth for you gardens of palm trees and grapes, for which you will find many fruits and from it you will eat
Anda tree which emerges from the mount of Sinai, it grows oil and is a relish for those who eat
Andin the livestock are lessons for you. We give you to drink from what is in its bellies, and you have many other benefits from them, and of them you eat
Andon them and on the ships you are carried
AndWe have sent Noah to his people, so he said: "O my people, serve God, you have no other god besides Him. Will you not take heed
Butthe leaders who rejected from among his people said: "What is this but a human being like you? He wants to make himself better than you! And if it was indeed the will of God, He would have sent down angels. We did not hear such a thing among our fathers of old
Heis no more than a man who has madness in him. So keep watch on him for a while
He said: "My Lord, grant me victory for what they denied me
So We inspired him: "Construct the ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration. Then, when Our command comes and the chamber erupts, then you shall take in it a pair from each kind, and your family; except for those of them upon whom the word has come. And do not address Me regarding those who have done wrong, for they will be drowned
So when you and those who are with you have embarked on the ship, then say: "All praise is due to God who has saved us from the wicked people
Andsay: "My Lord, cause me to embark upon a blessed place, for You are the best for those who embark
In this are signs, and We will always test
Then We raised after them a different generation
So We sent a messenger to them from among them: "Serve God, you have no other god besides Him. Will you not take heed
Andthe leaders from among his people who rejected and denied the meeting of the Hereafter; and We indulged them in this worldly life; said: "What is this but a human being like you? He eats from what you eat and he drinks from what you drink
And if you obey a human being like you, then you will indeed be losers
Does he promise you that if you die and become dust and bones that you will be brought out
Far fetched is what you are being promised
There is nothing but our worldly life, we die and we live, and we will not be resurrected
Heis but a man who has invented a lie against God, and we will not believe in him
He said: "My Lord, grant me victory for what they denied me
He said: "In a little while they will be in regret
So the scream took them with justice, and We made them as dead plants. So away with the wicked people
Then We raised after them different generations
No nation can hasten its appointed time, nor can it delay
Then We sent Our messengers in succession. Every time there came to a nation their messenger, they denied him. So We made them follow one another, and We let them become narrations. So away with a people who do not believe
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a clear authority
To Pharaoh and his commanders. But they became arrogant, for they were a high and mighty people
So they said: "Shall we believe to two human beings like us, while their people are servants to us
So they denied them, and they became of those who were destroyed
AndWe have given Moses the Book, so that they may be guided
AndWe made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and We gave them refuge on high ground, a place for resting and with a flowing stream
O messengers, eat from what is good, and do good work. I am aware of what you do
And this is your nation, one nation, and I am your Lord so be aware
Butthe affair was disputed between them into segments. Every group happy with what it had
So leave them in their error until a time
Do they not think why We are extending them with wealth and sons
We are quick to give them the good things. But they do not perceive
As for those who are, from the concern of their Lord, worried
Andthey believe in the revelations of their Lord
Andthey do not set up anything with their Lord
Andthey give of what they were given, and their hearts are full of reverence that they will return to their Lord
These are the ones who race in doing good, and they are the first to it
AndWe do not burden a soul except with what it can bear. And We have a record that speaks with the truth, they will not be wronged
No,their hearts are unaware of this! And they have deeds besides this which they are doing
Until We take their carefree people with the retribution, then they will shout for help
Do not shout for help today, for you will not be helped against Us
My revelations were recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels
Youwere too proud from it, talking evil about it; and you defiantly disregarded it
Didthey not ponder the words, or has there come to them that which had not come to their fathers of old
Or did they not know their messenger? For they are in denial of him
Or do they say that there is a madness in him? No, he has come to them with the truth, but most of them are hateful of the truth
Andif the truth were to follow their desires, then the heavens and the earth and all who are in them would have been corrupted. No, We have come to them with their reminder, but from their reminder they are turning away
Or do you ask them for a wage? The wage of your Lord is best, and He is the best of providers
Andyou are inviting them to a straight path
Andthose who do not believe in the Hereafter, they are deviating away from the path
Andif We were to have mercy on them and remove what distress was upon them, they would still return to persist in their transgression, wandering blindly
Andwhen We seized them with the punishment, they did not humble themselves to their Lord nor did they invoke Him
Until We open for them a door of immense retribution, then they become in sorrow and despair
AndHe is the One who established for you the hearing, and the sight, and the hearts. Little do you give thanks
AndHe is the One who multiplied you on the earth, and to Him you will be returned
AndHe is the One who gives life and brings death, and to Him is the alteration of the night and the day. Do you not comprehend
No,they have said the same as what the people of old had said
They said: "If we are dead and become dust and bones, will we then be resurrected
We, as well as our fathers, have been promised this from before. This is nothing except fictional tales of old
Say: "To whom is the earth and whoever is in it if you know
They will say: "To God." Say: "Will you then not remember
Say: "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the great Throne
They will say: "To God." Say: "Will you then not take heed
Say: "In whose hand is the sovereignty of all things, and He protects while there is no protector against Him, if you know
They will say: "To God." Say: "Then why are you deceived
No,We have come to them with the truth, and they are truly liars
God has not taken a son, nor is there with Him any god. If it were so, then every god would have taken what he created and they would have tried to overtake each other. God be glorified against what they describe
Theknower of the unseen and the seen. Be He exalted above what they set up
Say: "My Lord, if You show me what they are promised
My Lord, then do not leave me among the wicked people
AndWe are able to show you what We promise them
Push away evil with that which is better. We are better aware of what they describe
Andsay: "My Lord, I seek refuge with You from the whispers of the devils
And I seek refuge with you O Lord that they should come near
Until death comes to one of them, he says: "My Lord, send me back
So that I may do good in that which I have left behind." No, it is but a word he is speaking. And there is a barrier to prevent them from going back until the Day they are all resurrected
So when the horn is blown, then there will be no kinship between them on that Day, nor will they ask for one another
So, those whose weights are heavy on the balance, those are the successful ones
And those whose weights are light on the balance, those are the ones who lost their souls, in Hell they will abide
The Fire will scorch their faces, and in it their grin will be with displaced lips
Were My revelations not recited to you, then you denied them
Theysaid: "Our Lord, our wickedness overcame us, and we were a misguided people
OurLord, bring us out of it, and if we return to such, then we are indeed wicked
He said: "Be humiliated therein and do not speak to Me
There was a group from among My servants who used to say: "Our Lord, we have believed, so forgive us, and have mercy upon us, for You are the best of those who show mercy
But you mocked them, so much so that they made you forget My remembrance, and you used to laugh at them
I have rewarded them today for their patience, they are indeed the winners
He said:"How long have you stayed in the earth in terms of years
Theysaid: "We remained for a day, or for part of a day. So ask those who kept count
He said: "You have remained for very little, if only you knew
Didyou think that We have created you without purpose, and that you would not return to Us
So, Exalted is God, the true King, there is no god except He, the Lord of the noble Throne
And whoever calls on another god with God when he has no proof for such, then his judgment is with his Lord. The rejecters will never succeed
And say: "My Lord, forgive and have mercy, and you are the best of those who are merciful
A chapter which We have sent down and imposed, and We have sent down in it clear revelations that you may remember
The adulteress and the adulterer, you shall lash each of them with one hundred lashes, and do not let any pity overtake you regarding the system of God if you believe in God and the Last Day. And let a group of the believers witness their punishment
The adulterer will only marry an adulteress or she who is a polytheist. And the adulteress, she will only be married to an adulterer or he who is a polytheist. And such has been made forbidden for the believers
And those who accuse the independent females, then they do not bring forth four witnesses, you shall lash them with eighty lashes, and do not accept their testimony ever; and those are the wicked
Except those who repent after this and do good, then God is Forgiving, Merciful
And those who accuse their spouses, but they have no witnesses except for themselves, then the testimony of one of them is to be equivalent to that of four witnesses if it is sworn by God that he is being truthful
And the fifth shall be the curse of God upon him if he is of the liars
And the punishment will be averted from her if she bears witness four times by God that he is of the liars
And the fifth shall be the curse of God upon her if heis speaking the truth
All this is from the grace of God upon you and His mercy. And God is Forgiving, Wise
Those who have brought forth the false accusation were a group from among you. Do not think it is bad for you, for it is good for you. Every person among them will have what he deserves of the sin. And as for he who had the greatest portion of it, he will have a great retribution
If only when you heard it the believing males and the believing females should have thought good of their own selves and said: "This is an obvious lie
If only they had brought four witnesses to it. If they did not have the witnesses, then these with God are the liars
And had it not been for the grace of God upon you, and His mercy in this world and the Hereafter, a great retribution would have touched you for what you have spoken
For you have cast it with your tongues, and you say with your mouths what you have no knowledge of, and you think it is a minor issue, while with God it was great
And when you heard it you should have said: "It was not right for us to speak of this. Glory be to You, this is a great lie
God warns you not to repeat something similar to this ever, if you are believers
And God clarifies for you the revelations; and God is Knower, Wise
As for those who enjoy that immorality spreads among those who have believed, they will have a painful retribution in the world and the Hereafter. And God knows while you do not know
And all this is from the favor of God upon you and His mercy. And God is Compassionate, Merciful
O you who believe, do not follow the footsteps of the devil. And whoever follows the footsteps of the devil should know that he advocates immorality and vice. And had it not been for the grace of God upon you and His mercy, not one of you would have ever been purified, but God purifies whom He wishes, and God is Hearer, Knower
And let not those among you who have been blessed by abundance refuse to give to the relatives, and the needy, and those who have immigrated in the cause of God. Let them pardon and forgive. Would you not like God to forgive you? And God is Forgiving, Merciful
Surely, those who accuse the independent innocent believing females, they will be cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have a painful retribution
On the Day when their tongues, and their hands, and their feet will bear witness against them for what they used to do
On that Day, God will pay them what they are owed in full, and they will know that God is the Truth Manifested
The wicked females are for the wicked males, and the wicked males are for the wicked females. And the good females are for the good males, and the good males are for the good females; these are innocent from what statements have been made, and for them is forgiveness and a generous provision
O you who believe, do not enter any homes except your own unless you perceive a welcome and you greet the people in them. This is best for you, perhaps you will remember
But, if you do not find anyone in them then do not enter until you are given permission. And if you are told: "Go back," then go back for it is better for you. And God is aware of what you do
There is no sin upon you that you enter homes which are abandoned if in them there are belongings of yours. And God knows what you reveal and what you hold back
Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and keep covered their private parts, for that is better for them. God is fully aware of what you do
And tell the believing females to lower their gaze and keep covered their private parts, and that they should not reveal their beauty except what is apparent, and let them put forth their shawls over their cleavage. And let them not reveal their beauty except to their husbands, or their fathers, or fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or their women, or those maintained by their oaths, or the male servants who are without need, orthe child who has not yet understood the composition of women. And let them not strike with their feet in a manner that reveals what they are keeping hidden of their beauty. And repent to God, all of you believers, that you may succeed
And marry off those among you that are single, and the good from among your male and female servants. If they are poor, then God will grant them from His grace. And God is Encompassing, Knowledgeable
And let those who are not able to marry continue to be chaste until God enriches them of His Bounty. And if those who are maintained by your oaths seek to consummate the marriage, then document it with them if you find that they are ready, and give them from the wealth of God which He has bestowed upon you. And do not force your young women to need if they have desired to be independent, in order that you may make a gain in the goods of this worldly life. And if anyone has compelled them, then for their compulsion, God is Forgiving, Merciful
And We have sent down to you clarifying revelations and an example of those who came before you and a lesson for the righteous
God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His light is like a niche within which there is a lamp, the lamp is encased in a glass, the glass is like a radiant planet, which is lit from a blessed olive tree that is neither of the east nor of the west, its oil nearly gives off light even if not touched by fire. Light upon light, God guides to His light whom He pleases. And God sets forth examples for the people, and God is aware of all things
In homes that God has permitted to be raised, and His name mentioned in them. He is glorified therein in the mornings and the evenings
By men not distracted by trade or sale from the remembrance of God and holding the contact prayer, and contributing towards purification. They fear a Day when the hearts and sight will be overturned
God will reward them for the best of what they did, and He will increase them from His grace. And God provides for whom He wishes without reckoning
As for those who reject, their works are like a mirage in the desert. A thirsty person thinks it is water, until he reaches it, he finds it is nothing; and he finds God there and He pays him his due, and God is swift in judgment
Or like the darkness out in a deep ocean in the midst of violent waves, with waves upon waves and dark clouds. Darkness upon darkness, if he brings out his own hand, he could barely see it. And for whoever God does not make a light, he will have no light
Do you not see that everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies God? Even the birds in formation, each knows its contact prayer and its glorification. And God is fully aware of everything they do
And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and to God is the final destiny
Do you not see that God drives the clouds, then He joins them together, then He makes them into a stack; so you see the soft rain coming out of them? And He sends down hail from the sky from mountains, so He strikes with it whoever He wills, and He diverts it from whoever He wills; the vivid flash of its lightning almost blinds the eyes
God rotates the night and the day. In that is a lesson for those who have insight
And God created every moving creature from water. So some of them move on their bellies, and some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. God creates whatever He wills. God is capable of all things
We have sent down to you clarifying revelations, and God guides whoever He wills to a straight path
And they say: "We believe in God and in the messenger, and we obey," but a group of them turn away after that. These are not believers
And if they are invited to God and His messenger to judge between them, a party of them turn away
But, if the judgment is in their favor, they come to him readily
Is there a disease in their hearts, or are they doubtful? Or do they fear that God and His messenger would wrong them in the judgment? In fact, they are the wrong doers
The utterance of the believers when they are invited to God and His messenger to judge in their affairs is to say: "We hear and obey." These are the winners
And whoever obeys God and His messenger, and is concerned by God, and aware of Him, then these are the winners
And they swear by God with their strongest oaths that if you would only command them they would mobilize. Say: "Do not swear, for obedience is an obligation. God is Expert over what you do
Say: "Obey God, and obey the messenger." But if they turn away, then he is only responsible for his obligation, and you are responsible for your obligations. And if you obey him, you will be guided. The messenger is only required to deliver clearly
God promises those among you who believe and do good works, that He will make them successors on the earth, as He made successors of those before them, and He will enable for them their system which He has approved for them, and He will substitute security for them in place of fear: "That they serve Me, not setting up anything with Me." And as for those who reject after that, these are the wicked
And hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification, and obey the messenger, that you may attain mercy
Do not think that those who disbelieve will remain in the land. Their abode is Hell. What a miserable destiny
O you who believe, let those among you who are maintained by your oaths, and those who have not attained puberty, request your permission regarding three times: before the dawn contact prayer, and when you put off your garments from the noon time, and after the evening contact prayer. These are three private times for you. Other than these times, it is not wrong for you or them to intermingle with one another. God thus clarifies the revelations for you. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And when your children reach puberty, then let them seek your permission like it was sought by those before them. God thus clarifies His revelations for you. And God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And the women who are past child bearing, who no longer seek to get married, have no sin upon them if they put-off their garments, provided they are not adorned for beauty. And if they remain as they were, then it is better for them. God is Hearer, Knower
There is no blame upon the blind, nor is there any blame upon the crippled, nor is there any blame upon the ill, nor is there any blame upon yourselves, if you eat at your homes, or the homes of your fathers, or the homes of your mothers, or the homes of your brothers, or the homes of your sisters, or the homes of your uncles, or the homes of your aunts, or the homes of your mothers brothers, or the homes of your mothers sisters, or that which you possess their keys, or that of your friends. You commit nothing wrong by eating together or as individuals. When you enter any home, you shall greet each other a greeting from God that is blessed and good. God thus explains the revelations for you that you may comprehend
The believers are those who believe in God and His messenger, and when they are with him in a meeting, they do not leave him without permission. Those who ask permission are the ones who do believe in God and His messenger. If they ask your permission, in order to attend to some of their affairs, you may grant permission to whoever you wish, and ask God to forgive them. God is Forgiver, Merciful
Do not let the calling of the messenger between you be as if you are calling each other. God is fully aware of those among you who slip away under flimsy excuses. Let those who oppose his command beware, for an ordeal may strike them, or a painful retribution
Certainly, to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, He knows what your condition is; and on the Day when they are returned to Him, He will inform them of everything they had done. God is aware of all things
Blessed is the One who sent down the Criterion to His servant, so it can be a warner to the world
The One to whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and He did not take a son, and He does not have any partner in kingship. And He created everything and measured it precisely
And they took besides Him gods that do not create anything and are themselves created! And they do not possess for themselves any harm or benefit, nor do they possess death or life, nor resurrection
And those who rejected said: "This is but a falsehood that he invented and other people have helped him with it." Certainly, they have come with what is unjust and fabricated
And they said: "Fictional tales of old! He wrote them down while they were being dictated to him morning and evening
Say: "It was sent down by the One who knows the secrets in the heavens and the earth. He is always Forgiving, Merciful
And they said: "What is with this messenger that he eats the food and walks in the market places? If only an angel were sent down to him so that he would jointly be a warner
Or that a treasure is given to him, or that he has a paradise that he eats from." And the wicked said: "You are but following a man bewitched
See how they put forth the examples for you; they have strayed, and they cannot find a path
Blessed is the One who if He wishes can make for you better than that. Gardens with rivers flowing beneath them, and He will make for you palaces
Butthey have denied the Hour, and We have prepared for those who deny the Hour a flaming Fire
When it sees them from a far place, they hear it raging and roaring
Andwhen they are cast into it from a tight crevice, in chains, they call out their remorse
Do not call out one remorse today, but call out many a remorse
Say: "Is that better or the garden of eternity that the righteous have been promised?" It is their reward and destiny
In it they will have what they wish eternally. It is upon your Lord an obligated promise
Andon the Day when We gather them together with what they served besides God; then He will say: "Did you misguide My servants here, or did they stray from the path
They said: "Glory be to You, it was not for us to take besides You any allies; indeed You gave them and their fathers luxury until they forgot the remembrance, and they were a lost people
They have refuted what you claimed, so you will not find any excuse nor any victor. And whoever has done wrong among you, We will let him taste a great retribution
AndWe have not sent before you any messengers except that they ate the food and walked in the market places. And We have made some of you as a test for others to see if you will have patience. And your Lord was ever seeing
Andthose who do not expect to meet Us said: "If only the angels were sent down upon us, or that we see our Lord." They have become arrogant in their souls, and they have produced a great blasphemy
On the Day they see the angels, that is not good news for the criminals. And they will be saying: "An inviolable enclosure
AndWe turned to the works that they did, and We made it dust in the wind
Thedwellers of the Paradise on that Day are in the best abode and the best destiny
Andthe Day when the heaven will be filled with clouds, and the angels will be sent down in succession
Thetrue kingship on that Day will be to the Almighty. And it is a Day which will be very hard on the rejecters
Andthat Day the wrongdoer will bite on his hand and say: "I wish I had taken the path with the messenger
Woe to me, I wish I did not take so and so as a friend
Hehas misguided me from the remembrance after it came to me, and the devil was always a betrayer of mankind
Andthe messenger said: "My Lord, my people have deserted this Qur'an
Andit is so that We make for every prophet enemies from among the criminals. And your Lord suffices as a Guide and a Victor
Andthose who rejected said: "If only the Qur'an was sent down to him in one go!" It was done as such so We could strengthen your heart with it, and We arranged it accordingly
Andfor every example they come to you with, We bring you the truth and the best explanation
Those who will be gathered to Hell on their faces, these are the most evil and the most strayed from the path
AndWe gave Moses the Book and We made his brother Aaron a minister with him
So We said: "Go both of you to the people who have denied Our signs." So We then destroyed them utterly
Andthe people of Noah, when they denied the messengers We drowned them, and We made them a lesson for the people. And We have prepared for the wicked a painful retribution
And'Aad and Thamud and the dwellers of Arras, and many generations in between
Andfor each one We put forth the examples, and each one We destroyed utterly
Andthey have come upon the town that was showered with a miserable shower. Did they not see it? No, they do not expect any resurrection
Andif they see you they take you for a mockery: "Is this the one that God sent as a messenger
Henearly diverted us from our gods had we not been patient for them." They will learn when they see the retribution who is on a path most astray
Have you seen the one who has taken his desire as his god? Will you be a caretaker over him
Or do you think that most of them hear or comprehend? They are just like livestock. No, they are worse off
Didyou not see to your Lord how He casts the shadow? And if He wished, He could have made it still, then We would have made the sun as a guide to it
Then We retract it to us a simple retraction
AndHe is the One who made for you the night as a cover, and sleep for resting, and He made the day to move about in
AndHe is the One who sent the winds to spread between the hands of His mercy. And We sent down from the sky water which is pure
So that We revive a dead land with it and give drink to many of Our creation of livestock and people
AndWe have distributed it among them so that they may remember, but most of the people refuse to be anything but rejecters
Andif We wish, We could send to every town a warner
So do not obey the rejecters, and strive against them with it in a great striving
AndHe is the One who merges the two seas; this is fresh and palatable and this is salty and bitter. And He made between them a partition and an inviolable enclosure
AndHe is the One who has created from the water a human being, so He made him multiply and mate. And your Lord is Capable
Andthey serve besides God what does not benefit them nor harm them. And the rejecter is always set-against his Lord
AndWe have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner
Say: "I do not ask you for any wage; but for whoever chooses to make a path to his Lord
Andput your trust in the Eternal Who does not die, and glorify His praise. It is enough for Him that He is expert in the sins of His servants
TheOne who has created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days, then He settled upon the Throne. The Almighty; so ask Him for He is Expert
Andif they are told: "Prostrate to the Almighty." They say: "And what is the Almighty? Shall we prostrate to what you order us?" And it increases their aversion
Blessed is the One Who made towers in the heaven and He made in it a lamp and an illuminating moon
AndHe is the One Who made the night and the day in succession, for those who wish to remember or wish to be thankful
Andthe servants of the Almighty who walk on the earth in humility and if the ignorant speak to them, they say: "Peace
Andthose who stay awake for their Lord, in prostration and standing
Andthose who say: "Our Lord, avert from us the retribution of Hell. Its retribution is terrible
It is a miserable abode and station
Andthose who when they give they are not excessive nor stingy, but they are in a measure between that
Andthose who do not call on any other god with God; nor do they take the life which God has made forbidden, except in justice; nor do they commit adultery. And whoever does will receive the punishment
Theretribution will be doubled for him on the Day of Resurrection and he will abide in it in disgrace
Except for the one who repents and believes and does good works, for those God will replace their sins with good, and God is Forgiving, Merciful
Andwhoever repents, and does good, then he shall repent towards God a true repentance
Andthose who do not bear false witness, and if they pass by vain talk they pass by with dignity
Andthose who when they are reminded of the revelations of their Lord, they do not fall on them deaf and blind
Andthose who say: "Our Lord, grant us from our mates and our progeny what will be the comfort of our eyes, and make us leaders for the righteous
These will be rewarded with a dwelling for what they have been patient for, and they will find in it a greeting and peace
In it they will abide, what an excellent abode and station
Say: "My Lord would not care about you except for your imploring. But you have denied, so it will be your destiny
T'SM
These are the signs of the Book of clarity
Perhaps you grieve yourself that they do not become believers
IfWe wish, We could send down for them from the heavens a sign, to which they would bend their necks in humility
And not a reminder comes to them from the Almighty, except that they turn away from it
They have denied, thus the news will come to them of what they used to mock
Did they not look to the earth, how many plants have We raised in it, from each a good pair
Inthat is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
Andwhen your Lord called to Moses: "Go to the people who are wicked
The people of Pharaoh. Will they not be righteous
He said: "My Lord, I fear that they would deny me
And my chest would become tight, and my tongue would not be able to express; so send for Aaron
And they have charges of a crime against me, so I fear they will kill me
He said: "Indeed not! Go both of you with Our signs. I am with you listening
So both of you go to Pharaoh and say: 'We are messengers of the Lord of the worlds
Sosend with us the Children of Israel
He said: "Did we not raise you among us as a new born, and you stayed with us for many of your years
And you did that deed you did, and you are of the rejecters
He said: "I did it, and I was of those misguided
SoI ran away from you all, for I feared you. So my Lord granted me judgment, and made me of the messengers
And is it a favor that you taunt me with, so you could continue to enslave the Children of Israel
Pharaoh said: "And what is the Lord of the worlds
He said: "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, if you are aware
He said to those around him: "Do you hear that
He said: "Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old
He said: "This messenger of yours who has been sent to you is crazy
He said: "The Lord of the east and the west, and what is between them, if you comprehend
He said: "If you take a god other than me, then I will put you among the prisoners
He said: "What if I brought you proof
He said: "Then bring it forth if you are of the truthful ones
So he cast his staff, then it manifested into a serpent
Andhe drew out his hand, then it became white to the onlookers
He said to the commanders around him: "This is a knowledgeable magician
Hewants to bring you out of your land with his magic. So what will you decide
They said: "Delay him and his brother, and send gatherers to the cities
They will come to you with every knowledgeable magician
So the magicians were gathered to an appointed day
Andit was said to the people: "Will you also gather
Perhaps we can follow the magicians if they are the winners
So when the magicians came, they said to Pharaoh: "We should be rewarded if we are the winners
He said: "Yes, and you shall also be near to me
Moses said to them: "Cast down what it is you will cast
So they cast down their ropes and staffs and they said: "By the might of Pharaoh, we will be the winners
So Moses cast down his staff, then it was eating-up all that they showed
So the magicians went down prostrating
They said: "We believe in the Lord of the worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
He said: "Have you believed unto him before I permitted you? He is surely your great one who has taught you magic. So you shall come to know, I will cut off your hands and feet from alternate sides, and I will crucify you all
They said: "There is no worry, for we are all returning to our Lord
Wehope that our Lord will forgive us our wrongdoings, as we are the first to believe
AndWe inspired Moses: "Take away My servants, for you will be followed
So Pharaoh sent gatherers to the cities
These are but a small band
And they have done what has enraged us
And we are all gathered and forewarned
So,We evicted them out of gardens and springs
Andtreasures and an honorable station
As such, We gave it to the Children of Israel
So they were pursued at sunrise
Butwhen the two groups saw each other, the companions of Moses said: "We are caught
He said: "No, my Lord is with me and He will guide me
So We inspired to Moses: "Strike the sea with your staff." So it split into two, each side like a great mountain
AndWe then brought them to the other side
AndWe saved Moses and all those with him
Then We drowned the others
In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
Andyour Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
Andrecite to them the news of Abraham
When he said to his father and his people: "What do you worship
They said: "We worship statues; thus we stay devoted to them
He said: "Do they hear you when you call to them
Ordo they benefit you or harm you
They said: "No, but we found our fathers doing the same
He said: "Do you see that which you have been worshipping
You and your fathers of old
They are enemies to me, except for the Lord of the worlds
The One who has created me, He will guide me
And He is the One who feeds me and gives me to drink
And if I am sick, He is the One who cures me
And the One who will make me die and then bring me to life
And the One whom I hope will forgive my mistakes on the Day of Recompense
MyLord, grant me authority and join me with the good doers
And give me a tongue that is true for those who will follow
And make me of the inheritors of gardens of bliss
And forgive my father, for he was of those misguided
And do not disgrace me on the Day when they are resurrected
The Day when no money or sons can help
Except for he who comes to God with a pure heart
Andthe Paradise was made near for the righteous
AndHell was displayed for the wrongdoers
Andit was said to them: "Where is what you used to worship
Without God; can they help you or help themselves
So they were thrown in it on their faces, them and the wrongdoers
And all the soldiers of Satan
They said, while they were disputing therein
ByGod, we were clearly misguided
For we equated you with the Lord of the worlds
And none misled us except the criminals
So we have none to intercede for us
Nora close friend
If only we could have another chance, we would be among the believers
In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
The people of Noah disbelieved the messengers
Whentheir brother Noah said to them: "Will you not be righteous
I am to you a trustworthy messenger
So be aware of God and obey me
AndI do not ask you for any wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds
So be aware of God and obey me
Theysaid: "Shall we believe to you when the lowest type of people have followed you
He said: "And what knowledge do I have of what they used to do
Their judgment is on my Lord, if you could know
AndI will not drive away the believers
I am but a clear warner
They said: "If you do not cease, O Noah, you will be of those who are stoned
He said: "My Lord, my people have denied me
So open between me and them a rift, and save me and those who are with me of the believers
So We saved him and those who were with him in the charged ship
Thenafter that We drowned the rest
In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
Aad denied the messengers
For their brother Hud said to them: "Will you not be righteous
I am to you a clear messenger
So be aware of God and obey me
AndI do not ask you for any wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds
Do you build on every high place a symbol, for the sake of vanity
Andyou take for yourselves strongholds, perhaps you will live forever
Andif you attack, you strike ruthlessly
So be aware of God and obey me
Andbe aware of the One who provided you with what you know
He provided you with livestock and sons
Andgardens and springs
I fear for you the retribution of a great day
Theysaid: "It is the same whether you preach or do not preach
This is nothing except an invention by the people of old
Andwe are not going to be punished
So they denied him, and We destroyed them. In that is a sign, but most are not believers
And your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
Thamud denied the messengers
For their brother Saleh said to them: "Will you not be righteous
I am to you a clear messenger
So be aware of God and obey me
AndI do not ask you for any wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds
Will you be left secure in that which you have here
In gardens and springs
Andgreen crops and palm trees laden with fruit
Andyou carve homes out of the mountains with great skill
So be aware of God and obey me
Anddo not obey the command of the carefree
Theones who corrupt in the land and are not reformers
They said: "You are but one of those bewitched
Youare but a human being like us. So bring a sign if you are of the truthful ones
He said: "This is a female camel, for her is a share of water, and for you is a share of water, each on an appointed day
Anddo not afflict her with harm, else the retribution of a great day will seize you
But they slaughtered her, and they became regretful
So the retribution took them. In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
The people of Lot denied the messengers
For their brother Lot said to them: "Will you not be righteous
I am to you a trustworthy messenger
So be aware of God and obey me
AndI do not ask you for any wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds
Do you approach the males of the worlds
And you leave what your Lord has created for you of mates? You are an intrusive people
Theysaid: "If you do not cease O Lot, you will be among those driven out
He said: "I am in severe opposition to your acts
My Lord, save me and my family from what they do
So We saved him and his entire family
Except for an old woman who remained
ThenWe destroyed the others
And We rained upon them a rain. Miserable was the rain to those who had been warned
In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And that your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
The people of the Sycamore disbelieved the messengers
For Shu'ayb said to them: "Will you not be righteous
I am to you a trustworthy messenger
So be aware of God and obey me
AndI do not ask you for any wage, for my reward is upon the Lord of the worlds
Give full measure and do not be of those who cause losses
Andweigh with the balance that is straight
Anddo not defraud the people of their belongings, and do not venture into the land corrupting
Andbe aware of the One who has created you and the generations of old
Theysaid: "You are but one of those bewitched
Andyou are nothing but a human being like us, and we think you are one of those who lie
So let pieces from the heaven fall upon us if you are of those who are truthful
He said: "My Lord is most aware of what you do
But they denied him, so the retribution of the day of shadow took them. It was the retribution of a terrible day
In that is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And your Lord is the Noble, the Merciful
And this is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
It was sent down with the trusted Spirit
Uponyour heart, so that you would be of the warners
In a clear Arabic tongue
And it is in the scriptures of old
Was it not a sign for them that the scholars of the Children of Israel knew it
And had We sent it down upon some of the foreigners
And he read it to them, they would not have believed in it
As such, We diverted it from the hearts of the criminals
Theydo not believe in it until they see the painful retribution
So it will come to them suddenly, while they do not perceive it
Thenthey would say: "Can we be given more time
Was it not their wish that Our punishment be hastened
Do you see that if We gave them luxury for years
Thenwhat they were promised came to them
All the luxury they were given will not avail them
And We have not destroyed any town except after having warners
By way of a reminder, and We were never unjust
And it is not the devils who have brought this down
Nor would they, nor could they
Theyare blocked from overhearing
So do not call upon any other god with God, else you will be with those punished
And warn your closest kin
And lower your wing for any who follow you of the believers
But,if they disobey you, say: "I am innocent from what you do
And put your trust in the Noble, the Merciful
The One who sees you when you stand
And your movements among those who prostrate
He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
Shall I inform you on whom the devils come down
Theycome down on every sinful liar
Theyclaim to listen, but most of them are liars
And the poets, are followed by the strayers
Do you not see that they traverse in every valley
And that what they say, is not what they do
Except for those who believe, and do good works, and remember God greatly, and were victorious after they were wronged. As for those who did wrong, they will know which fate they will meet
T'S, these are the signs of the Qur'an and a clear Book
A guide and good news to the believers
Those who hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification, and regarding the Hereafter they are certain
As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have made their work appear pleasing to them, so they walk around blind
They will have the worst retribution, and in the Hereafter they are the biggest losers
And you are receiving the Qur'an from One who is Wise, Knowledgeable
And Moses said to his family: "I have seen a fire, I will bring you from there some news or I will bring you a burning piece so that you may be warmed
So when he came to it he was called: "Blessed is the One at the fire and whoever is around it, and glory to God, Lord of the worlds
O Moses, it is I God, the Noble, the Wise
And cast down your staff." So when he saw it vibrate as if it were a Jinn, he ran away and would not turn back. "O Moses, do not fear, for My messengers shall have no fear from Me
Except he who has done wrong. But then if he replaces the evil deed with good, then I am Forgiving, Merciful
And place your hand into your pocket; it will come out white with no blemish, one of nine signs to Pharaoh and his people; for they are a wicked people
So when Our signs came to them for all to see, they said: "This is clearly magic
And they rejected them, while their souls knew, out of transgression and arrogance. So see how it ended for the wicked
And We bestowed upon David and Solomon knowledge, and they both said: "Praise be to God who preferred us over many of His believing servants
And Solomon inherited from David, and he said: "O people, we have been taught how to understand the speech of the creatures that fly, and we have been given from everything. This is indeed an evident grace
And the soldiers of Solomon were gathered, comprising of mankind and Jinn and birds, for they were to be spread out
Until they came to a valley of ants, a female ant said: "O ants, enter your homes else you will be crushed by Solomon andhis soldiers while they do not notice
He then smiled, amused by what she said. And he said: "My Lord, help me to be thankful for the blessings You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and that I may do good works that please You, and admit me by Your mercy with Your righteous servants
And he inspected the birds, then said: "Why do I not see the hoopoe, or is he among those absent
I will punish him severely, or I will kill him, else he should have a clear excuse
But the hoopoe did not stay away long, then he said: "I have seen what you do not know, and I have come to you from Sheba with news which is certain
I found them ruled by a woman, and she was given all possessions, and she had a great throne
And I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of God! And the devil had made their works appear good to them, so he kept them away from the path, for they are not being guided
Will they not prostrate to God who brings out what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you declare
God, there is no god except He, the Lord of the supreme Throne
He said: "We will see if you are being truthful or are one of those who lie
Take this letter of mine and cast it to them, then withdraw from them and observe what they respond with
She said: "O commanders, a noble letter has been delivered to me
It is from Solomon, and it reads: 'In the name of God, the Almighty, the Merciful
Do not be arrogant towards me and come to me as submitters
She said: "O commanders, advise me in this matter of mine, for I will not take a decision until you give testimony
They said: "We are a people of strength and mighty in power. But the decision is yours, so see what you will command
She said: "When the kings enter a town they destroy it and make its most noble people humiliated. It is such that they do
And I will send to them a gift, then I will see with what the messengers will return
So when they came to Solomon he said: "Are you providing me with wealth? What God has provided for me is far better than what He has given you. Now you are happy with your gift
Go back to them. For we shall come to them with soldiers the like of which they have never seen, and we will drive them out humiliated, while they are feeble
He said: "O commanders, which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission
A powerful being from among the Jinn said: "I will bring it to you before you rise from your station. For I am strong and trustworthy
And one who had knowledge from the Book said: "I will bring it to you before you blink." So when he saw it resting before him, he said: "This is from the grace of my Lord, so that He tests me whether I am thankful or whether I reject. As for he who is thankful, he is thankful for himself, and as for he who rejects, then my Lord is Rich, Bountiful
He said: "Disguise her throne so we may see if she will be guided or if she will be of those who are not guided
So when she came, it was said: "Is your throne like this?" She said: "It appears to be similar." "And we were given knowledge before her, and we had submitted
And she was prevented by that which she served besides God. She was of the people who were rejecters
It was said to her: "Enter the palace." So when she saw it she thought there was a pool, and she uncovered her legs. He said: "It is a palace paved with crystal." She said: "My Lord, I have wronged myself; and I submit with Solomon to God, Lord of the worlds
And We have sent to Thamud their brother Saleh: "You shall serve God." But they became two disputing groups
He said: "My people, why do you hasten with evil ahead of good? If you would only seek the forgiveness of God, perhaps you will receive mercy
They said: "You have an ill omen with you and those with you." He said: "Your ill omen is with God, but you are a people who are being tested
And in the city were nine ruffians who were causing corruption in the land, and they were not reforming
They said: "Swear by God to one another that we will attack him and his family at night, and we will then say to his supporters: 'We did not witness who murdered his family, and we are being truthful
And they schemed a scheme and We schemed a scheme, while they did not notice
So see what the result of their planning was! We destroyed them and their people together
So these are their homes, ruined, for what they transgressed.In that is a sign for a people who know
And We saved those who believed and were righteous
And Lot, when he said to his people: "Why do you commit immorality when you can clearly see
You are approaching the men out of desire instead of the women! Indeed, you are an ignorant people
But the reply of his people was that they said: "Expel the family of Lot from your town, for they are a people who are being pure
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife; We found her to be of those doomed
And We rained down a rain upon them. Miserable was the rain of those warned
Say: "Praise be to God, and peace be upon His servants whom He has selected." Is God better, or that which you set up
The One who has created the heavens and the earth, and He sent down water from the sky for you, so We cause gardens to grow with it that are full of beauty. It is not your ability that causes the growth of its trees. Is there a god with God? No. But they are a people who ascribe equals
The One who made the earth a habitat, and He made in it rivers and He made for it stabilizers, and He made between the two seas a barrier. Is there a god with God? No. But most of them do not know
The One who answers the distressed when he calls Him, and He removes the evil, and He makes you successors on the earth. Is there a god with God? Little do you remember
The One who guides you in the darkness of the land and the sea, and He sends the winds to spread between the hands of His mercy. Is there a god with God? God be exalted above what they set up
The One who initiates the creation then He returns it, and He provides for you from the sky and the land. Is there a god with God? Say: "Bring your proof if you are being truthful
Say: "None in the heavens or the earth know the unseen except God. And they do not perceive when they will be resurrected
No, they have no knowledge of the Hereafter. No, they are in doubt regarding it. No, they are blind to it
And those who rejected said: "When we have become dust, as our fathers, shall we be brought out
We have been promised this, both us and our fathers before. This is nothing except fictional tales of old
Say: "Roam the earth and see how was the end of the criminals
And do not be saddened for them, and do not be distraught for what they plot
And they say: "When is this promise if you are truthful
Say: "Perhaps He is now sending your way some of that which you hasten
And your Lord has given grace to the people, but most of them are not thankful
And your Lord knows what is concealed in their chests and what they reveal
And there is not a thing hidden in the heavens or the earth, but is in a clear record
This Qur'an tells to the Children of Israel most of that which they are in dispute over
And it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers
Your Lord decides between them by His judgment. And He is the Noble, the Knowledgeable
So put your trust in God, for you are clearly on the truth
You cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and flee
Nor can you guide the blind from their misguidance. You can only make those who believe in Our revelations hear you, for they have submitted
And when the punishment has been deserved by them, We will bring out for them a creature from the earth, it will speak to them that the people have been unaware regarding Our revelations
And the Day We gather from every nation a party that denied Our revelations, then they will be driven
Then, when they have come, He will say: "Have you denied My revelations while you had no explicit knowledge of them? What were you doing
And the punishment was deserved by them for what they transgressed; they shall not speak
Did they not see that We made the night for them to reside in, and the day to see in? In that are signs for a people who have faith
And on the Day when the horn is blown, then those in the heavens and the earth will be horrified, except for whom God wills. And all shall come to Him humbled
And you see the mountains, you think they are solid, while they are passing by like the clouds. The making of God who perfected everything. He is Expert over what you do
Whoever comes with a good deed will receive better than it, and from the terror of that Day they will be safe
And whoever comes with the bad deed, their faces will be cast in Hell. Are you not being rewarded for what you used to do
I have been ordered to serve the Lord of this land that He has made restricted, and to Him are all things, and I have been ordered to be of those who submit
And that I recite the Qur'an." He who is guided is guided for himself, and to he who is misguided, say: "I am but one of the warners
Say: "Praise be to God, He will show you His signs and you will know them. And your Lord is not unaware of what you do
T'SM
These are the signs of the clear Book
We recite to you from the news of Moses and Pharaoh with fact, for a people who believe
Pharaoh became mighty in the land, and he turned its people into factions; he oppressed a group of them by killing their children and raping their women. He was of those who corrupted
And We wanted to help those who were oppressed in the land, and to make them leaders, and to make them the inheritors
And to enable them in the land, and to show Pharaoh and Haamaan and their troops what they had feared
And We inspired to Moses' mother: "Suckle him, and when you become fearful for him, then cast him off in the sea, and do not fear nor grieve. We will return him to you and We will make him of the messengers
Then the family of Pharaoh picked him up, so he would be an enemy to them and a source of sadness. Certainly, Pharaoh and Haamaan and their troops were wrongdoers
And the wife of Pharaoh said: "A pleasure to my eye and yours, so do not kill him, perhaps he will benefit us or we may take him as a son;" while they did not perceive
And the heart of Moses' mother became anxious, that she nearly revealed her identity. But We strengthened her heart, so that she would be of the believers
And she said to his sister: "Follow his path." So she watched him from afar, while they did not notice
And We forbade him from accepting all the nursing mothers. Then his sister said: "Shall I lead you to a household that can nurse him for you, and take good care of him
Thus, We returned him to his mother, so that she may be pleased and not be saddened, and to let her know that the promise of God is the truth. However, most of them do not know
And when he reached his independence and was established, We bestowed him with wisdom and knowledge. We thus reward the good doers
And he entered the city unexpectedly, without being noticed by the people. He found in it two men who were fighting, one was from his clan, and the other was from that of his enemy. So the one who was from his clan called on him for help against his enemy, whereby Moses punched him, killing him. He said: "This is from the work of the devil; he is an enemy that clearly misleads
He said: "My Lord, I have wronged my soul, so forgive me." He then forgave him, for He is the Forgiver, the Merciful
He said: "My Lord, for what blessings you have bestowed upon me, I will never be a supporter for the criminals
So he spent the night in the city, afraid and watchful. Then the one who sought his help yesterday, was asking again for his help. Moses said to him: "You are clearly a trouble maker
But when he was about to strike their common enemy, he said: "O Moses, do you want to kill me, as you killed that person yesterday? Obviously, you wish to be a tyrant on the earth; you do not wish to be of the righteous
And a man came running from the farthest part of the city, saying: "O Moses, the commanders are plotting to kill you, so leave immediately. I am giving you good advice
He exited the city, afraid and watchful. He said: "My Lord, save me from the wicked people
And as he traveled towards Midyan, he said: "Perhaps my Lord will guide me to the right path
When he arrived at the watering hole of Midyan, he found a crowd of people watering, and he found two women waiting on the side. He said: "What is holding you back." They said: "We cannot draw water until the shepherds finish, and our father is an old man
So he drew water for them, then he turned to a shaded area, and he said: "My Lord, I am poor, lacking any provisions You may have sent down
So one of the two women approached him, shyly, and said: "My father invites you to reward you for watering for us." So when he came to him, and told to him the stories, he said: "Do not fear, for you have been saved from the wicked people
One of the two women said: "O my father, hire him. For the best to be hired is one who is strong and honest
He said: "I wish you to marry one of my two daughters, on condition that you work for me through eight pilgrimage periods; if you complete them to ten, it will be voluntary on your part. I do not wish to make this matter too difficult for you. You will find me, God willing, of the righteous
He said: "It is then an agreement between me and you. Whichever period I fulfill, you will not be averse to either one. And God is entrusted over what we said
So after Moses fulfilled his obligation and was traveling with his family, he saw a fire on the slope of the mount. He said to his family: "Stay here, I have seen a fire, perhaps I can bring you from there some news or a burning piece of the fire so that you may be warmed
So when he reached it, he was called from the edge of the right side of the valley at the blessed area of the tree: "O Moses, it is I, God, Lord of the worlds
And cast down your staff." So when he saw it vibrate as if it were a Jinn, he turned around to flee and would not return. "O Moses, come forward and do not be afraid. You are of those who are safe
Place your hand into your pocket. It will come out white without any blemish, and fold your hand close to your side against fear. These are two proofs from your Lord, to Pharaoh and his commanders; for they are a wicked people
He said: "My Lord, I have killed a person from them, so I fear that they will kill me
And my brother Aaron is more eloquent in speech than I. So send him with me to help and to confirm me. For I fear that they will deny me
He said: "We will strengthen you with your brother, and We will provide you both with authority. Thus, they will not be able to touch either one of you. With Our signs, the two of you, along with those who follow you, will be the victors
So when Moses went to them with Our clear signs, they said: "This is nothing but fabricated magic; nor did we hear of this from our fathers of old
And Moses said: "My Lord is fully aware of who has come with the guidance from Him, and who will have the best deal in the Hereafter. The wicked never succeed
And Pharaoh said: "O commanders, I have not known of any god for you other than me. Therefore, O Haamaan, fire-up the bricks and make for me a high platform, so perhaps I may take a look at the god of Moses; though I think he is one of the liars
And he and his soldiers were arrogant in the land without any right, and they thought that they would not be returned to Us
So We took him and his soldiers, and We cast them into the sea. So see how was the end of the wicked
We made them leaders, inviting to the Fire. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will not be supported
And We made them followed by a curse in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be despised
We had given Moses the Book after We had destroyed the earlier generations; as an example for the people and a guidance and a mercy, perhaps they will take heed
And you were not on the western slope when We decreed the command to Moses. You were not a witness
And We established many generations, and many ages passed them by. And you were not living among the people of Midyan, reciting Our revelations to them. But We were to send messengers
And nor were you on the side of the mount when We called. But it is a mercy from your Lord, so that you may warn a people who received no warner before you, perhaps they may take heed
Thus, if any disaster strikes them as a consequence of their own deeds they cannot Say: "Our Lord, if only You sent a messenger to us, so that we would follow Your revelations, and we would be of the believers
But when the truth came to them from Us, they said: "If only he was given the same that was given to Moses!" Had they not rejected what was given to Moses before? They had said: "Two magicians assisting one another." And they said: "We reject all these things
Say: "Then bring forth a book from God that is better than them in guidance so I may follow it, if you are truthful
But if they fail to respond to you, then know that they follow only their desires. And who is more astray than he who follows his desire, without guidance from God? God does not guide the wicked people
And We have delivered the message, perhaps they may take heed
Those to whom We had given the Book before this, they will believe in it
And if it is recited to them, they say: "We believe in it. It is the truth from our Lord. Indeed, we had submitted before it
To these We grant twice the reward for that they have been patient. And they counter evil with good, and from Our provisions to them, they give
And if they come across vain talk, they disregard it and say: "To us are our deeds, and to you are your deeds. Peace be upon you. We do not seek the ignorant
You cannot guide whom you love. But it is God who guides whom He wills; and He is fully aware of those who receive the guidance
And they said: "If we follow the guidance with you, we will be deposed from our land." Did We not establish for them a safe territory, to which all kinds of fruits are offered, as a provision from Us? Indeed, most of them do not know
And how many a town have We destroyed that had become unappreciative of its livelihood. So here are their dwellings, they remained uninhabited after them, except for a few. And We were the inheritors
And your Lord was not to destroy the towns until He sends a messenger to their capital, to recite Our revelations to them. And We do not destroy the towns unless its people are wicked
And anything that is given to you is only the materialism of this world, and its glitter. And what is with God is far better, and more lasting. Do you not comprehend
Is one whom We promised a good promise, and it will come to pass, equal to one whom We provided with the goods of this life, then on the Day of Resurrection he is of those who will be summoned
And on the Day when He calls upon them, saying: "Where are My partners whom you used to claim
Those who have deserved the retribution will say: "Our Lord, these are the ones we misled; we misled them only because we ourselves were misled. We seek to absolve ourselves to You, it was not us that they worshipped
And it will be said: "Call upon your partners," but they will not respond to them. And they will see the retribution. If only they were guided
On that Day, He will ask them and say: "What was the answer you gave to the messengers
They will be shocked by the news on that Day, they will be speechless
As for the one who repents, believes, and does good works; perhaps he will be with the winners
And your Lord creates what He wills, and He selects; it is not for them to select. Glory be to God, He is far above the partners they set up
And your Lord knows what is concealed in their chests and what they declare
And He is God, there is no god except He. To Him belongs all praise in the first and in the last, and judgment belongs with Him, and to Him you will be returned
Say: "Have you noted: what if God made the night eternal, until the Day of Resurrection? Which god, other than God, can bring you with light? Do you not listen
Say: "Have you noted: what if God made the daylight eternal, until the Day of Resurrection? Which god, other than God, can provide you with night for you to reside in? Do you not see
And from His mercy is that He created for you the night and the day; that you may reside in it, and that you may seek of His provisions; and perhaps you may be thankful
And the Day He will call them and say: "Where are My partners whom you had claimed
And We will extract from every nation a witness, then We will say: "Bring forth your proof." They will then realize that all truth belongs with God, and what they had invented will abandon them
Qaroon was from among the people of Moses, but he betrayed them. And We gave him such treasures that the keys thereof were almost too heavy for the strongest person.His people said to him: "Do not glee, for God does not love the gleeful
And seek with the provisions bestowed upon you by God the abode of the Hereafter, and do not forget your share in this world, and do good as God has done good to you. And do not seek corruption in the land. God does not love the corrupters
He said: "I have attained all this only because of my own knowledge." Did he not realize that God had annihilated before him generations that were much stronger than he, and greater in riches? The transgressors were not asked about their crimes
Then he came out among his people draped in his ornaments. Those who preferred this worldly life said: "Oh, if only we were given similar to what Qaroon has been given. Indeed, he is very fortunate
And those who were blessed with knowledge said: "Woe to you! The reward from God is far better for those who believe and do good work. And none attains it except the steadfast
We then caused the earth to swallow him and his mansion. He had no group that could protect him against God; nor would he be victorious
And those who wished they were in his place the day before said: "Indeed it is God Who provides or restricts for whoever He chooses from among His servants. Had it not been for the grace of God towards us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us as well. We now realize that the rejecters never succeed
Such will be the abode of the Hereafter; We reserve it for those who do not seek prestige on the earth, nor corruption; and the ending will be for the righteous
Whoever brings forth a good deed, he will receive a better reward than it. And whoever brings forth a sin then the retribution for their sins will be to the extent of their deeds
Surely, the One who decreed the Qur'an to you will summon you to a predetermined appointment. Say: "My Lord is fully aware of who it is that brings the guidance, and who has gone astray
Nor did you expect this Book to come your way; but this is a mercy from your Lord. Therefore, you shall not side with the rejecters
Nor shall you be diverted from the revelations of God after they have come to you. And invite to your Lord. And do not be of the polytheists
And do not call besides God any god, there is no god except He. Everything will fade away except His face. To Him is the judgment, and to Him you will be returned
ALM
Did the people think that they will be left to say: "We believe" without being put to the test
We had tested those before them, so that God would distinguish those who are truthful and so that He would know the liars
Or did those who sinned think that they would be ahead of Us? Miserable indeed is their judgment
Whoever looks forward to meeting God, then the meeting of God will come. And He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
And whoever strives is only striving for himself; for God is in no need of the worlds
And those who believed and did good works, We will cancel their sins and We will reward them in the best for what they did
And We instructed man to be good to his parents. But if they strive to make you set up partners with Me, then do not obey them. To Me are all your destinies, and I will inform you of what you used to do
And those who believed and did good works, We will admit them with the righteous
And from among the people are those who say: "We believe in God," but if he is harmed in the sake of God, he equates the persecution inflicted by the people with the punishment of God! And if a victory comes from your Lord, he says: "We were with you!" Is God not fully aware of what is in the chests of the worlds
God is fully aware of those who believed, and He is fully aware of the hypocrites
And those who rejected said to those who believed: "Follow our path and we will carry your mistakes." But they cannot carry anything from their mistakes, they are liars
And they will carry their own burdens, and burdens with their burdens, and they will be asked on the Day of Resurrection regarding what they fabricated
And We had sent Noah to his people, so he stayed with them one thousand years less fifty. Then the flood took them while they were wicked
So We saved him and the people on the ship, and We made it a sign for the worlds
And Abraham when he said to his people: "Serve God and be aware of Him, that is better for you if only you knew
You are worshipping nothing except idols besides Him, and you are creating fabrications. Those that you worship besides God do not possess for you any provision, so seek with God the provision and serve Him and be thankful to Him; to Him you will return
And if you disbelieve, then nations before you have also disbelieved." The messenger is only required to deliver clearly
Did they not observe how God initiates the creation then He returns it? All that for God is easy to do
Say: "Roam the earth and observe how the creation was initiated. Thus God will establish the final creation. God is capable of all things
God will punish whom He wills and He will have mercy on whom He wills, and to Him you will return
And you will not be able to escape this fact, on the earth or in the heavens, nor do you have besides God any ally or victor
And those who rejected the revelations of God and in meeting Him; those have forsaken My mercy; and they will have a painful retribution
But the only response from his people was their saying: "Kill him, or burn him." But God saved him from the fire. In this are signs for a people who believe
And he said: "You have taken idols besides God in order to preserve some friendship among you in this worldly life. But then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will reject one another, and curse one another. Your destiny is Hell, and you will have no victors
Lot believed with him and said: "I am emigrating to my Lord. He is the Noble, the Wise
And We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and We made within his progeny the prophethood and the Book. And We gave him his reward in this world, and in the Hereafter he is among the righteous
And Lot, when he said to his people: "You commit an immorality that no others in the world have done before
You sexually approach men, and you commit highway robbery, and you bring all vice to your society." But the only response from his people was to say: "Bring us the retribution of God, if you are being truthful
He said: "My Lord, grant me victory over the wicked people
And when Our messengers came to Abraham with good news, they said: "We are to destroy the people of such a town, for its people have been wicked
He said: "But Lot is in it!" They said: "We are fully aware of who is in it. We will save him and his family, except his wife; she is of those doomed
And when Our messengers came to Lot, they were mistreated, and he was embarrassed towards them. And they said: "Do not fear, and do not be saddened. We will save you and your family, except for your wife; she is of those doomed
We will send down upon the people of this town an affliction from the heaven for what wickedness they were in
And We left remains of it as a clear sign for a people who comprehend
And to Midyan was their brother Shu'ayb. He said: "O my people, serve God and seek the Last Day, and do not roam the earth corrupting
But they denied him, so the earthquake took them; thus they became lifeless in their dwelling
And 'Aad and Thamud. Much was made apparent to you from their dwellings. The devil had adorned their works in their eyes, thus he diverted them from the path, even though they could see
And Qaroon, and Pharaoh, and Haamaan;Moses went to them with clear proofs. But they became arrogant in the land, and they were not the first
We took each by his sins. Some of them We sent upon him violent winds, some of them were taken by the scream, some of them We caused the earth to swallow, and some of them We drowned. God is not the One who wronged them; it is they who wronged themselves
The example of those who take allies besides God is like the spider how it makes a home; and the weakest home is the home of the spider, if only they knew
God knows that what they are calling on besides Him is nothing. He is the Noble, the Wise
Such are the examples We put forth for the people, but none comprehend except the knowledgeable
God created the heavens and the earth with truth. In that is a sign for the faithful
Recite what is inspired to you of the Bookand hold the contact prayer, for the contact prayer prohibits immorality and vice; but certainly the remembrance of God is the greatest. God knows everything you do
And do not argue with the people of the Book except in that which is better; except for those who are wicked among them; and say: "We believe in what was revealed to us and in what was revealed to you, and our god and your god is the same; to Him we submit
And similarly, We have sent down to you the Book. Thus, those whom We have given the Book will believe in it. Also, some of your people will believe in it. The only ones who mock Our revelations are the rejecters
You were not reciting any Book before this, nor were you writing one down by your hand. In that case, the doubters would have had reason
In fact, it is a clear revelation in the chests of those who have been given knowledge. And it is only the wicked who doubt Our revelations
And they said: "If only signs would come down to him from his Lord!" Say: "All signs are with God, and I am but a clear warner
Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the Book that is being recited to them? In that is a mercy and a reminder for people who believe
Say: "God is enough as a witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. As for those who believe in falsehood and reject God, they are the losers
And they hasten you for the retribution! If it were not for an appointed term, the retribution would have come to them. Itwill come to them suddenly, when they do not expect
They hasten you for the retribution; while Hell surrounds the rejecters
The Day will come when the retribution overwhelms them, from above them and from beneath their feet; and We will say: "Taste the results of what you used to do
O My servants who believed, My earth is spacious, so serve only Me
Every soul will taste death, then to Us you will be returned
And those who believe and do good works, We will settle them in mansions in the Paradise, with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein. Excellent is the reward for the workers
They are the ones who were patient, and put their trust in their Lord
And many a creature does not carry its provision; God provides for it, and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
And if you ask them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth, and put the sun and the moon in motion?" They will say: "God." Why then did they deviate
God expands the provision for whoever He chooses from among His servants, and withholds it. God is fully aware of all things
And if you ask them: "Who sends down water from the sky, thus reviving the land after its death?" They will say: "God." Say: "Praise be to God." But most of them do not comprehend
And this worldly life is no more than distraction and play, while the abode of the Hereafter is the reality, if only they knew
When they ride on a ship, they call on God,devoting the system to Him. But as soon as He saves them to the shore, they set up partners
Let them reject what We have given them, and let them enjoy; for they will come to know
Have they not seen that We have established a safe territory, while all around them the people are in constant danger? Would they still believe in falsehood, and reject the blessings of God
Who is more evil than he who fabricates lies and attributes them to God, or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a place in Hell for the rejecters
As for those who strive in Our cause, We will guide them to Our paths. For God is with the pious
ALM
The Romans have won
At the lowest part on the earth. But after their victory, they will be defeated
In a few more years. The decision before and after is for God, and on that day the believers will rejoice
With the victory of God. God gives victory to whom He wishes; He is the Noble, the Merciful
Such is the pledge of God, and God does not break His pledge, but most of the people do not know
They only know the outside appearance of the worldly life; and regarding the Hereafter, they are ignorant
Did they not reflect upon themselves? God did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them except with truth and an appointed term. But most of the people are in denial regarding their meeting with their Lord
Did they not roam the earth and see how it ended for those before them? They were more powerful than them, and they cultivated the land and they built in it far more than these have built, and their messengers came to them with the proofs. God was not to wrong them, but it was they who wronged themselves
Then the end of those who did evil was evil, that is because they denied the signs of God, and they used to mock them
God initiates the creation, then He repeats it, then to Him you will return
And the Day when the Hour will be established, the criminals will be in despair
And they did not have any intercessors from the partners they set up, and they will reject such partners
And on the Day the Hour is established, they will be separated
So, those who believed and did good works, they will be delighted in a luxurious place
And as for those who rejected and denied Our revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter, they shall be brought forth for the retribution
So glory be to God, when you retire and when you wake
And to Him is all praise in the heavens and the earth, and in the evening and when you go out
He brings the living out of the dead, and He brings the dead out of the living. And He revives the land after its death. And similarly you will be brought out
And from His signs is that He created you from dust, then you became human beings, spreading out
And from His signs is that He created for you mates from yourselves that you may reside with them, and He placed between you affection and mercy. In that are signs for a people who reflect
And from His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference of your tongues and your colors. In that are signs for the world
And from His signs is your sleep by night and day, and your seeking of His bounty. In that are signs for a people who listen
And from His signs is that He shows you the lightning, giving you fear and hope, and He sends down water from the sky, and He revives the land with it after its death. In that are signs for a people who comprehend
And from His signs is that the heavens and the earth will rise by His command. Then, when He calls you forth from the earth, you will come out
And to Him is all that is in the heavens and the earth. All are dutiful to Him
And He is the One who initiates the creation, then He repeats it, and this is easy for Him. And to Him is the highest example in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Noble, the Wise
An example is put forth for you from among yourselves: are there any from among those who are maintained by your oaths that are partners to you in what provisions We have given you that you become equal therein? Would you fear them as you fear each other? It is such that We clarify the revelations for a people who have sense
No, those who were wrong followed their desires without knowledge. So who can guide he whom God misguides? And they will have no victors
So establish yourself to the system of monotheism. It is the inclination that God has nurtured the people on. There is no changing in the creation of God. Such is the pure system, but most of the people do not know
Turn to Him, and be aware of Him, and hold the contact prayer, and do not be of the polytheists
From those who have divided their system and become sects, each group is happy with what it has
And if harm afflicts the people, they call out sincerely to their Lord. But then, when He gives them a taste of His mercy, a group of them set up partners with their Lord
So as to reject what We gave them. Enjoy then, for you will come to know
Or have We sent down to them an authority, which speaks to them of that which they have set up
And if We grant the people a taste of mercy, they become happy with it, but if evil afflicts them for what they have done, they become in despair
Did they not see that God grants the provisions for whom He wills, and He is able? In that are signs for a people who believe
So give the relative his due, and the poor, and the wayfarer. That is best for those who seek the face of God, and they are the successful ones
And any usury you have taken to grow from the money of the people, it will not grow with God. And any contribution that you have placed seeking the face of God, then those will be multiplied
God is the One who has created you, then He provided for you, then He puts you to death, then He brings you to life. Is there any among the partners you set up that can do any of this? Be He glorified and exalted above what they set up
Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea at the hands of the people by what they earn. He will make them taste some of what they have done, perhaps they will return
Say: "Roam the earth and see how the end was for those before. Most of them were polytheists
So establish yourself to the system which is straight, before a Day comes from God that none can avert. On that Day they shall be separated
Whoever rejects, then he will suffer his rejection; and whoever does good works, then it is for themselves that they are preparing a good place
So that He will reward those that believe and do good works from His grace. He does not love the rejecters
And from His signs is that He sends the winds with glad tidings, and to give you a taste of His mercy, and so that the ships may sail by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty; perhaps you will be thankful
And We have sent before you messengers to their people. So they came to them with clear proofs; then We took revenge on those who were criminals. And it is binding upon Us to grant victory to the believers
God Who sends the winds, so they raise clouds, and He spreads them in the sky as He wishes, then He turns them into joined pieces, then you see the rain drops come forth from their midst. Then when He makes them fall on whoever He wills of His servants, they rejoice
Even though just before He sent it down to them, they were in despair
So look at the effects of the mercy of God, how He revives the land after its death. Such is the One who will revive the dead, and He is capable of all things
And if We chose to send a wind and they see it turn yellow, they will continue to be rejecters after it
You cannot make the dead listen, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs
Nor can you enlighten the blind from their straying; but you can only make those who believe in Our revelations listen, for they have submitted
God is the One who has created you from weakness, then He made strength after the weakness, then He makes after the strength a weakness and grey hair. He creates what He wills and He is the Knowledgeable, the Capable
And the Day the Hour is established, the criminals will swear that they have remained only for an hour! Thus they were deluded
And those who were given knowledge and faith said: "You have remained according to the decree of God until the Day of Resurrection; so this is now the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know
So on that Day, the excuses of those who transgressed will not help them, nor will they be allowed to return
And We have put forth for the people in this Qur'an of every example. And if you come to them with a sign, those who rejected will say: "You are bringing falsehood
It is thus that God seals the hearts of those who do not know
So be patient, for the promise of God is true, and do not be dissuaded by those who do not have certainty
ALM
These are the signs of the Book of wisdom
A guide and a mercy for the good doers
Those who hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification and regarding the Hereafter they are certain
These are on a guidance from their Lord, and they are the successful ones
And from the people, there are those who will purchase a baseless narrative with which to mislead from the path of God without knowledge, and to make it a mockery. These will have a humiliating retribution
And when Our revelations are recited to him, he turns away arrogantly as if he did not hear them, as if there is a deafness in his ears. So announce to him a painful retribution
Those who believe and do good works, for them will be gardens of bliss
Abiding therein, the promise of God is true. And He is the Noble, the Wise
He created the sky without pillars that you can see. And He cast onto the earth stabilizers so that it would not tumble with you, and He spread on it all kinds of creatures. And We sent down water from the sky, thus We caused to grow all kinds of good plants
This is the creation of God, so show me what those besides Him have created? Indeed, the transgressors are far astray
And We had given Luqmaan the wisdom: "You shall be thankful to God, and whoever is thankful is being thankful for his own good. As for whoever rejects, then God is Rich, Praiseworthy
And Luqmaan said to his son, while he was advising him: "O my son, do not set up any partners with God; for setting up partners is an immense wrongdoing
And We enjoined man regarding his parents. His mother bore him with hardship upon hardship, and his weaning takes two years. You shall give thanks to Me, and to your parents. To Me is the final destiny
If they strive to make you set up any partners besides Me, then do not obey them. But continue to treat them amicably in this world. You shall follow only the path of those who have sought Me. Ultimately, you all return to Me, then I will inform you of everything you have done
O my son, if it be anything, even the weight of a mustard seed, be it deep inside a rock, or be it in the heavens or the earth, God will bring it. God is Sublime, Expert
O my son, hold the contact prayer and advocate righteousness and prohibit vice, and be patient to what befalls you. These are the most honorable traits
And do not turn your cheek arrogantly from people, nor shall you roam the earth insolently. For God does not love the arrogant show off
And be humble in how you walk and lower your voice. For the harshest of all voices is the voice of the donkeys
Did you not see that God has commissioned in your service what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and He has showered you with His blessings, both apparent and hidden? Yet from the people are some who argue about God with no knowledge nor guidance nor enlightening Book
And if they are told: "Follow that which God has sent down." They say: "No, we will follow what we found our fathers doing." What if the devil had been leading them to the agony of Hell
And whoever submits himself completely to God, while he is righteous, indeed he has taken grasp of the strongest hold. And to God is the conclusion of all matters
And whoever rejects, then do not be saddened by his rejection. To Us is their ultimate return, then We will inform them of what they had done. God is fully aware of what is in the chests
We let them enjoy for a while, then We commit them to a severe retribution
And if you ask them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will say: "God." Say: "Praise be to God." Yet, most of them do not know
To God belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy
And if all the trees on the earth were made into pens, and the ocean were supplied by seven more oceans, the words of God would not run out. God is Noble, Wise
Your creation and your resurrection is all like that of one soul. God is Hearer, Seer
Have you not seen that God merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night, and that He has commissioned the sun and the moon, each running to an appointed term; and that God is expert of everything you do
That is because God is the truth, and that which they call on besides Him is falsehood, and that God is the Most High, the Great
Have you not seen the ships sailing in the sea by the grace of God, so that He shows you some of His signs? In that are signs for every one who is patient, thankful
And when waves surround them like mountains, they call on God, sincerely devoting the system to Him. But when He saves them to the shore, some of them return. None discard Our signs except those who are betrayers, rejecters
O people, you shall reverence your Lord, and be concerned of a Day when a father cannot help his child, nor can a child help his father. Certainly, the promise of God is truth. Therefore, do not be deceived by this worldly life; and do not be deceived from God by arrogance
With God is the knowledge regarding the Hour. And He sends down the rain, and He knows what is inside the wombs. No soul knows what it may gain tomorrow, nor does any soul know in which land it will die. God is Knowledgeable, Expert
ALM
The sending down of this Book, without a doubt, from the Lord of the worlds
Or do they say: "He fabricated it!" No, it is the truth from your Lord, so that you may warn a people who never received a warner before you, in order that they may be guided
God is the One who has created the heavens and the earth, and what is between them in six days, then He settled upon the Throne. You do not have besides Him any Lord, nor intercessor. Will you not then remember
He arranges matters from the heaven to the earth, then it ascends to Him in a day which is equivalent to one thousand of the years which you count
Such is the Knower of the unseen and the seen; the Noble, the Merciful
The One who perfected everything He created and He began the creation of man from clay
Then He made his offspring from a structure derived from a lowly liquid
Then He evolved him, and blew into him from His Spirit. And He made for you the hearing, the eyesight, and the hearts; rarely are you thankful
And they said: "When we are buried in the ground, will we be created anew?" Indeed, they reject the meeting of their Lord
Say: "Your lives will be terminated by the angel of death that has been assigned to you, then to your Lord you will be returned
And if only you could see the criminals when they bow down their heads before their Lord: "Our Lord, we have now seen and we have heard, so send us back and we will do good. We are believers
And if We had wished, We could have given every soul its guidance, but the word from Me has taken effect, that I will fill Hell with the Jinn and people all together
So taste the consequences of your forgetting this Day; for We have now forgotten you. And taste the eternal retribution in return for what you used to do
The only people who believe in Our revelations are those whom when they are reminded by them, they fall prostrating, and they glorify the praise of their Lord, and they are not arrogant
Their sides readily forsake their beds, to call on their Lord out of fear and hope, and from Our provisions to them they give
No person knows what is being hidden for them of joy, as a reward for what they used to do
Is one who is a believer the same as one who is wicked? They are not the same
As for those who believe and do good works, for them are eternal gardens as an abode for what they used to work
And as for those who were wicked, their abode is the Fire. Every time they try to leave it, they will be put back in it, and it will be said to them: "Taste the retribution of the Fire which you used to deny
And We will let them taste the worldly retribution before the greater retribution, perhaps they will return
And who is more wicked than he who is reminded of the revelations of his Lord, then he turns away from them? We will exact a punishment from the criminals
And We have given Moses the Book; so do not be in any doubt about meeting Him; and We made it a guide for the Children of Israel
And We made from them leaders who guided in accordance with Our commandment, for they were patient and had certainty regarding Our revelations
Your Lord will separate between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding that which they disputed in
Is it not a guide for them how many generations We have annihilated before them in whose dwellings they walk? In that are signs. Do they not listen
Have they not seen that We drive the water to the barren lands, and produce with it crops to feed their livestock, and themselves? Do they not see
And they say: "When is this victory, if you are being truthful
Say: "On the day of the victory, it will not benefit those who rejected if they believe, nor will they be given respite
Therefore, turn away from them and wait, for they too are waiting
O prophet, you shall be aware of God, and do not obey the rejecters and the hypocrites. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And follow what is being inspired to you by your Lord. God is fully aware of all that you do
And put your trust in God. God suffices as an advocate
God did not make any man with two hearts in his body. Nor did He make your wives whom you make estranged to be your mothers. Nor did He make your adopted children to be your sons. Such is what you claim with your mouths, but God speaks the truth, and He guides to the path
Name them by their fathers. That is more just with God. But if you do not know their fathers, then, name them as your brothers in the system and your patrons. There is no sin upon you for what mistake you make in this respect; but you will be responsible for what your hearts deliberately intend. God is Forgiver, Merciful
The prophet is closer to the believers than themselves, and his wives are mothers to them. And the decree of God to the believers and the emigrants is that before they help their relatives, they have taken care of their own families first. Such has been decreed in the Book
And when We took from the prophets their covenant. And from you, and from Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus, son of Mary; We took from them a solemn covenant
So that the truthful may be asked about their truthfulness, and He has prepared for the rejecters a painful retribution
O you who believe, remember the grace of God upon you when soldiers attacked you and We sent upon them a wind and invisible soldiers. God is Seer of what you do
For they came from above you, and from beneath you; and your eyes were terrified, and the hearts reached to the throat, and you harbored doubts about God
That is when the believers were truly tested; they were severely shaken up
And the hypocrites and those who have a sickness in their hearts said: "God and His messenger promised us nothing but delusion
And a group of them said: "O people of Yathrib, there is no station for you, so come back." And a small party of them sought permission from the prophet, saying: "Our homes are exposed," while they were not exposed. They just wanted to flee
And if the enemy had entered at them from all sides, and then they were asked to betray, they would do so with very little hesitation
And indeed they had pledged to God before this that they would not turn around and flee; and making a pledge to God brings great responsibility
Say: "It will not benefit you to flee away from death or from being killed, for you will only have the enjoyment for a short while
Say: "Who can protect you from God if He intends to harm you, or He intends any blessing for you?" They will never find besides God any ally or victor
God already knows which of you are the hinderers, and those who say to their brothers: "Come and stay with us." Rarely do they mobilize for battle
They are miserable towards you. Then, when fear comes, you see their eyes rolling, as if death had already come to them. But once the fear is gone, they lash-out at you with sharp tongues. They are miserable towards doing any good. These have not believed, so God nullifies their works. This is easy for God to do
They thought that the Confederates had not yet mobilized. And if the Confederates do appear, they wish that they were out with the Nomads, seeking out news for you. Even if they were among you, they would not have fought except very little
Indeed, in the messenger of God a good example has been set for you for he who seeks God and the Last Day and thinks constantly about God
And when the believers saw the Confederates, they said: "This is what God and His messenger have promised us, and God and His messenger are truthful." This only increased their faith and their submission
From among the believers are men who fulfilled their pledge to God. Thus, some of them have passed away, while some are still waiting; but they never altered in the least
That God may recompense the truthful for their truthfulness, and punish the hypocrites if He so wills, or accepts their repentance. God is Forgiver, Merciful
And God drove back those who disbelieved with their rage, they left empty handed. God thus spared the believers any fighting. God is Powerful, Noble
And He also brought down those who helped support them from among the people of the Book from their secure positions, and He threw terror into their hearts. Some of them you killed, and some you took captive
And He made you inherit their lands, and their homes, and their money, and lands you had never stepped on; and God is able to do all things
O prophet, say to your wives: "If you are seeking this worldly life and its vanities, then come, I will make a provision for you and release you in an amicable manner
But if you are seeking God and His messenger, and the abode of the Hereafter, then God has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward
O women of the prophet, if any of you commits evident immorality, then her retribution will be doubled. This is easy for God to do
And any of you who is dutiful to God and His messenger, and does good works, We will grant her double the recompense, and We have prepared for her a generous provision
O women of the prophet, you are not like any other women. If you are righteous, then do not speak too softly, lest those with disease in their hearts will move with desire; you shall speak in an honorable manner
You shall be content in your homes, and do not show off like in the old days of ignorance. You shall hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification, and obey God and His messenger. God wishes to remove any taint from you, O people of the Sanctuary, and to purify you completely
And recall all that is being recited in your homes of the revelations of God and the wisdom. God is Sublime, Expert
Surely, the submitting males, and the submitting females, the believing males, and the believing females, the dutiful males, and the dutiful females, the truthful males, and the truthful females, the patient males, and the patient females, the humble males, and the humble females, the charitable males, and the charitable females, the fasting males, and the fasting females, the males who keep covered their private parts, and the females who similarly keep covered, and the males who commemorate God frequently, and the commemorating females; God has prepared for them a forgiveness and a great recompense
It is not for a believing male or believing female, if God and His messenger issue any command, that they have any choice in their decision. And anyone who disobeys God and His messenger, he has gone far astray
And you said to the one who was blessed by God, and blessed by you: "Keep your wife and reverence God," and you hid inside yourself what God wished to proclaim. And you were concerned with the people, while God was more deserving that you be concerned with. So when Zayd ended his relationship with his wife, We had you marry her, to establish that there is no wrongdoing for the believers in marrying the wives of their adopted sons if their relationship is ended. And the command of God is always done
There is no blame on the prophet in doing anything that God has decreed upon him. Such was the way of God with the people of old. And the command of God is a determined duty
Those who deliver the messages of God, and are concerned towards Him, and they are not concerned towards anyone except God. God suffices as a Reckoner
Mohammed is not the father of any of your men, but he is the messenger of God and the seal of the prophets. And God is fully aware of all things
O you who believe, you shall remember God frequently
And glorify Him morning and evening
He is the One who makes contact with you, along with His angels, to bring you out of darkness and into the light. And He is ever Merciful towards the believers
Their greeting the Day they meet Him is: "Peace" and He has prepared for them a generous recompense
O prophet, We have sent you as a witness, and a bearer of good news, and a warner
Inviting to God, with His permission, and an illuminating lamp
And give good news to the believers, that they have deserved from God a great blessing
And do not obey the rejecters and the hypocrites, and ignore their insults, and put your trust in God; for God suffices as an advocate
O you who believe, if you marry the believing females, then divorce them before having intercourse with them, then there is no interim required of them. You shall compensate them, and let them go in an amicable manner
O prophet, We have made lawful for you the wives to whom you have already given their dowries, and those who are maintained by your oath, as granted to you by God; and the daughters of the brothers of your father, and the daughters of the sisters of your father, and the daughters of the brothers of your mother, and the daughters of the sisters of your mother - those who emigrated with you. Also, the believing woman who had decreed herself to the prophet, the prophet may marry her if he wishes, as a privilege given only to you and not to the believers. We have already decreed their rights in regard to their spouses and those who are maintained by their oaths. This is to spare you any hardship. God is Forgiver, Merciful
You may postpone whom you will of them, and you may receive whom you will. And whomsoever you seek of those whom you have set aside then there is no sin upon you. Such is best that they may be comforted and not grieve, and that they may all be pleased with what you give them. And God knows what is in your hearts. And God is Knowledgeable, Compassionate
No women are lawful to you beyond this, nor that you change them for other wives, even though you may be attracted by their beauty, except what is maintained by your oath. And God is Watcher over all things
O you who believe, do not enter the homes of the prophet unless you are invited to a meal, without you forcing such an invitation. But if you are invited, you may enter. And when you finish eating, you shall leave, without staying to wait for a narrative. This used to bother the prophet, and he was shy to tell you. But God does not shy away from the truth. And if you ask his wives for something, ask them from behind a barrier. This is purer for your hearts and their hearts. And it is not for you to harm the messenger of God, nor that you should marry his wives after him. This is indeed a gross offence with God
If you reveal anything, or hide it, God is fully aware of all things
There is no sin upon them before their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or their women, or those who are maintained by their oaths. And be aware of God, for God is witness over all things
God and His angels make contact with the prophet. O you who believe, you shall make contact with him, and comply completely
Surely those who harm God and His messenger, God will curse them in this world and in the Hereafter; and He has prepared for them a shameful retribution
And those who harm the believing males and the believing females, with no just reason, they have brought upon themselves a slander and a gross sin
O prophet, tell your wives, your daughters, and the women of the believers that they should lengthen upon themselves their outer garments. That is better so that they will not be recognized and harmed. God is Forgiver, Merciful
If the hypocrites and those with disease in their hearts and those who spread lies in the city do not refrain, then We will let you overpower them, then they will not be able to remain as your neighbors except for a short while
They are cursed wherever they are encountered, and they are taken and killed in numbers
This is the way of God with those who have passed away before, and you will not find any change in the way of God
The people ask you regarding the Hour. Say: "Its knowledge is with God. And for all that you know the Hour may be near
God has cursed the rejecters, and He has prepared for them Hell
Abiding therein eternally. They will find no ally, or victor
On the Day when their faces will be turned over in the Fire, they will say: "Oh, we wish we had obeyed God, and obeyed the messenger
And they will say: "Our Lord, we have obeyed our leaders and our learned ones, but they misled us from the path
Our Lord, give them double the retribution, and curse them with a mighty curse
O you who believe, do not be like those who harmed Moses, but then God cleared him of all they said, and he was honorable before God
O you who believe, be aware of God and speak only the truth
He will then direct your works, and forgive your sins. And whoever obeys God and His messenger has triumphed a great triumph
We have offered the trust to the heavens and the earth, and the mountains, but they refused to bear it, and were fearful of it. But man accepted it; he was transgressing, ignorant
So that God may punish the hypocrite males and the hypocrite females, and the polytheist males and the polytheist females. And God redeems the believing males and the believing females. And God is Forgiver, Merciful
Praise be to God, to whom belongs everything in the heavens and the earth; and to Him is the praise in the Hereafter. He is the Wise, the Expert
He knows what goes into the earth, and what comes out of it, and what comes down from the heaven, and what ascends into it. He is the Merciful, Forgiver
And those who rejected said: "The Hour will not come to us!" Say: "Yes, by my Lord, it will come to you." He is the Knower of the unseen; not even the weight of an atom or less than that or greater can be hidden from Him, be it in the heavens or the earth. All are in a clear record
That He may reward those who believe and do good works. To them will be a forgiveness and a generous provision
As for those who sought against Our revelations to frustrate them, they will have a retribution of painful affliction
And those that have been given knowledge will see that what has been sent down to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it guides to the path of the Noble, the Praiseworthy
And those who rejected said: "Shall we lead you to a man who will tell you that after you are dismembered you will be created anew
Has he invented a lie against God, or is there a madness in him?" Indeed, those who do not believe in the Hereafter will be in a retribution and are far straying
Have they not seen all that is before them and behind them, in the heaven and the earth? If We wished, We could cause the earth to swallow them, or cause pieces of the heaven to fall on them. In this is a sign for every obedient servant
And We granted David blessings from Us: "O mountains, echo with him, and the birds." And We softened the iron for him
That you may make armor coats that fit perfectly, and work righteousness. For I am Seer of what you do
And for Solomon the wind was given, traveling one month coming and one month going, and We caused a spring of tar to flow for him. And from among the Jinn are those that worked for him with the permission of his Lord; and any one of them who turns from Our commands, We shall cause him to taste the retribution of the Fire
They made for him what he desired of enclosures, and images and pools of deep reservoirs, and heavy pots. "O family of David, work to give thanks." Only a few of My servants are thankful
Then, when We decreed death for him, nothing informed them of his death until a worm kept eating from his staff, so when he fell down, the Jinn realized that if they had known the unseen, they would not have remained in the humiliating retribution
There was for Sheba a sign in their homeland, with two gardens on the right and the left. "Eat from the provisions of your Lord, and be thankful to Him." A good land, and a forgiving Lord
But they turned away, so We sent them a destructive flash flood, and We substituted their two gardens with two gardens of rotten fruits, thorny plants, and a skimpy harvest
We thus requited them for what they rejected. And We do not requite except the rejecter
And We placed between them and between the towns that We blessed, towns that were easy to see; and We measured the journey between them: "Travel in them by night and day in complete security
But they said: "Our Lord, make the measure between our journeys longer," and they wronged themselves. So We made them narrations and We tore them into pieces. In this are signs for every person who is patient, thankful
And Satan has been successful in his suggestions to them, for they followed him, except for a group of the believers
And he did not have any authority over them except that We might distinguish those who believed in the Hereafter from those who are doubtful about it. And your Lord is Keeper over all things
Say: "Call on those whom you have claimed besides God. They do not possess even the weight of an atom in the heavens, or the earth. They possess no partnership therein, nor is there for Him any assistant among them
Nor will intercession be of any help with Him, except for whom He has already given leave." Until when the fear has subsided from their hearts, they ask: "What did your Lord say?" They will say: "The truth!" And He is the Most High, the Great
Say: "Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?" Say: "God! And either we or you are guided, or are clearly astray
Say: "You will not be asked about our crimes, nor will we be asked for what you do
Say: "Our Lord will gather us together then He will judge between us with the truth. He is the Judge, the Knowledgeable
Say: "Show me those whom you have set up as partners with Him! No; He is but God, the Noble, the Wise
And We have sent you to all people to be a bearer of good news, and as a warner; but most of the people do not know
And they say: "When is this promise, if you are truthful
Say: "You have an appointed day, which you cannot delay by one hour, nor advance
And those who rejected have said: "We will not believe in this Qur'an, nor in what is already with him." And if you could but see these transgressors when they stand before their Lord, how they will accuse one another back and forth. Those who were weak will say to those who were mighty: "If it were not for you, we would have been believers
Those who were mighty will say to those who were weak: "Did we turn you away from the guidance after it had come to you? No, it was you who were criminals
And those who were weak will say to those who were mighty: "No, it was your scheming night and day, when you commanded us to reject God and to set up equals to Him." And they are filled with regret when they see the retribution  and We will place shackles around the necks of those who rejected. Are they not being requited for what they used to do
And We do not send a warner to any town, except its carefree ones would say: "We reject what you have been sent with
And they said: "We have more wealth and more children, and we will not be punished
Say: "My Lord gives provisions to whoever He wishes, or He restricts them, but most of the people do not know
And it is not your money or your children that will bring you closer to Us, but only those who believe and do good work, they will receive double the reward for their works, and they will reside in the high dwellings in peace
As for those who sought against Our revelations, they will be brought to the retribution
Say: "My Lord gives provisions for whom He wishes of His servants and He restricts. And anything you spend, He will replace it; and He is the Best of providers
And on the Day when We gather them all, then We will say to the angels: "Was it you that these people used to serve
They will say: "Be You glorified. You are our Lord, not them. No, most of them were serving the Jinn; most were believers to them
So today, none of you can help or harm one another. And We will say to the transgressors: "Taste the retribution of the Fire that you used to deny
And when Our clear revelations were recited to them, they said: "This is but a man who wants to turn you away from what your parents were worshiping." And they also said: "This is nothing except a fabricated lie." And those who disbelieved say of the truth when it has come to them: "This is nothing except evident magic
We had not given to them any books to study, nor did We send to them before you any warner
And those before them had also denied, while they did not reach one tenth of what We had given them, but they denied My messengers; so how was My retribution
Say: "I advise you to do one thing: that you stand to God, in twos and individually, then reflect." There is no madness in your friend, he is only a warner to you in the face of a severe retribution
Say: "I have not asked you for any wage; for it will be your own. My wage is from God, and He is witness over all things
Say: "My Lord casts with the truth. He is the Knower of all secrets
Say: "The truth has come; while falsehood can neither initiate anything, nor resurrect
Say: "If I stray, then I stray to my own loss. And if I am guided, then it is because of what my Lord inspired to me. He is Hearer, Near
And if you could but see, when they will be terrified with no escape, and they will be taken from a place that is near
And they will say: "We believe in it!" But it will be far too late
And they had rejected it in the past; and they made allegations regarding the unseen, from a place far off
And a barrier will be set between them and what they had desired, as was done for their counterparts before. They have been in grave doubt
Praise be to God, Initiator of the heavens and the earth; maker of the angels as messengers with wings of two, and three, and four. He increases in the creation as He wishes. God is able to do all things
Whatever mercy God opens for the people, none can stop it. And what He holds back none can send it other than He. And He is the Noble, the Wise
O people, remember the blessings of God upon you. Is there any creator other than God who provides for you from the heaven and the earth? There is no god besides Him, so why do you deviate
And if they deny you, then also messengers before you have been denied. And to God all matters are returned
O people, the promise of God is the truth; therefore, do not be overwhelmed by this worldly life, and do not let arrogance overwhelm you from God
The devil is an enemy to you, so treat him as an enemy. He only invites his faction to be the dwellers of Hell
Those who reject will have a painful retribution, and those who believe and do good works they will have a forgiveness and a great reward
As for he whose evil work is adorned for him so he sees it as being good; for God thus misguides whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. So do not let yourself grieve over them. God is fully aware of what they are doing
And God is the One who sends the winds so it stirs up a cloud, then We drive it to a land that is dead, and We revive with it the earth after it had died. Such is the resurrection
Whoever is seeking dignity, then know that to God belongs all dignity. To Him ascend the good words, and the good deeds raise them up. And as for those who scheme evil, they will have a painful retribution, and their scheming will fail
And God created you from dust, then from a seed, then He made you into pairs. And no female becomes pregnant, nor gives birth, without His knowledge. Nor does anyone have his life extended, or his life is shortened, except in a record. This is easy for God
Nor are the two seas the same. One is fresh and palatable, good to drink, while the other is salty and bitter. And from each of them you eat tender meat, and you extract jewelry to wear. And you see the ships sailing through them, seeking His provisions; and perhaps you may be thankful
He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. And He has commissioned the sun and the moon, each running for an appointed term. Such is God your Lord; to Him is the sovereignty. And as for those whom you pray to besides Him, they do not possess even the shell of a seed
If you pray to them, they cannot hear you. And even if they hear you, they cannot respond to you. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will reject your partnership. And none can inform you like an Expert
O people, you are the poor when it comes to God, while God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy
If He wishes, He could do away with you and He would bring a new creation
And this is not difficult for God
And none can carry the load of another; and even if it calls on another to bear part of its load, no other can carry any part of it, even if they were related. You will only be able to warn those who are concerned towards their Lord while unseen, and they hold the contact prayer. And whoever contributes, is contributing for himself. And to God is the final destiny
The blind and the seer are not equal
Nor are the darkness and the light
Nor are the shade and the heat
Nor equal are the living and the dead; God causes whoever He wills to hear; and you cannot make those who are in the graves hear
You are but a warner
We have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and a warner. There was not a nation that a warner did not come to it
And if they deny you, then those before them have also denied. Their messengers went to them with the proofs and the scriptures and the Book of Enlightenment
Then I seized those who rejected; so how was My retribution
Do you not see that God sends down water from the sky, thus We produce with it fruits of various colors? And of the mountains are peaks that are white, red, or some other color and intense black
And from the people, and the animals, and the livestock, are various colors. Those concerned with God from among His servants are the most knowledgeable. God is Noble, Forgiving
Surely, those who recite the Book of God and hold the contact prayer, and spend secretly and openly from what We have provided them, they are seeking a trade that can never lose
He will give them their recompense, and He will increase them from His blessings. He is Forgiving, Thankful
And what We inspired to you from the Book, it is the truth, authenticating what is between his hands. God is Expert over His servants, Seer
Then We inherited the Book to those whom We selected from Our servants. Subsequently, some of them wronged themselves, and others upheld it partly, while others were eager to work righteousness in accordance with the will of God; such is the great benefit
They will enter gardens of delight, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments in it will be of silk
And they will say: "Praise be to God who took away our sorrow. Our Lord is Forgiving, Thankful
The One who admitted us into the abode of eternal bliss, out of His grace. In it, no boredom touches us, nor does any fatigue
As for those who have rejected, for them is the fire of Hell, where they do not terminate and die, nor is its retribution ever reduced for them. It is such that We requite every rejecter
And they will scream in it: "Our Lord, let us out, and we will work righteousness instead of the works we used to do." Did We not give you a long life so that he who would remember would take heed, and a warner came to you? Therefore, taste, for the transgressors will have no supporter
God knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth. He is knowledgeable of what is even in the chests
He is the One who made you successors on the earth. So, whoever rejects, then to him is his rejection. And the rejection of the rejecters only increases the abhorrence of their Lord towards them. The rejection of the rejecters only increases their loss
Say: "Do you see the partners whom you have called on besides God? Show me what they have created on the earth. Or do they possess any partnership in the heavens? Or have We given them a book wherein they are taking knowledge from it? Indeed, what the transgressors promise one another is no more than arrogance
God is the One who holds the heavens and the earth, lest they cease to exist. And they would certainly cease to exist if anyone else were to hold them after Him. He is Compassionate, Forgiving
And they swore by God in their strongest oaths, that if a warner came to them, they would be the most guided of all nations, but when a warner came to them, it only increased their aversion
Arrogance on the earth, and evil scheming. And the evil schemes only backfire on those who scheme them. Were they expecting anything different from the ways used on the people of the past? You will not find any change in the way of God, and you will not find any bypass to the way of God
Did they not roam the earth and note how was the consequence for those who were before them? And they were even more powerful than they in strength. But nothing can inhibit God be it in the heavens, or the earth. He is Knowledgeable, Omnipotent
And if God were to punish the people for what they have earned, He would not leave a single creature standing. But He delays them to an appointed term. So, when their time comes, then God is Seer of His servants
YS
And the Qur'an of wisdom
You are one of the messengers
Upon a straight path
The revelation of the Most Honorable, the Merciful
To warn a people whose fathers were not warned, for they are unaware
The retribution has been deserved by most of them, for they do not believe
We have placed shackles around their necks, up to their chins, so that they are forced in place
And We have placed a barrier in front of them, and a barrier behind them, thus We shielded them so they cannot see
And whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe
You can only warn him who follows the Reminder, and is concerned towards the Almighty while unseen. Give him good news of forgiveness and a generous reward
It is indeed Us who resurrect the dead, and We record what they have done and left behind. And everything We have counted in a clear ledger
And put forth for them the example of the people of the town, when the messengers came to it
Where We sent two to them, but they disbelieved in them, so We supported them with a third one, thus they said: "We are messengers to you
They said: "You are but human beings like us, and the Almighty did not send down anything, you are only telling lies
They said: "Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you
And we are only required to give a clear delivery
They said: "We have welcomed you better than you deserve. If you do not cease, we will stone you, and you will receive a painful retribution from us
They said: "Keep your welcome with you, for you have been reminded. Indeed, you are transgressing people
And a man came running from the farthest part of the city, saying: "O my people, follow the messengers
Follow those who do not ask you for any wage, and are guided
And why should I not serve the One who initiated me, and to Him is your ultimate return
Shall I take gods besides Him? If the Almighty intends any harm for me, their intercession cannot help me in the least, nor can they save me
Then I would be clearly astray
I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me
It was said: "Enter the Paradise." He said "Oh, how I wish if only my people knew
Of what my Lord has forgiven me, and made me of the honored ones
And We did not send down upon his people after him soldiers from the heaven; for there was no need to send them down
For all it took was one scream, whereupon they were stilled
What sorrow for the servants. For every time a messenger went to them, they would mock him
Did they not see how many generations We destroyed before them, do they not go back to them
And how every one of them will be summoned before Us
And a sign for them is the dead land, We revive it and produce from it seeds from which they eat
And We made in it gardens of date palms, and grapes, and We cause springs to gush forth therein
So that they may eat from its fruits, and what they manufacture with their own hands. Would they be thankful
Praise be to the One who has created all pairs from what the earth sprouts out and from themselves, and from what they do not know
And a sign for them is the night, We strip the daylight from it, whereupon they are in darkness
And the sun runs to a specific destination, such is the design of the Noble, the Knowledgeable
And the moon We have measured it to appear in stages, until it returns like an old palm sheath
The sun is not required to overtake the moon, nor will the night precede the day; each of them is swimming in its own orbit
And a sign for them is that We carried their ancestors on the charged ship
And We created for them of its similarity, to ride in
And if We wished, We could drown them, so that their screaming would not be heard, nor could they be saved
Except through a mercy from Us, and as an enjoyment for awhile
And when they are told: "Be aware of your present and your past, that you may attain mercy
And no matter what sign comes to them from the signs of their Lord, they turn away from it
And when they are told: "Spend from what God has provisioned you." Those who reject say to those who believe: "Shall we feed those whom God could feed, if He so willed? You are clearly misguided
And they say: "When is this promise to come, if you are truthful
They will not realize it when one scream overwhelms them, while they dispute
They will not even be able to leave a will, nor will they be able to return to their people
And the horn will be blown, whereupon they will rise from the graves massing towards their Lord
They will say: "Woe to us! Who has resurrected us from our resting place? This is what the Almighty had promised; and the messengers were truthful
It only took one scream, whereupon they are summoned before Us
On this Day, no soul will be wronged in the least. You will be recompensed precisely for whatever you did
The dwellers of the Paradise will be, on that Day, joyfully busy
Both them and their spouses, they will be shaded, reclining on raised couches
They will have fruits therein; they will have in it whatever they ask for
Saying of: "Peace" from a Merciful Lord
As for you, O criminals, you are singled out
Did I not pledge to you, O Children of Adam, that you should not serve the devil for he is your most ardent enemy
And that you should serve Me? That is a straight path
He has misled mountain loads of you. Did you not comprehend
This is Hell that you have been promised
Burn in it today, as a consequence of your rejection
Today, We shall cease their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness to everything they had done
And if We wished, We can blind their eyes, and they would race towards the path, but how would they see
And if We wished, We can freeze them in their place; thus, they can neither move forward, nor go back
And for whoever We grant a long life, We weaken him in body. Do they not comprehend
And We did not teach him poetry, nor does he need it. This is a reminder and a clear Qur'an
To warn those who are alive, and so that the retribution will be deserved by the rejecters
Did they not see that We created for them with Our own hands livestock which they own
And they were subdued by Us for them. So some they ride, and some they eat
And they have benefits in them, and to drink. Would they not be thankful
And they have taken besides God other gods, perhaps they will help them
They cannot help them; while they are soldiers for them
So do not be saddened by what they say. We are fullyaware of what they conceal and what they declare
Has man not seen that We have created him from a seed, but he then becomes a clear opponent
And he puts forth an example for Us, while forgetting his own creation! He says: "Who can resurrect the bones while they are dust
Say: "The One who has made them in the first place will resurrect them. He is fully aware of every creation
The One who initiated for you a forest fire, by which you learned to light
Is not the One who has created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them? Yes indeed; He is the Creator, the Knowledgeable
His command, when He wants anything, is to say to it: 'Be,' and it is
Therefore, praise be to the One in whose Hand is the sovereignty of all things, and to Him you will be returned
By the columns in formation
By the drivers of clouds
By the remembrance which follows
Your god is indeed One
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what lies between them, and the Lord of the sunrises
We have adorned the lower heaven with the decoration of planets
And to guard against every rebellious devil
They cannot listen to the command up high; and they are bombarded from every side
Outcasts; they will have an eternal retribution
Any of them who snatches a part, he is pursued by a piercing flame
So ask them: "Are they the more powerful creation, or the others We created?" We have created them from a clay that is sticky
While you were awed, they simply mocked
And when they are reminded, they do not care
And when they see a sign, they make fun of it
And they said: "This is nothing except evident magic
Can it be that after we die and become dust and bones, that we are resurrected
What about our fathers of old
Say: "Yes, and you will be humbled
All it takes is one sound, then they will be staring
And they said: "Woe to us, this is the Day of Recompense
This is the Day of decisiveness that you used to deny
Gather the transgressors, and their mates, and all they worshiped
Beside God, and guide them to the path of Hell
And let them stand and be questioned
Why do you not support one another
No, for today they have totally given up
And some of them came to each other, questioning
They said: "You used to entice us from the right side
They replied: "No, it was you who were not believers
And we never had any power over you, but you were a wicked people
So the decree of our Lord is now upon us, that we will suffer
We misled you, because we were astray
Then, on that Day they will all share in the retribution
This is how We deal with the criminals
When it was said to them: "There is no god except God," they would be arrogant
And they would say: "Shall we leave our gods because of a crazy poet
No, he has come with the truth and he has confirmed the messengers
You will taste the greatest of retribution
And you are only recompensed for what you have done
Except for the servants God who are faithful
For them will be known provisions
Fruits, and they will be honored
In gardens of bliss
On beds which are opposite one another
They will be served with a cup of pure drink
White, delicious for the drinkers
There is no bitterness therein, nor will they tire from it
And with them are those with a modest gaze, with lovely eyes
They are like fragile eggs
So then they approached one another, questioning
One of them said: "I used to have a friend
Who used to say: 'Are you among those who believe in this
That if we die and turn into dust and bones, that we would be called to account
He said: "Can anyone find him
So when he looked, he saw him in the midst of Hell
He said: "By God, you nearly ruined me
And had it not been for the blessing of my Lord, I would have been with you
Are we then not going to die
Except for our first death, and we will not be punished
Such is the great triumph
For this let those who will work endeavor
Is that a better destination, or the tree of Bitterness
We have made it a punishment for the transgressors
It is a tree that grows in the midst of Hell
Its shoots are like the devils' heads
They will eat from it, so that their bellies are filled up
Then they will have with it a drink of boiling liquid
Then they will be returned to Hell
They had found their parents astray
So they too have hastened in their footsteps
Most of the previous generations have strayed before them
And We had sent to them warners
Thus note the consequences for those who were warned
Except for the servants of God who are faithful
And Noah had called upon Us, for We are the best to respond
And We saved him and his family from the great disaster
And We made his progeny the one that remained
And We kept his history for those who came later
Peace be upon Noah among the worlds
It is such that We reward the righteous
He is of Our believing servants
Then We drowned the others
And from his clan was Abraham
For he came to his Lord with a pure heart
When he said to his father and his people: "What are you worshiping
Is it fabricated gods, instead of God, that you want
What do you say of the Lord of the worlds
Then he looked towards the stars
And he said: "I am ill
So they turned away from him and departed
He then went to their gods and said: "Can you not eat
What is the matter, you do not speak
So he then turned on them, striking with his hand
Then they approached him outraged
He said: "Do you worship what you carve
While God has created you, and all that you make
They said: "Build for him a structure, and then cast him into its fire
So they wanted to plan against him, but We made them the losers
And he said: "I am going to my Lord; He will guide me
My Lord, grant me from among the righteous
So We gave him good news of a compassionate child
And when he grew enough to work with him, he said: "My son, I am seeing in a dream that I am sacrificing you. What do you think?" He said: "O my father, do what you are commanded to do. You will find me, God willing, patient
So when they both had submitted, and he was laid by his forehead
And We called him: "O Abraham
You have carried out the vision." It was such that We rewarded the righteous
Surely, this was an exacting test
And We ransomed him with a great animal sacrifice
And We kept his history for those who came later
Peace be upon Abraham
It is thus that We reward the righteous
He was of Our believing servants
And We gave him the good news of the coming of Isaac, a prophet from among the righteous
And We blessed him and Isaac. And from among their progeny, some are righteous, and some are clearly wicked
And indeed, We have given Our grace to Moses and Aaron
And We saved them and their people from the great disaster
And We supported them, so that they became the winners
And We gave both the clear Book
And We guided them to the straight path
And We kept their history for those who came later
Peace be upon Moses and Aaron
We thus reward the righteous
Both of them were among Our believing servants
And Elias was one of the messengers
When he said to his people: "Would you not be righteous
Would you call on Ba'al and forsake the best Creator
God is your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers of old
But they denied him. Thus they were called to account
Except for the devoted servants of God
And We kept his history for those who came later
Peace be upon the family of Elias
We thus reward the righteous
He was one of our believing servants
And Lot was one of the messengers
When We saved him and all his family
Except an old woman who remained
Then, We destroyed the rest
And you pass by them in the morning
And in the night. Do you not comprehend
And Jonah was one of the messengers
When he escaped to the charged ship
And he was guilty, so he became among the losers
Thus a whale swallowed him, and he was the one to blame
And had it not been that he was one of those who implored
He would have stayed in its belly until the Day of Resurrection
So We threw him on the shore while he was sick
And We caused a tree of gourd to grow on him
And We sent him to a hundred thousand, or more
And they believed, so We gave them enjoyment for a time
So ask them: "Are the daughters for your Lord, while the sons are for them
Or did We create the angels as females while they witnessed
Indeed, it is out of their falsehood that they say
The son of God." And they are liars
Has He chosen the daughters over the sons
What is wrong with you, how do you judge
Will you not remember
Or do you have a clear proof
Bring forth your book, if you are truthful
And they invented a kinship between Him and the Jinn. But the Jinn know that they will be gathered
God be glorified from what they describe
Except for the servants of God who are faithful
As for you and what you worship
You cannot lead away from Him
Except those who are destined to Hell
Every one of us has a destined station
And we are the ones who are in columns
And we are the ones that glorify
And they used to say
If only we had received a reminder from the previous generations
We would have surely been loyal servants of God
But they rejected it. They will come to know
Our word had been decreed to Our servants who were sent
That they would be made victorious
And that Our soldiers are the winners
So turn away from them for awhile
And observe them; for they will see
Do they seek to hasten Our retribution
When it comes down to their courtyard, dire will be the morning for those who have been warned
And turn away from them for awhile
And observe; for they will see
Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of greatness, for what they have described
And peace be upon the messengers
And praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
S', and the Qur'an that contains the remembrance
Indeed, those who have disbelieved are in false pride and defiance
How many a generation have We destroyed before them. And they called out when it was far too late
And they were surprised that a warner has come to them from among themselves. And the rejecters said: "This is a magician, a liar
Has he made the gods into One god? This is indeed a strange thing
And the leaders among them went out: "Walk away, and remain patient to your gods. This thing can be turned back
We never heard of this from the people before us. This is but an innovation
Has the remembrance been sent down to him, from between all of us!" Indeed, they are doubtful of My reminder. Indeed, they have not yet tasted My retribution
Or do they have the treasures of mercy of your Lord, the Noble, the Grantor
Or do they possess the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them? Then let them bring their own solutions
The Confederates that have gathered will be defeated
Disbelieving before them were the people of Noah, 'Aad, and Pharaoh with the planks
And Thamud, and the people of Lot, and the people of the Sycamore; these are the Confederates
Each of them disbelieved the messengers, therefore My retribution came to be
And what these people are waiting for is a single scream, from which they will not recover
And they said: "Our Lord, hasten for us our punishment, before the Day of Reckoning
Be patient to what they say, and recall Our servant David, the resourceful. He was obedient
We commissioned the mountains to glorify with him, at dusk and dawn
And the birds were gathered; all were obedient to him
And We strengthened his kingship, and We gave him the wisdom and the ability to make sound judgment
Did the news come to you of the disputing party who came over into the temple enclosure
When they entered upon David, he was startled by them. They said: "Have no fear. We are two who have disputed, and one has wronged the other, so judge between us with the truth, and do not wrong us, and guide us to the right path
This is my brother and he owns ninety-nine lambs, while I own one lamb; so he said to me: "'Let me take care of it' and he pressured me
He said: "He has wronged you by asking to combine your lamb with his lambs. And many who mix their properties take advantage of one another, except those who believe and do good works, and these are very few." And David guessed that We had tested him, so he sought forgiveness from his Lord, and fell down kneeling, and repented
So We forgave him in this matter. And for him with Us is a near position, and a beautiful abode
O David, We have made you a successor on the earth. Therefore, you shall judge among the people with the truth, and do not follow desire, lest it diverts you from the path of God. Indeed, those who stray off the path of God will have a severe retribution for forgetting the Day of Reckoning
And We did not create the heaven and the earth, and everything between them, in vain. Such is the thinking of those who rejected. Therefore, woe to those who have rejected from the Fire
Or shall We treat those who believe and do good works as We treat those who make corruption on the earth? Or shall We treat the righteous as the wicked
A Book that We have sent down to you, that is blessed, so that they may reflect upon its revelations, and so that those who possess intelligence will take heed
And to David We granted Solomon. What an excellent and obedient servant
When, before evening, well trained horses were displayed before him
He said: "I have enjoyed materialism more than I enjoyed the remembrance of my Lord; until it had set beyond the horizon
Send them back." He then rubbed their legs and necks
And We tested Solomon and placed a corpse upon his throne, but he then repented
He said: "My Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingship that will never be attained by anyone after me. You are the Grantor
So, We commissioned the wind to run by his command, raining gently where he directed it
And the devils, building and diving
And others, held by restraints
This is Our gift, so you may spend or withhold, without any repercussions
And he has a near position with Us, and a wonderful abode
And recall Our servant Job, when he called upon his Lord: "The devil has afflicted me with an illness and pain
Rapidly move with your foot, here is a cold spring to wash with and to drink
And We restored his family to him along with a group like them, as a mercy from Us; and a reminder for those who possess intelligence
And take in your hand a bundle and go forth with it, and do not break your oath." We found him steadfast. What a good servant! He was obedient
And recall Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They were resourceful, and with vision
We had chosen them to enforce awareness of the Hereafter
And they are with Us of the elite, the best
And recall Ishmael, Elisha, and Isaiah; all are among the best
This is a reminder, and the righteous will have a wonderful abode
Gardens of delight, whose gates will be open for them
Reclining therein, they will be invited to many fruits and drinks
And with them are those with a modest gaze, mature in age
This is what you have been promised for the Day of Reckoning
Such is Our provisions, it does not run out
This is so, and for the transgressors is a miserable destiny
Hell is where they burn. What a miserable abode
This is so, and let them taste what is boiling and dark
And other multitudes that are similar to that
Here is another group to be thrown into Hell with you. "We have no welcome for them, for they shall burn in the Fire
They said: "No, you are the ones without welcome. It was you who presented this to us, what a miserable result
They said: "Our Lord, whoever brought this upon us, then double their retribution in the Fire
And they said: "Why do we not see some men whom we used to count among the wicked
Did we mock them erroneously, or have our eyes failed to find them
Surely, this is in truth the feuding of the people of Hell
Say: "I am but a warner; and there is no god besides God, the One, the Supreme
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them; the Noble, the Forgiving
Say: "It is an awesome news
From which you turn away
I had no knowledge of the command up high, that they had quarreled
It is only inspired to me that I am a clear warner
For your Lord said to the angels: "I am creating a human being from clay
So when I have evolved him, and blow of My Spirit in him, then you shall yield to him
The angels yielded, all of them
Except Satan; he turned arrogant, and became one of the rejecters
He said: "O Satan, what prevented you from yielding to what I have created by My hands? Are you too arrogant? Or are you one of those exalted
He said: "I am better than he; You created me from fire, and created him from clay
He said: "Therefore exit from it, you are outcast
And My curse will be upon you until the Day of Recompense
He said: "My Lord, respite me until the Day they are resurrected
He said: "You are respited
Until the appointed Day
He said: "By Your majesty, I will mislead them all
Except for Your servants who are loyal
He said: "The truth, and the truth is what I say
That I will fill Hell with you and all those who follow you
Say: "I do not ask you for any wage, nor am I a fraud
It is but a reminder for the worlds
And you will come to know its news after awhile
The sending down of the Book is from God, the Noble, the Wise
We have sent down to you the Book with the truth, so serve God while devoting the system to Him
Absolutely, to God is the true system. And those who set up allies besides Him: "We only serve them so that they may bring us closer to God." God will judge between them in what they dispute. For God does not guide him who is a liar, a rejecter
If God wished to take a son, He could have exalted from among His creation what He pleases. Be He glorified; He is God, the One, the Supreme
He created the heavens and the earth with the truth. He rolls the night over the day, and He rolls the day over the night. And He commissioned the sun and the moon, each running for an appointed term. Absolutely, He is the Noble, the Forgiving
He created you from one person, then He made from it its mate. And He sent down to you eight pairs of the livestock. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, a creation after a creation in three darkness's. Such is God your Lord. To Him belongs the sovereignty. There is no god besides Him. How is it then you deviate
If you reject, then know that God is in no need of you, and He is displeased with rejection for His servants. And if you are thankful, He is pleased with it for you. And none shall carry the burdens of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of everything you had done. He is fully aware of what is in the chests
And when man is afflicted with adversity, he implores his Lord, turning in repentance to Him. But then, when He grants him a blessing from Him, he forgets his previous imploring, and sets up equals with God, in order to mislead others from His path. Say: "Enjoy your rejection for a while; for you are of the dwellers of the Fire
Is one better who is dutiful during the night, prostrating and standing, fearing the Hereafter, and seeking the mercy of his Lord? Say: "Are those who know equal to those who do not know?" Only those who possess intelligence will remember
Say: "O My servants who believed, be aware of your Lord." For those who worked righteousness in this world will be a good reward, and the earth of God is spacious. Those who steadfastly persevere will receive their recompense fully, without reckoning
Say: "I have been commanded to serve God, devoting the system to Him
And I was commanded to be the first of those who submit
Say: "I fear, if I disobeyed my Lord, the retribution of a great Day
Say: "God is the One I serve, devoting my system to Him
Therefore, serve whatever you wish besides Him." Say: "The losers are those who lose their souls, and their families, on the Day of Resurrection. Indeed, such is the real loss
They will have coverings of fire from above them and below them. It is as such that God makes His servants fearful: "O My servants, you shall reverence Me
And for those who avoid serving evil, and turn to God in repentance, for them are glad tidings. So give the good news to My servants
The ones who listen to what is being said, and then follow the best of it. These are the ones whom God has guided, and these are the ones who possess intelligence
As for those who have deserved the retribution; can you save those who are in the Fire
But those who reverence their Lord, they will have dwellings constructed upon dwellings, with rivers flowing beneath them. The promise of God, and God does not break the promise
Do you not see that God sends down water from the sky, then lets it run as springs in the earth, then He produces with it plants of various colors, then they grow until they turn yellow, then He makes them dry and broken? In this is a reminder for those who possess intelligence
If God comforts the chest of a person to submission, then he will be on a light from his Lord. So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembering God. They have gone far astray
God has sent down the best narrative, a Book that is similar, dual. The skins of those who are concerned towards their Lord shiver from it, then their skins and their hearts soften up to the remembrance of God. Such is the guidance of God; He guides with it whoever He wills. And for whoever God misguides, then none can guide him
As he who saves his face from the terrible retribution on the Day of Resurrection. And it will be said to the transgressors: "Taste for what you have earned
Those before them have denied, and thus the retribution came to them from where they did not perceive
So God made them taste the humiliation in this worldly life, but the retribution in the Hereafter is far greater, if only they knew
And We have put forth for the people in this Qur'an from every example, that they may take heed
A revelation in Arabic, without any crookedness, that they may be righteous
God puts forth the example of a man who has partners that dispute with each other, and a man who has given to dealing with only one man. Are they the same? Praise be to God; most of them do not know
You will die, and they will die
Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will quarrel at your Lord
Who is more wicked than he who lies about God, and denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not in Hell an abode for the rejecters
And those who came with the truth, and believed in it, these are the righteous
They shall have what they wish at their Lord. Such is the rewardfor the good doers
So that God may cancel for them the worst that they did, and He may recompense them their reward for the best of what they used to do
Is God not enough for His servant? And they frighten you with others besides Him. And whoever God sends astray, then for him there will be no guide
And whoever God guides, then there will be none that can mislead him. Is God not Noble, with Vengeance
And if you ask them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will say: "God." Say: "Do you see what you call on besides God, If God wanted any harm for me, can they alleviate His harm? Or if He wanted a mercy for me, can they hold back his mercy?" Say: "God is sufficient for me; in Him those who trust shall place their trust
Say: "O my people, work according to your way, and I will work. You will come to know
To whom the humiliating retribution will come, and on whom an eternal retribution will be cast
We have sent down to you the Book for the people with the truth. Then, whoever is guided is guided for himself, and whoever goes astray goes astray to his own loss. And you are not a keeper over them
God seizes the souls at the time of their death; and for those that have not died, during their sleep. He then keeps those that have been overtaken by death, and He sends the others back until a predetermined time. In that are signs for a people who will think
Or have they taken intercessors besides God? Say: "What if they possessed nothing, nor comprehended
Say: "To God belongs all intercession." To Him belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, then to Him you will be returned
And when God alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter are filled with aversion; and when others are mentioned besides Him, they rejoice
Say: "Our god, Initiator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the seen, You will judge between Your servants regarding what they disputed in
And if those who transgressed owned everything on the earth, and its equivalent again with it, they would ransom it to avoid the terrible retribution on the Day of Resurrection. They will be shown by God what they did not expect
And the sinful works they had earned will be shown to them, and they will be surrounded by that which they used to mock
So when man is touched by adversity, he implores Us, then when We bestow a blessing upon him, he says: "I attained this because of knowledge I had!" Indeed, it is a test, but most of them do not know
Those before them have said the same thing, yet what they earned did not help them in the least
So, they suffered the evil of what they had earned. And those who transgressed from among these here will suffer the evil of what they earned; they cannot escape
Do they not realize that God spreads the provision for whoever He chooses, and withholds? In that are signs for a people who believe
Say: "O My servants who transgressed against themselves, do not despair of the mercy of God. For God forgives all sins. He is the Forgiver, the Merciful
And repent to your Lord, and submit to Him, before the retribution comes to you. Then you cannot be helped
And follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your Lord, before the retribution comes to you suddenly when you least expect it
Lest a soul will say: "How sorry I am for disregarding the path of God; and I was certainly one of those who mocked
Or say: "Had God guided me, I would have been among the righteous
Or say, when it sees the retribution: "If only I could have another chance, I would be among the good doers
Yes indeed, My revelations came to you, but you denied them and turned arrogant, and became one of the rejecters
And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied about God, their faces will be darkened. Is there not an abode in Hell for the arrogant ones
And God will save those who were righteous as their reward. No harm will touch them, nor will they grieve
God is the Creator of all things, and He is Guardian over all things
To Him belongs the keys of the heavens and the earth. And those who rejected the revelations God, they are the losers
Say: "Do you order me to serve other than God, O you ignorant ones
And He has inspired to you and to those before you, that if you set up partners, He will nullify all your works, and you will be of the losers
Therefore, you shall serve God, and be among the thankful
And they have not given God His true worth; and the whole earth is within His fist on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be folded in His right hand. Be He glorified and exalted above what they set up
And the horn will be blown, whereupon everyone in the heavens and the earth will be struck unconscious, except those spared by God. Then it will be blown another time, whereupon they will all rise up, looking
And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord, and the record will be placed, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forth; and it will then be judged between them with the truth, and they will not be wronged
And every soul will be paid for whatever it did, for He is fully aware of everything they have done
And those who rejected will be driven to Hell in groups. When they reach it, and its gates are opened, its guards will say to them: "Did you not receive messengers from among you who recited to you the revelations of your Lord, and warned you about meeting this Day?" They said: "Yes indeed; but the sentence of retribution has come to pass upon the rejecters
It was said: "Enter the gates of Hell, abiding therein. What a miserable destiny for the arrogant
And those who reverenced their Lord will be driven to the Paradise in groups. When they reach it, and its gates are opened, its guards will say to them: "Peace be upon you. You have done well, so enter to abide herein
And they said: "Praise be to God who has fulfilled His promise to us, and He made us inherit the land, enjoying the Paradise as we please. What a beautiful recompense for the workers
And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne, glorifying the praise of their Lord. And it will be judged between them with the truth, and it will be said: "Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
HM
The revelation of the Book is from God, the Noble, the Knowledgeable
Forgiver of sins, and accepter of repentance, severe in retribution, with ability to reach. There is no god other than Him, to Him is the ultimate destiny
None dispute in the revelations of God except those who have rejected. So do not be impressed by their influence in the land
Denial had come before them from the people of Noah, and the Confederates after them. And every nation obsessed with their messenger - to take him - and they disputed by means of falsehood to defeat with it the truth. So I took them; how then was My punishment
And as such, the word of your Lord has come to pass upon those who rejected, that they are the dwellers of the Fire
Those who carry the Throne and all those surrounding it glorify the praise of their Lord, and believe in Him, and they seek forgiveness for those who have believed: "Our Lord, You encompass all things with mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who repented and followed Your path, and spare them the agony of Hell
Our Lord, and admit them into gardens of delight which You had promised for them and for those who did good of their fathers, their spouses, and their progeny. You are the Noble, the Wise
And save them from the sins. And whoever You save from the sins, on that Day, You have granted him mercy. And such is the great triumph
Those who had rejected will be told: "The abhorrence of God towards you is greater than your abhorrence of yourselves, for you were invited to believe, but you chose to reject
They will say: "Our Lord, You have made us die twice, and You have given us life twice. Now we have confessed our sins. Is there any way out of this state
This is because when God alone was mentioned, you rejected, but when partners were set up with Him, you believed. Therefore, the judgment is for God, the Most High, the Great
He is the One who shows you His signs, and He sends down to you provisions from the heaven. But none do remember except those who repent
Therefore, call on God while being pure to His system, even if the rejecters hate it
Possessor of the highest ranks, the One with the Throne. He sends the Spirit with His command upon whom He wills from His servants, that they may warn of the Day of Summoning
The Day when they will be exposed. None of them will hide anything from God. To whom is the sovereignty on this Day? To God, the One, the Supreme
Today, every soul will be recompensed for what it had earned. There will be no injustice today. Truly, God is swift in reckoning
And warn them of the imminent Day, when the hearts will reach the throats, and many will be remorseful. The transgressors will have no friend nor intercessor to be obeyed
He knows what the eyes have seen, and what the chests conceal
And God judges with the truth, while those they call on besides Him do not judge with anything. Certainly, God is the Hearer, the Seer
Have they not roamed the earth and seen how was the consequence of those who were before them? They used to be stronger than they, and had built more in the land. But God seized them for their sins, and they had no protector against God
That is because their messengers used to come to them with proofs, but they rejected. Thus God seized them; for He is Mighty, severe in punishment
And We had sent Moses with Our signs, and a clear authority
To Pharaoh, Haamaan, and Qaroon. But they said: "A lying magician
Then, when the truth came to them from Us, they said: "Kill the children of those who believed with him, and rape their women." But the planning of the rejecters is always in error
And Pharaoh said: "Leave me to kill Moses, and let him call upon his Lord. I fear that he may change your system, or that he will cause evil to spread throughout the land
And Moses said: "I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant one who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning
And a believing man from among the people of Pharaoh, who had concealed his belief, said: "Will you kill a man simply for saying: 'My Lord is God', and he has come to you with proofs from your Lord? And if he is a liar, then his lie will be upon him, and if he is truthful, then some of what he is promising you will afflict you. For God does not guide any transgressor, liar
O my people, you have the kingship today throughout the land. But then who will save us against the torment of God, should it come to us?" Pharaoh said: "I am showing you that which I see, and I am guiding you in the right path
And the one who believed said: "O my people, I fear for you the same fate as the day of the Confederates
Like the fate of the people of Noah, 'Aad, and Thamud, and those after them. And God does not wish any injustice for the servants
And, O my people, I fear for you the Day of mutual blaming
A Day when you will turn around and flee, you will have no protector besides God, and whoever God sends astray, then there is none who can guide him
And Joseph had come to you before with proofs, but you remained in doubt regarding what he came to you with, until when he died, you said: "God will not send any messenger after him." It is such that God sends astray he who is a transgressor, doubter
Those who dispute about the revelations of God without any authority that has come to them, it is greatly abhorred with God and with those who believe. God thus seals the hearts of every arrogant tyrant
And Pharaoh said: "O Haamaan, build for me a high platform that I may uncover the secrets
The secrets of the heavens, so that I may take a look at the god of Moses; though I think he is a liar." Thus the evil works of Pharaoh were adorned for him, and he was blocked from the path. And the planning of Pharaoh brought nothing but regret
And the one who believed said: "O my people, follow me, and I will guide you to the right path
O my people, this worldly life is but an enjoyment, while the Hereafter is the permanent abode
Whoever does a sin, will not be requited except for its equivalent, and whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, then those will be admitted to the Paradise, where they will receive provision without reckoning
And, O my people, why is it that I invite you to salvation, while you invite me to the Fire
You invite me to reject God, and set up partners besides Him that I have no knowledge of, and I am inviting you to the Noble, the Forgiver
There is no doubt that what you invite me to has no basis in this world, nor in the Hereafter. And our ultimate return will be to God, and that the transgressors will be the dwellers of the Fire
You will come to remember what I am telling you, and I leave my affair in this matter to God; for God is the Seer of the servants
So God protected him from the evil of what they schemed, while the people of Pharaoh have incurred the worst retribution
The Fire, which they will be exposed to morning and evening, and on the Day when the Hour is established: "Admit the people of Pharaoh into the most severe of the retribution
And when they argue in Hell, the weak will say to those who were arrogant: "We used to be your followers, can you take from us any portion of the Fire
Those who were arrogant will say: "We are all in it together, for God has passed judgment upon the servants
And those who are in the Fire will say to the guardians of Hell: "Call upon your Lord to reduce for us the retribution, by just one day
They will say: "Did your messengers not come to you with proofs?" They will say: "Yes." They will say: "Then implore, but the imploring of the rejecters will be nothing but in vain
We will indeed grant victory to Our messengers and to those who believed in the worldly life, and on the Day when the witnesses will rise
A Day when excuses will be of no help to the transgressors, and they will be cursed, and they will have the worst abode
And We gave Moses the guidance, and We made the Children of Israel inherit the Book
A guide and a reminder for those who possess intelligence
So be patient, for the promise of God is true, and seek forgiveness for your sin, and glorify and praise your Lord evening and morning
Surely, those who dispute about the revelations of God without any authority given to them, there is nothing except arrogance in their chests, which they do not perceive. Therefore, seek refuge with God; He is the Hearer, the Seer
The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of the people, but most of the people do not know
And not equal are the blind and the seer, nor those who believe and do good works, and those who do evil. Little do you remember
Surely the Hour is coming, there is no doubt in it, but most of the people do not believe
And your Lord said: "Call on Me and I will respond to you." Surely, those who are too arrogant to serve Me, they will enter Hell, humbled
God, it is He Who has made for you the night to reside in and the day to see in. Surely, God provides many blessings upon the people, but most of the people are not thankful
That is God, your Lord, Creator of all things. There is no god except He, so why do you deviate
Thus, those who were denying the revelations of God were deviated
God is the One who made the earth a habitat for you, and the heaven as a structure, and He designed you, and has perfected your design. And He provided you with good provisions. Such is God your Lord. Most Exalted is God, Lord of the worlds
He is the Living; there is no god except He. So call on Him while devoting the system to Him. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds
Say: "I have been prohibited from serving those whom you are calling upon besides God, since the proofs have come to me from my Lord. And I have been commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds
He is the One who has created you from dust, then from a seed, then from an embryo, then He brings you out as a child, then He lets you reach your maturity, then you become old; and some of you will have their lives terminated before this; and that you may reach an appointed term, and perhaps so you may comprehend
He is the One who gives life and death. And when He decides upon anything, He simply says to it: 'Be,' and it is
Did you not see those who dispute about the revelations of God, how they have deviated
Those who deny the Book, and what We have sent Our messengers with. Therefore, they will come to know
When the shackles will be around their necks and in chains they will be dragged off
To the boiling water, then in the Fire they will be burned
Then it will be said to them: "Where are those that you have set up as partners
Beside God?" They will say: "They have abandoned us. No, we did not used to call on anything before!" Thus God leads the rejecters astray
That was because you used to gloat on the earth without any right, and for what you used to rejoice
Enter the gates of Hell, abiding therein. What a miserable abode for the arrogant ones
So be patient, for the promise of God is true. So, if We show you some of what We promise them, or We terminate your life, then it is to Us that they will be returned
And We have sent messengers prior to you. Some of them We have told to you, and some We did not tell to you. And it was not given to any messenger that he should bring a sign except with the permission of God. So, when the judgment of God is issued, the matter is decided with the truth, and the followers of falsehood will be lost
God is the One who made the livestock for you that you may ride on some of them, and some of them you eat
And you have other benefits in them. And that you may reach by them what is desired in your chests. And on them and on the ships, you are carried
And He shows you His signs. So which of the signs of God do you deny
Have they not roamed the earth and noted the consequences for those who were before them? They used to be greater in number than them and mightier in strength, and they had built more in the land. Yet, all that they had earned could not avail them
Then, when their messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were content with what they already had of knowledge. And they will be surrounded by that which they used to mock
So when they saw Our might, they said: "We believe in God alone, and we reject all the partners we used to set up
But their belief could not help them once they saw Our might; such is the way of God that has been established for His servants; and the rejecters were then totally in loss
HM
A revelation from the Almighty, the Merciful
A Book whose verses are made detailed - an Arabic revelation for a people who know
A bearer of good news, and a warner. But most of them turn away; they do not hear
And they said: "Our hearts are sealed from what you invite us to, and in our ears is a deafness, and there is a barrier between us and you. So do what you will, and so will we
Say: "I am no more than a human being like you. It is inspired to me that your god is One god, therefore you shall be upright towards Him and seek His forgiveness. And woe to the polytheists
The ones who do not contribute towards purification, and with regards to the Hereafter, they are disbelievers
Surely, those who believe and do good works, they will receive recompense that will not end
Say: "You are rejecting the One who has created the earth in two days, and you set up equals with Him. That is the Lord of the worlds
And He placed in it stabilizers from above it, and He blessed it and established its provisions in proportion in four days, to satisfy those who ask
Then He settled to the heaven, while it was still smoke, and He said to it, and to the earth: "Come willingly or unwillingly." They said: "We come willingly
Thus, He then made them into seven heavens in two days, and He inspired to every heaven its affair. And We adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and for protection. Such is the design of the Noble, the Knowledgeable
But if they turn away, then say: "I have warned you of a destruction like the destruction of 'Aad and Thamud
When the messengers came to them, publicly and privately: "You shall not serve except God." They said: "Had our Lord willed, He would have sent angels. We are rejecting what you have been sent with
As for 'Aad, they turned arrogant on the earth, without any right, and they said: "Who is mightier than us in strength?" Did they not see that God, who has created them, was mightier than they in strength? And they were denying Our revelations
Consequently, We sent upon them a violent wind, for a few miserable days, that We may let them taste the humiliating retribution in this worldly life, and the retribution of the Hereafter is more humiliating; they can never win
And as for Thamud, We gave them the guidance, but they preferred blindness over guidance. Consequently, the blast of humiliating retribution annihilated them, because of what they earned
And We saved those who believed and were righteous
And the Day when the enemies of God will be gathered to the Fire, forcibly
When they come to it, their own hearing, eyes, and skins will bear witness to everything they had done
And they will say to their skins: "Why did you bear witness against us?" They will say: "God made us speak; He is the One who causes everything to speak. He is the One who has created you the first time, and to Him you return
And there was no way you could hide from the testimony of your own hearing, or your eyes, or your skins. In fact, you thought that God was unaware of much of what you do
And this is the kind of thinking about your Lord that has caused you to fail, and thus you became of the losers
If they wait, then the Fire will be their destiny, and if they beg to be excused, they will not be excused
And We assigned to them associates who adorned their present and past actions. Thus, the retribution has been deserved by them the same as previous nations of Jinn and mankind; all of them were losers
And those who rejected said: "Do not listen to this Qur'an and make noise over it that you may succeed
We will let those who have rejected taste a severe retribution. And We will recompense them for the evil that they used to do
Such is the recompense for the enemies of God. The Fire shall be their eternal abode, as a recompense for their discarding Our revelations
And those who have rejected will say: "Our Lord, show us those who have misled us from among the Jinn and mankind so we can trample them under our feet, so that they would be the lowest
Those who have said: "Our Lord is God," then they did right, the angels will come down upon them: "You shall not fear, nor shall you grieve. Rejoice in the good news of the Paradise that you have been promised
We are your allies in this worldly life and in the Hereafter.In it you will have anything your soul desires, and in it you will have anything you ask for
A dwelling, from a Forgiver, Merciful
And who is better in saying than he who invites to God, and does good works, and says: "I am one of those who have submitted
Not equal are the good and the bad response. You shall resort to the one which is better. Thus, the one who used to be your enemy, may become your best friend
And none can attain this except those who are patient. And none can attain this except those who are extremely fortunate
And if bitterness from the devil afflicts you, then seek refuge with God. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
And from among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not prostrate to the sun, nor the moon; you shall prostrate to God who has created them, if it is truly Him you serve
So, if they become arrogant, then those who are with your Lord glorify Him night and day, and they never despair
And from among His signs is that you see the land still, then, as soon as We send down the water upon it, it shakes and grows. Surely, the One who revived it can revive the dead. He is capable of all things
Those who distort Our revelations are not hidden from Us. Is one who is thrown into Hell better, or one who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you wish; He is Seer of what you do
Those who have rejected the Reminder when it came to them; and it is an Honorable Book
No falsehood could enter it, presently or afterwards; a revelation from One Most Wise, Praiseworthy
What is being said to you is the same that was said to the messengers before you. Your Lord has forgiveness, and He has a painful retribution
And had We made it a non-Arabic revelation, they would have said: "If only its verses were made clear!" Non-Arabic and Arabic, say: "For those who believe, it is a guide and healing. As for those who disbelieve, there is deafness in their ears, and they are blind to it. These will be called from a place far away
And We have given Moses the Book, but it was disputed in. And had it not been for the predetermined decision of your Lord, they would have been judged immediately. Indeed, they harbor many doubts about it
Whoever does good works does so for his own soul, and whoever works evil shall have the same. Your Lord does not wrong the servants
To Him belongs the knowledge regarding the Hour. And no fruit emerges from its sheath, nor does any female conceive or give birth, except by His knowledge. And on the Day He asks them: "Where are My partners?" They will say: "With your permission, none of us will bear witness to such
And they were abandoned by that which they used to call on before, and they realized that there will be no escape
Man does not tire in praying for good things. But if adversity touches him, he is disheartened, desperate
And when We let him taste a mercy from Us after hardship had touched him, he will say: "This was by my actions, and I do not think that the Hour will come to pass. And even if I am returned to my Lord, I will find at Him good things for me." Surely, We will inform the rejecters of all they had done, and We will let them taste the severe retribution
And when We bless man, he withdraws and turns away, and when he suffers any adversity, then he implores at length
Say: "Do you see if this was from God and then you rejected it? Who is further astray than those who are in opposition
We will show them Our signs in the horizons, and within themselves, until it becomes clear to them that this is the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord is witness over all things
Indeed, they are in doubt about meeting their Lord; but He is encompassing all things
HM
A'SQ
Similarly, inspiring you and those before you, is God, the Noble, the Wise
To Him belongs all what is in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Most High, the Great
The heavens would nearly shatter from above them, and the angels praise the glory of their Lord, and they ask forgiveness for those on the earth. Surely, God is the Forgiver, the Merciful
And those who take allies besides Him, God is responsible for them; and you are not a guardian over them
And thus We have inspired to you an Arabic revelation, so that you may warn the capital town and all around it, and to warn about the Day of Gathering that is inevitable. A group will be in the Paradise, and a group in Hell
And if God had willed, He could have made them one nation. But He admits whom He wills into His mercy. And the transgressors will have neither an ally, nor helper
Or have they taken allies besides Him? But God is the ally, and He is the One who resurrects the dead, and He is able to do all things
And anything you dispute in, then its judgment shall be with God. Such is God my Lord. In Him I place my trust, and to Him I repent
Initiator of the heavens and the earth. He created for you from among yourselves mates, and also mates for the livestock so they may multiply. There is nothing that equals Him. He is the Hearer, the Seer
To Him belong the possessions of the heavens and the earth. He spreads out the provision for whoever He wills, and He measures it. He is fully aware of all things
He has decreed for you the same system He ordained for Noah, and what We inspired to you, and what We ordained for Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: "You shall uphold this system, and do not divide in it." Intolerable for the polytheists is what you invite them towards. God chooses for Himself whoever He wills; He guides to Himself those who repent
And they only divided after the knowledge had come to them, due to resentment among themselves. And had it not been for a predetermined decision from your Lord, they would have been judged immediately. Indeed, those who inherited the Book after them are full of doubts
For that, you shall preach and be upright, as you have been commanded, and do not follow their wishes. And say: "I believe in all that God has sent down as a Book, and I was commanded to be with justice between you. God is our Lord and your Lord. We have our deeds and you have your deeds. There is no argument between us and you. God will gather us all together, and to Him is the ultimate destiny
And those who debate about God, after they had been answered, their argument is nullified at their Lord. They have incurred a wrath, and will have a severe retribution
God is the One who sent down the Book with the truth, and the balance. And for all that you know, the Hour may be very near
Those who do not believe in it seek to hasten it, while those who believe are concerned about it, and they know that it is the truth. Certainly, those who dispute the Hour have gone far astray
God is Gracious to His servants; He gives provisions for whoever He wills, and He is the Powerful, the Noble
Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase for him his harvest. And whoever seeks the harvest of this world, We will give him therefrom, and he will have no share in the Hereafter
Or do they have partners who decree for them a system which has not been authorized by God? And if it were not for the word already given, they would have been judged immediately. Indeed, the transgressors will have a painful retribution
You see the transgressors worried because of what they had done; and it will come back at them. As for those who believed and do good works, they will be in gardens of bliss. They will have what they wish from their Lord. This is the great blessing
Such is the good news from God to His servants who believe and do good works. Say: "I do not ask you for any wage, except that you show compassion to your relatives." And whoever earns a good deed, We shall increase it for him in goodness. Surely, God is Forgiving, Thankful
Or do they say: "He has fabricated lies about God!" Had God willed, He could have sealed your heart. And God erases the falsehood and affirms the truth with His words. He is fully aware of what is in the chests
And He is the One who accepts the repentance from His servants, and He forgives the sins. He is fully aware of what you do
And those that believe and do good works respond to Him, and He increases for them His blessings. As for the rejecters, they have incurred a severe retribution
And if God were to increase the provision for His servants, they would transgress on the earth; but He sends down what He wills in a measure. He is Expert and Seer of His servants
And He is the One who sends down the rain after they had despaired, and spreads His mercy. He is the Supporter, the Praiseworthy
And from among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the creatures He spreads in them. And He is able to gather them, if He wills
And any misfortune that happens to you is a consequence of what your hands have earned. And He overlooks much
And you can never escape, and you have none besides God as an ally or helper
And from His signs are the vessels that sail the sea like flags
If He willed, He could still the winds, leaving them motionless on top of it. In that are signs for every one who is patient, thankful
Or He may drown them, for what they have earned. And He overlooks much
And that those who dispute in Our signs may know that they have no place to hide
So whatever you are given is simply an enjoyment of the worldly life, and what is with God is far better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
And those who avoid major sins and immorality, and when they are angered, they forgive
And those who have responded to their Lord, and they hold the contact prayer, and their affairs are conducted by mutual consultation among themselves, and from Our provisions to them they give
And those who, when injustice befalls them, they seek justice
The recompense for a crime shall be its equivalence, but whoever forgives and makes right, then his reward is upon God. He does not like the wrongdoers
And for any who demand action after being wronged, those are not committing any error
The error is upon those who oppress the people, and they aggress in the land without cause. For these will be a painful retribution
And for he who is patient and forgives, then that is an indication of strength
And whoever God sends astray will not have any ally after Him. And you will see the transgressors, when they see the retribution, saying: "Is there any way we can go back
And you will see them being displayed to it, in fearful humiliation, and looking, while trying to avoid looking. And those who believed will say: "The losers are those who lost their souls and their families on the Day of Resurrection. The transgressors will be in a lasting retribution
And they had no allies to help them against God. And whoever Godmisguides will never find the way
Respond to your Lord before a Day comes from God which cannot be averted. You will have no refuge for you on that Day, nor an advocate
But if they turn away, then We did not send you as their guardian. You are only required to deliver. And when We let man taste a mercy from Us, he becomes happy with it; and when adversity afflicts them for what their hands have delivered, then man becomes rejecting
To God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wills. He bestows daughters to whoever He wills, and bestows sons to whoever He wills
Or, He may bestow them with both sons and daughters, and He makes whom He wills barren. He is Knowledgeable, Capable
And it is not for any human being that God would speak to him, except through inspiration, or from behind a barrier, or by sending a messenger to inspire whom He wills with His permission. He is Most High, Wise
And thus, We inspired to you a revelation of Our command. You did not know what was the Book, nor what was faith. Yet, We made this a light to guide whoever We wish from among Our servants. Surely, you guide to a straight path
The path of God, to whom belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. Ultimately, to God all matters return
HM
And the clarifying Book
We have made it an Arabic revelation, perhaps you may comprehend
And it is held honorable and wise in the master record with Us
Shall We turn away the Reminder from you, because you are a transgressing people
And how many a prophet did We send to the previous generations
And every time a prophet went to them, they mocked him
We have destroyed those who were even more powerful than these, and the example of the previous generations has already been given
And if you asked them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will say: "They were created by the One who is the Noble, the Knowledgeable
He is the One who made the earth a habitat for you, and He made paths in it that you may be guided
And He is the One who sends down water from the sky, in exact measure. We then revive with it a dead land. Similarly, you will be brought-out
And He is the One who has created all the pairs, and He made for you of the ships and the livestock that which you can ride
So that you may settle on their backs; then recall the blessing of your Lord once you have settled on them, and say: "Glory to the One who has committed this for us, and we could not have done so by ourselves
And we will ultimately return to our Lord
And they assigned a share to Him from His own servants! Man is clearly denying
Or has He selected daughters from among His creation, while He has left you with the sons
And if one of them is given news of that which he puts forth as an example for the Almighty, his face becomes dark, and he is miserable
What good is an offspring that is brought up to be beautiful, and cannot help in a fight
And they have claimed the angels who are with the Almighty are females! Have they been made witness to their creation? We will record their testimony, and they will be asked
And they said: "If the Almighty had willed, we would not have worshipped them." They have no knowledge of this; they only conjecture
Or have We given them a book before this which they are upholding
The fact is, they have said: "We found our fathers following a certain way, and we are following in their footsteps
And similarly, We did not send a warner to a town, except its carefree ones said: "We found our fathers following a certain way, and we are being guided in their footsteps
He said: "What if I brought to you better a guidance than what you found your fathers upon?" They said: "We are disbelievers in that with which you have been sent
Consequently, We took revenge upon them. So see how was the consequences of the deniers
And when Abraham said to his father and his people: "I am innocent of that which you worship
Except for the One who initiated me, He will guide me
And he made it a word to last in his subsequent generations; perhaps they may turn back
Indeed, I have given these people and their fathers to enjoy, until the truth came to them, and a clarifying messenger
And when the truth came to them, they said: "This is magic, and we reject it
And they said: "If only this Qur'an was sent down to a man of greatness from the two towns
Is it they who assign the mercy of your Lord? We have assigned their share in this worldly life, and We raised some of them above others in ranks, so that they would take one another in service. The mercy from your Lord is far better than that which they amass
And were it not that all the people would become one nation, We would have provided for those who reject the Almighty silver roofs for their homes, and stairs upon which they could ascend
And for their homes, gates, and beds on which they could recline
And many ornaments. All these are the pleasures of this worldly life. And the Hereafter with your Lord is for the righteous
And whoever turns away from the remembrance of the Almighty, We appoint a devil to be his associate
And they hinder from the path, but they think they are guided
Until he comes to Us, he will say, "Oh, I wish that between you and me was the distance of the two easts. What a miserable associate
It would not benefit you this Day, for you have transgressed; you are partners in the retribution
Can you make the deaf hear, or can you guide the blind and those who are far astray
So if We take you away, We may then seek revenge on them
Or We may show you that which We promised for them; for We are able to take them
You shall hold on to that which is inspired to you; for you are on a straight path
And this is indeed a reminder for you and your people; and you will all be questioned
And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before you: "Did We ever appoint gods besides the Almighty to be served
And We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his commanders; so he said: "I am a messenger of the Lord of the worlds
But when he came to them with Our signs, they laughed at them
And every sign We showed them was greater than the one before it, and We seized them with the torment, perhaps they would return
And they said: "O you magician, call on your Lord for what pledge He gave you; we will then be guided
But when We removed the torment from them, they broke their word
And Pharaoh proclaimed among his people: "O my people, do I not possess the kingship of Egypt, and these rivers that flow below me? Do you not see
Am I not better than this one who is despised and he can barely be understood
Why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him, or the angels are accompanying him
He thus convinced his people, and they obeyed him; they were a wicked people
So when they persisted in opposing Us, We sought revenge from them, and drowned them all
We thus made them a thing of the past, and an example for the others
And when the son of Mary was put forth as an example, your people turned away from it
And they said: "Our gods are better or is he?" They only put this forth to argue with you. Indeed, they are a quarrelsome people
He was no more than a servant whom We blessed, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel
And if We willed, We could have made some of you angels to be successors on the earth
And he was a lesson for the Hour. So have no doubt about it. And follow Me; this is a straight path
And let not the devil repel you; he is to you a clear enemy
And when Jesus came with the proofs, he said: "I have come to you with the wisdom, and to clarify some of the matters in which you dispute. So be aware of God and obey me
God is my Lord and your Lord. So serve Him. This is a straight path
The Confederates disputed among themselves. So, woe to those who have been wicked from the retribution of a painful Day
Do they only wait for the Hour to come to them suddenly, while they do not perceive
Friends on that Day will become enemies of one another, except for the righteous
O My servants, you will have no fear on this Day, nor will you grieve
They are the ones who believed in Our revelations, and had submitted
Enter the Paradise, together with your spouses, in happiness
They will be served with golden trays and cups, and they will find everything the self desires and the eyes wish for, and you will abide therein
And this is the Paradise that you have inherited, in return for your works
In it you will have all kinds of fruits, from which you eat
Surely, the criminals will abide in the retribution of Hell
It will not be removed from them; they will be confined therein
And We did not wrong them, but it was they who were the wrongdoers
And they called out: "O Malek, please let your Lord terminate us!" He will say: "No, you are remaining
We have come to you with the truth,but most of you hate the truth
Or have they devised some scheme? We will also devise
Or do they think that We do not hear their secrets and their private counsel? Yes indeed; and Our messengers are with them, recording
Say: "If the Almighty had a son, I would be the first to serve
Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, from what they describe
So leave them to speak nonsense and play until they meet their Day which they have been promised
And He is the One who is a god in the heaven and a god on the earth. And He is the Wise, the Knowledgeable
And blessed is the One who possesses the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them; and with Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and to Him you will be returned
And those whom they call on besides Him do not possess any intercession; except those who bear witness to the truth, and they fully know
And if you asked them who has created them, they would say, "God." Why then do they deviate
And it will be said: "O my Lord, these are a people who do not believe
So disregard them and say: "Peace." For they will come to know
HM
And the clarifying Book
We have sent it down in a blessed night. Surely, We were to warn
In it, is a decree for every matter of wisdom
A decree from Us. Surely, We were to send messengers
A mercy from your Lord. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them. If you were certain
There is no god except He. He gives life and causes death; your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors
No; they are in doubt, playing
Therefore, watch for the day when the heaven will bring a visible smoke
It will envelop the people: "This is a painful retribution
Our Lord, remove the retribution from us; we are believers
How is it that now they remember, while a clarifying messenger had come to them
But then, they turned away from him and said: "Clearly educated, but crazy
We will remove the retribution in a while; you will then return back
On the Day We strike the great strike, We will avenge
And We had tested before them the people of Pharaoh, and an honorable messenger came to them
Restore to me the servants of God. I am a trustworthy messenger to you
And, do not transgress against God. I come to you with clear authority
And I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord, should you stone me
And if you do not believe in me, then have no dealing with me
Subsequently, he called on his Lord: "These are a criminal people
You shall travel with My servants during the night; you will be pursued
And cross the sea quickly; their troops will be drowned
How many gardens and springs did they leave behind
And crops and an honorable station
And blessings that they enjoyed
Thus it was; and We caused another people to inherit it
Neither the heaven, nor the earth wept over them, and they were not respited
And We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating agony
From Pharaoh; he was a transgressing tyrant
And We have chosen them, out of knowledge, over the worlds
And We granted them signs, which constituted a great test
These people now are saying
There is nothing except our first death; and we will never be resurrected
So bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful
Are they better or the people of Tubba` and those before them? We destroyed them, they were criminals
And We have not created the heavens and the earth, and everything between them, for mere play
We did not create them except with the truth, but most of them do not know
Surely, the Day of Separation is the appointment for them all
That is the Day when no friend can help his friend in any way; nor will they be helped
Except him on whom God has mercy. He is the Noble, the Merciful
Surely, the tree of Bitterness
Will be the food for the sinful
Like hot oil, it will boil in the bellies
Like the boiling of liquid
Take him and throw him into the midst of Hell
Then pour upon his head the retribution of boiling liquid
Taste this; surely you are the noble, the generous
Surely, this is what you used to doubt
The righteous will be in a station of security
Among gardens and springs
Wearing silk and satin; facing each other
So it is, and We married them to wonderful companions
They enjoy in it all kinds of fruits, in perfect peace
They do not taste death therein except for the first death, and He has spared them the retribution of Hell
As a blessing from your Lord. Such is the great triumph
We have thus made it easy in your language, perhaps they may take heed
Therefore, watch; for they too will be watching
HM
The revelation of the Book is from God, the Noble, the Wise
In the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers
And in your creation, and what creatures He puts forth are signs for people who are certain
And the alternation of the night and the day, and what God sends down from the heaven of provisions to revive the land after its death, and the dispatching of the winds, are signs for a people who comprehend
These are the revelations of God, We recite them to you with the truth. So, in which narrative after God and His revelations do they believe
Woe to every sinful fabricator
He hears the revelations of God being recited to him, then he persists arrogantly, as if he never heard them. Give him news of a painful retribution
And if he learns anything from Our revelations, he takes it in mockery. For these will be a humiliating retribution
Waiting for them is Hell. And that which they earned will not help them, nor those whom they have taken as allies besides God, and for them is a terrible retribution
This is a guidance. And those who reject the revelations of their Lord, for them is an affliction of a painful retribution
God is the One who commissioned the sea in your service, so that the ships can run in it by His command, and that you may seek of His provisions, and that you may be thankful
And He commissioned in your service what is in the heavens and what is in the earth;all from Him. In that are signs for a people who reflect
Say to those who believed to forgive those who do not look forward to the days of God. He will recompense a people for whatever they have earned
Whoever works good does so for himself, and whoever works evil will suffer it. Then to your Lord you will be returned
And We had given the Children of Israel the Book, and the judgment, and the prophethood, and We provided them with good provisions; and We preferred them over the worlds
And We gave them clarity in the matter, but then they disputed after the knowledge had come to them, out of jealousy among themselves. Your Lord will judge them on the Day of Resurrection regarding everything that they have disputed
Then We have established you on the path of things; so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know
They cannot help you against God in the least. And the transgressors are allies to one another, while God is the Protector of the righteous
This is a physical evidence for the people, and a guidance and a mercy for a people who are certain
Or do those who work evil expect that We would treat them the same as those who believe and do good works, in their present life and their death? Miserable is how they judge
And God created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and so that every soul may be recompensed for whatever it earned, and they will not be wronged
Have you seen the one who took his desire as his god, and God led him astray, despite his knowledge, and He sealed his hearing and his heart, and He made a veil on his eyes? Who then can guide him after God? Will you not remember
And they said: "There is nothing except this worldly life; we die and we live and nothing destroys us except the passing of time!" And they have no knowledge about this; they only conjecture
And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, their only argument is to say: "Then bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful
Say: "God gives you life, then He puts you to death, then He will gather you to the Day of Resurrection, in which there is no doubt. But most of the people do not know
And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. And on the Day the Hour comes to pass, on that Day the falsifiers will lose
And you will see every nation lined-up together. Every nation will be called to its book. "Today, you will be recompensed for everything you have done
This is Our record; it utters the truth about you. We have been recording everything you did
As for those who believed and did good works, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. Such is the clear triumph
As for those who disbelieve: "Were not My revelations recited to you, but you turned arrogant and were a criminal people
And when it was said: "Surely the promise of God is the truth, and there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour," you said: "We do not know what the Hour is! We are full of conjecture about it; we are not certain
And the evils of their works will become evident to them, and they will be surrounded by that which they used to mock
And it will be said to them: "Today We will forget you, just as you forgot the meeting of this Day. And your abode is the Fire, and you will have no helpers
This is because you took the revelations of God in mockery, and you were deceived by the worldly life." So from this Day, they will never exit therefrom, nor will they be excused
To God belongs all praise; the Lord of the heavens, and the Lord of the earth; the Lord of the worlds
And to Him belongs all majesty in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise
HM
The revelation of the Book from God, the Noble, the Wise
We did not create the heavens and the earth, and everything between them except with the truth, and for an appointed time. And those who disbelieve turn away from what they are being warned with
Say: "Do you see those that you call on besides God? Show me what they have created on the earth, or do they have a share in the heavens? Bring me a book before this, or any trace of knowledge, if you are truthful
And who is more astray than he who calls on others besides God that do not respond to him even until the Day of Resurrection? And they are totally unaware of the calls to them
And at the time when the people are gathered, they will be enemies for them, and they will reject their worship
And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who rejected said of the truth that came to them: "This is evidently magic
Or do they say: "He fabricated this!" Say: "If I fabricated this, then you cannot protect me at all from God. He is fully aware of what you say. He suffices as a witness between me and you. He is the Forgiver, the Merciful
Say: "I am no different from the other messengers, nor do I know what will happen to me or to you. I only follow what is inspired to me. I am no more than a clear warner
Say: "Do you see that if it were from God, and you rejected it, and a witness from the Children of Israel bore witness to its similarity, and he has believed, while you have turned arrogant? Surely, God does not guide the wicked people
And those who had rejected said regarding those who had believed: "If it were any good, they would not have beaten us to it." And when they are not able to be guided by it, they will say: "This is an old fabrication
And before it was the Book of Moses, a beacon and a mercy. And this is an authenticating Book, in an Arabic tongue, so that you may warn those who have transgressed, and to give good news to the righteous
Those who said: "Our Lord is God," then they lead a righteous life, there is no fear for them, nor will they grieve
These are the dwellers of the Paradise, abiding therein, a reward for what they used to do
And We enjoined man to do good to his parents. His mother bore him with hardship, gave birth to him in hardship, and his bearing and weaning lasts thirty months. So that, when he has reached his independence, and he has reached forty years, he says: "My Lord, direct me to appreciate the blessings You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and to do good work that pleases You. And let my progeny be righteous. I have repented to You; I am of those who have submitted
It is from these that We accept the best of their deeds, and We shall overlook their sins, among the dwellers of the Paradise. This is the promise of truth that they had been promised
And the one who says to his parents: "Enough of you! Are you promising me that I will be resurrected, when the generations who died before me never came back?" While they both will implore God: "Woe to you; believe! For the promise of God is the truth." He would say: "This is nothing except fictional tales of old
These are the ones against whom the retribution has been deserved in nations who had come before them of mankind and Jinn; they are the losers
And to each will be degrees according to what they did, and He will recompense them and they will not be wronged
And on the Day when those who disbelieved will be displayed to the Fire: "You have wasted the good things given to you during your worldly life, and you took pleasure in it. Consequently, today you will be recompensed with a shameful retribution for your arrogance in the land without any right, and for what wickedness you were in
And recall the brethren of `Aad, when he warned his people of the sandstorm; no different to the warners sent before him and after him: "You shall not serve except God. For I fear for you the retribution of a great day
They said: "Have you come to us to divert us away from our gods? Then bring us what you are promising us, if you are truthful
He said: "The knowledge is only with God; and I convey to you what I was sent with. However, I see that you are a people who are ignorant
Then when they saw the dense cloud heading towards their valleys, they said: "This is a dense cloud that will bring to us much needed rain!" No, this is what you had asked to be hastened; a violent wind wherein there is a painful retribution
It destroys everything by the command of its Lord. Thus they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings. We thus requite the criminal people
And We had established them in the same way as We established you, and provided them with hearing, and eyesight, and hearts. But their hearing, eyesight, and hearts did not help them at all. This is because they used to disregard the revelations of God, and they will be surrounded by that which they used to mock
And We destroyed the towns around you and We had dispatched the signs, perhaps they would repent
They were to be supported by those who had established offerings to gods instead of God. Alas, they abandoned them. Such was their lie, and what they fabricated
And We directed to you a company of Jinn, in order to let them listen to the Qur'an. So when they arrived there, they said: "Pay attention." Then, when it was finished, they returned to their people, to warn them
They said: "O our people, we have heard a Book that was sent down after Moses, authenticating what is between his hands. It guides to the truth; and to a straight path
O our people, respond to the caller to God, and believe in Him. He will then forgive your sins, and spare you a painful retribution
And whoever does not respond to the caller to God will not escape in the land, and he will not have besides Him any allies. Such have gone far astray
Did they not see that God, who has created the heavens and the earth and was not tired by their creation, is able to revive the dead? Yes indeed; He is able to do all things
And the Day those who rejected are displayed to the Fire: "Is this not the truth?" They will say: "Yes indeed, by our Lord." He will say, "Then taste the retribution for what you had rejected
Therefore, be patient like the messengers of strong-will did before you and do not be in haste regarding them. On the Day they will see what they have been promised, it will be as if they had not remained except for one hour of a single day. A proclamation: "Are any destroyed except for the wicked people
Those who rejected and repelled from the path of God, He will mislead their works
And those who believe and do good works, and believe in what was sent down to Mohammed, for it is the truth from their Lord, He cancels for them their sins, and relieves their concern
That is because those who reject followed falsehood, while those who believe followed the truth from their Lord. God thus puts forth for the people their examples
Therefore, if you encounter those who have rejected, then strike the necks; until you bind them, then secure the cords. You may then either set them free or ransom them, until the war ends. That, and if God had willed, He alone could have beaten them, but He thus tests you by one another. As for those who get killed in the cause of God, He will never let their deeds be put to waste
He will guide them, and relieve their concerns
And He will admit them into the Paradise, which He has described to them
O you who believe, if you support God, He will support you, and make your foothold firm
And those who rejected, for them is destruction; and He has misled their works
That is because they hated what God sent down, thus He nullifies their works
Did they not roam the earth and note how was the end for those before them? God destroyed them; and for the rejecters in a similar fate
This is because God is the Master for those who believe, while the rejecters have no master
God admits those who believe and do good works to gardens with rivers flowing beneath them. As for those who reject, they are enjoying and eating as the livestock eat, and the Fire will be their abode
And many a town was stronger than your own town, which drove you out. We destroyed them, and there was none who could help them
Is he who is based on proof from his Lord, as he for whom his evil works have been adorned for him and they followed their desires
Is the example of the Paradise; that the righteous have been promised with rivers of pure water, and rivers of milk whose taste does not change, and rivers of alcohol that are delicious for the drinkers, and rivers of strained honey, and for them in it are all kinds of fruits, and a forgiveness from their Lord; like that of those who abide in the Fire, and are given to drink boiling water that cuts-up their intestines
And some of them listen to you, until when they go out from you, they say to those who have been given the knowledge: "What did he say?" Those are the ones whom God has sealed their hearts, and they followed their desires
And those who are guided, He increases their guidance, and grants them their righteousness
So are they waiting until the Hour comes to them suddenly? For its conditions have already been met. But once it comes to them, how will they benefit from their message
So know that there is no god besides God, and ask forgiveness of your sins and also for the believing males and the believing females. And God knows your movements and your place of rest
And those who believe say: "If only a chapter is sent down!" But when a lawgiving chapter is sent down, and fighting is mentioned in it, you see those who have a disease in their hearts look at you, as if death had already come to them. It thus revealed them
Obedience and to speak righteousness until the matter is decided, then if they trust God it would be better for them
So do you plan that when you turn away, that you will corrupt the land and sever your family ties
These are the ones whom God has cursed and thus He made them deaf and blinded their sight
Do they not reflect upon the Qur'an? Or are there locks on the hearts
Surely, those who returned back, after the guidance has been made clear to them, the devil has enticed them and has led them on
That is because they said to those who hated what God had sent down: "We will obey you in certain matters." And God knows their secrets
So how will it be when their lives are terminated by the angels, while striking their faces and their backs
That is because they followed that which angered God, and they hated that which pleased Him. Thus, He nullified their works
Or did those who harbor a disease in their hearts think that God would not bring out their evil thoughts
And if We wished, We would show them to you so you would recognize them by their looks. However, you can recognize them by their speech. And God is fully aware of your works
And We will test you for We know those who strive among you and those who are patient. And We will bring out your qualities
Those who have rejected and repelled from the path of God, and stood against the messenger; after the guidance has been made clear for them; they will not harm God in the least, and He will nullify their works
O you who believe, obey God, and obey the messenger. And do not render your works in vain
Surely, those who rejected and repelled from the path of God, then they died while still rejecting, God will never forgive them
Therefore, do not be weak and ask for peace, for you are on a higher moral ground, and God is with you. And He will not waste your efforts
The worldly life is no more than play and distraction. But if you believe and lead a righteous life, He will reward you, and He will not ask you for your wealth
If He were to ask you for it, to the extent of creating a hardship for you, you would become stingy, and your hidden evil will be exposed
Here you are being invited to spend in the cause of God, but some among you turn stingy. And whoever is stingy is only being stingy on himself. And God is the Rich, while you are the poor. And if you turn away, He will substitute another people instead of you, then they will not be like you
We have given you a clear conquest
So that God may forgive your present sins, and those past, and so that He may complete His blessings upon you, and guide you on a straight path
And God will grant you a conquest which is mighty
He is the One who sends down tranquility into the hearts of the believers, so that they may increase in faith along with their present faith. And to God belong the soldiers of the heavens and the earth, and God is Knowledgeable, Wise
That He may admit the believing males and believing females into gardens with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein, and He will forgive their sins for them. And with God this is a great triumph
And He will punish the hypocrite males and the hypocrite females, and the polytheist males and the polytheist females; they think evil thoughts about God. Their evil will come back to them, and God was angry with them, and He has cursed them and prepared for them Hell. What a miserable destiny
And to God belong the soldiers of the heavens and the earth. And God is Noble, Wise
We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of good news, and a warner
That you may believe in God and His messenger, and that you may support Him, honor Him, and glorify Him, morning and evening
Those who pledge allegiance to you, are in-fact pledging allegiance to God; the hand of God is above their hands. Those of them who violate such a pledge, are violating it only for themselves. And whoever fulfills what he has pledged to God, then He will grant him a great reward
The Nomads who lagged behind will say to you: "We were preoccupied with our money and our family, so ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: "Who then would possess any power for you against God if He wanted harm to afflict you or if He wanted benefit for you?" No, God is fully Aware of everything you do
Alas, you thought that the messenger and the believers would not return to their families, and this was deemed pleasant in your hearts, and you thought the worst thoughts; you were a wicked people
Anyone who does not believe in God and His messenger, then We have prepared for the rejecters a Fire
And to God is the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whoever He wills, and punishes whoever He wills. God is Forgiver, Merciful
Those who lagged behind will say, when you venture out to collect the spoils: "Let us follow you!" They want to change the words of God. Say: "You will not follow us; this is what God has decreed beforehand." They will then say: "No, you are envious of us." Alas, they rarely understood anything
Say to those Nomads who lagged behind: "You will be called on to fight a people who are very powerful in warfare, unless they surrender. Then if you obey, God will grant you a good reward, but if you turn away as you turned away before, He will punish you with a painful retribution
There is no burden on the blind, nor is there any burden on the cripple, nor is there any burden on the sick. And whoever obeys God and His messenger, He will admit them into gardens with rivers flowing beneath them; and whoever turns away, He will punish him with a painful retribution
God is pleased with the believers who pledged allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility upon them, and rewarded them with a victory that is near
And abundant spoils that they will take. God is Noble, Wise
God has promised you abundant spoils that you will take. Thus He has hastened this for you, and He has withheld the hands of the people against you; that it may be a sign for the believers, and that He may guide you to a straight path
And the other group which you could not vanquish, God took care of them. And God was capable of all things
And if the rejecters had fought you, they would have turned and ran, then they would have found neither an ally nor a victor
Such is the way of God with those who have passed away before, and you will not find any change in the way of God
And He is the One who withheld their hands against you, and your hands against them in the interior of Mecca, after He had made you victorious over them. God is Seer of what you do
They are the ones who rejected and barred you from the Restricted Temple, and barred your donations from reaching their destination. And there had been believing men and believing women whom you did not know, and you may have hurt them, and on whose account you would have incurred a sin unknowingly. God will admit into His mercy whoever He wills. Had they become separated, We would then have punished those from them who rejected with a painful retribution
Those who rejected had put in their hearts the rage of the days of ignorance. Then, God sent down tranquility upon His messenger and the believers, and directed them to uphold the word of righteousness, and they were well entitled to it and worthy of it. And God is fully aware of all things
God has affirmed, that the vision of His messenger will come true: "You will enter the Restricted Temple, God willing, secure, with your heads shaven, and shortened - no longer in fear." Thus, He knew what you did not know, and He has appointed before this a conquest near at hand
He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the system of truth, so that it would expose all other systems. And God is enough as a witness
Mohammed is the messenger of God, and those who are with him are severe against the rejecters, but merciful between themselves. You see them kneeling and prostrating, they seek the blessings and approval of God. Their distinction is in their faces, as a result of prostrating. Such is their example in the Torah. And their example in the Gospel is like a plant which shoots out and becomes strong and thick and it stands straight on its trunk, pleasing to the farmers. That He may enrage the rejecters with them. God promises those among them who believe and do good works a forgiveness and a great reward
O you who believe, do not place your opinion above that of God and His messenger. And be aware of God. God is Hearer, Knowledgeable
O you who believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet, nor shall you speak loudly to him as you would speak loudly to each other, lest your works become nullified while you do not perceive
Surely, those who lower their voices with the messenger of God, they are the ones whose hearts have been tested by God for righteousness. They have deserved forgiveness and a great recompense
Surely, those who call on you from behind the lodgings, most of them do not comprehend
And if they had only been patient until you came out to them, it would have been better for them. God is Forgiver, Merciful
O you who believe, if a wicked person comes to you with any news, then you shall investigate it. Lest you harm a people out of ignorance, then you will become regretful over what you have done
And know that among you is the messenger of God. If he were to obey you in many things, you would have deviated. But God made you love faith and He adorned it in your hearts, and He made you hate disbelief, wickedness, and disobedience. These are the rightly guided ones
Such is the grace from God and a blessing. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And if two parties of believers battle with each other, you shall reconcile them; but if one of them aggresses against the other, then you shall fight the one aggressing until it complies with the command of God. Once it complies, then you shall reconcile the two groups with justice, and be equitable; for God loves those who are equitable
The believers are brothers; so reconcile between your brothers, and be aware of God, that you may receive mercy
O you who believe, let not any people ridicule other people, for they may be better than they. Nor shall any women ridicule other women, for they may be better than they. Nor shall you mock one another, or call each other names; miserable indeed is the name of wickedness after attaining faith. And anyone who does not repent, then these are the transgressors
O you who believe, you shall avoid much suspicion, for some suspicion is sinful. And do not spy on one another, nor shall you backbite. Would any of you enjoy eating the flesh of his dead brother? You certainly would hate this. You shall observe God. God is Redeemer, Merciful
O people, We created you from a male and female, and We made you into nations and tribes, that you may know one another. Surely, the most honorable among you in the sight of God is the most righteous. God is Knowledgeable, Expert
The Nomads said: "We believe." Say: "You have not believed; but you should say: 'We have submitted', for belief has not yet entered into your hearts." If you obey God and His messenger, He will not put any of your works to waste. God is Forgiver, Merciful
Believers are those who believe in God and His messenger, then they became without doubt, and they strive with their money and their lives in the cause of God. These are the truthful ones
Say: "Are you teaching God about your system while God knows everything in the heavens and the earth? God is knowledgeable of all things
They think they are doing you a favor by having submitted! Say: "Do not think you are doing me any favors by your submission. For it is God who is doing you a favor that He has guided you to the faith, if you are being true
Surely, God knows all the unseen in the heavens and the earth; God is Seer of what you do
Q, and the Qur'an of glory
Are they surprised that a warner has come to them from amongst them, so the rejecters said: "This is something strange
Can it be that when we are dead and we become dust, that we come back later
We know which of them has become consumed with the earth; and We have with Us a record which keeps track
But they denied the truth when it came to them, so they are in a confused state
Did they not look to the heaven above them, how We built it, and adorned it, and how it has no openings
And the land We extended it, and placed in it stabilizers, and We gave growth in it to every kind of healthy pair
Something to see and a reminder for every pious servant
And We sent down from the sky blessed water, and We gave growth with it to gardens and grain that is harvested
And the palm trees, emerging with clustering fruit
A provision for the servants, and We gave life with it to the land which was dead. Such is the resurrection
Before their denial was that of the people of Noah, and the dwellers of Al-Raas, and Thamud
And 'Aad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot
And the people of the Sycamore, and the people of Tubba`. All of them disbelieved the messengers, so the promise came to pass
Did We have any difficulty in making the first creation? No, they are in confusion about the next creation
And We have created man and We know what his soul whispers to him, and We are closer to him than his jugular vein
When the two receivers meet on the right and on the left
He does not utter a word except a watcher is constantly with him
And the moment of death came with truth: "This is what you have been trying to avoid
And the horn is blown on the promised Day
And every soul is brought, being driven, and with a witness
You were heedless of this, so now We have removed your veil, and your sight today is iron
And his associate said: "Here is one who is a transgressor
Cast in Hell every stubborn rejecter
Denier of good, transgressor, doubter
The one who has set up with God another god; so cast him into the severe retribution
His associate said: "Our Lord, I did not corrupt him, but he was already far astray
He said: "Do not argue with each other before Me, I have already presented you with My promise
The sentence will not be changed with Me, and I do not wrong the servants
The Day We say to Hell: "Are you full?" And it says: "Is there not more
And the Paradise is brought near to the righteous, not far off
This is what you have been promised, for every obedient, steadfast
Who is concerned towards the Almighty while unseen, and came with a repenting heart
Enter it in peace. This is the Day of eternal life
In it they will have what they wish, and We have even more
And how many a generation before them have We destroyed? They were stronger in power, and they had dominated the land. Did they find any refuge
In that is a reminder for whoever has a heart, or cares to listen while he is heedful
And We have created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days, and no fatigue touched Us
So be patient to what they are saying, and glorify the grace of your Lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting
And from the night glorify Him, and after prostrating
And listen to the Day when the caller will call from a near place
The Day they hear the scream with the truth. That is the Day of coming out
We are the Ones who give life and bring death, and to Us is the destiny
The Day when the earth will rapidly crumble away from them; that will be a gathering which is easy for Us
We are fully aware of what they say; and you are not a tyrant over them. So remind with the Qur'an those who fear My promise
By the winds that blow
Carrying rain
Traveling easily
Distributing as commanded
What you are being promised is true
And the Judgment will come to pass
By the heaven that is woven
You are saying what is different
To mislead those who are misled
Woe to the deceitful
Who are in mischief, unaware
They ask: "When is the Day of Recompense
The Day they ordeal upon the Fire
Taste this ordeal of yours; this is what you asked to be hastened
The righteous are in gardens and springs
Receiving what their Lord has bestowed to them, for they were before that pious
They used to rarely sleep the whole night
And before dawn, they would seek forgiveness
An in their money was a portion for the beggar and the needy
And on the earth are signs for those who comprehend
And within yourselves; do you not see
And in the heaven is your provision, and what you are promised
By the Lord of the heaven and the earth, this is truth just as the fact that you speak
Has the narrative of the noble guests of Abraham come to you
When they entered upon him, they said: "Peace." He said: "Peace to a people unknown
Then he went to his family and brought a fat calf
He offered it to them, he said: "Do you not eat
He then became fearful of them. They said: "Do not fear," and they gave him good news of a knowledgeable son
His wife then approached in amazement. She slapped upon her face, and said: "A barren old woman
They said: "It was such that your Lord has said. He is the Wise, the Knowledgeable
He said: "What is your undertaking, O messengers
They said: "We have been sent to a criminal people
To send down upon them stones of clay
Prepared by your Lord for the transgressors
We then vacated from it all the believers
But We only found in it one house of those who had submitted
And We left in it a sign for those who fear the painful retribution
And also Moses, for We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authority
But he and his camp turned away, and said: "A magician, or crazy
So We took him and his troops; We cast them into the sea, and he was to blame
And also 'Aad, for We sent upon them the barren wind
Anything that it came upon was utterly destroyed
And also Thamud, for it was said to them: "Enjoy for a while
But they rebelled against the command of their Lord. So the lightning struck them while they were looking
They were unable to rise up, nor could they win
And the people of Noah before; they were a wicked people
And the heaven We constructed with resources, and We are expanding it
And the earth We furnished; so glory to the Makers
And of everything We created a pair, perhaps you may remember
So turn towards God. I am to you from Him a clear warner
And do not make any other god with God. I am to you from Him a clear warner
Likewise, when a messenger went to those before them, they said: "A magician, or crazy
Have they passed down this saying to each other? Indeed, they are a wicked people
So turn away from them; you will not be blamed
And remind, for the reminder benefits the believers
I did not create the Jinn and mankind except to serve Me
I need no provisions from them, nor do I need them to give food
God is the Provider, the One with Power, the Supreme
The transgressors will have the same fate as their previous friends; so let them not be hasty
So woe to those who rejected from the Day that is waiting for them
By the mount
And a recorded Book
In parchment published
And the constructed Sanctuary
And the ceiling which is raised
And the sea that is overflowing
The retribution of your Lord is unavoidable
Nothing can stop it
The Day when the heaven will violently thunder
And the mountains will be wiped out
Woe on that Day to the deniers
Who are in their recklessness, playing
The Day they will be called into Hell, forcibly
This is the Fire which you used to deny
Is this magic, or do you not see
Enter it, whether you are patient or impatient, it will be the same for you. You are only being requited for what you used to do
The righteous are in gardens and bliss
Delighted by what their Lord has granted them; and their Lord has spared them the retribution of Hell
Eat and drink happily because of what you used to do
They recline on arranged beds, and We married them to wonderful companions
And those who believed, and their progeny also followed them in belief; We will have their progeny join them. We never fail to reward them for any work. Every person is paid for what he did
We will supply them with fruit and meat such as they desire
They will enjoy drinks therein, from which there is no nonsense, nor blame
And around them will be children like protected pearls
And they came to one another asking
They said: "We used to be compassionate among our people
God thus blessed us, and has spared us the agony of the fierce hot winds
We used to implore Him before; He is the Kind, the Merciful
Therefore, you shall remind. For by the grace of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer, nor crazy
Or do they say: "He is a poet; so let us just wait until a disaster befalls him
Say: "Continue waiting; for I will wait along with you
Or do their dreams dictate this to them, or are they a transgressing people
Or do they say: "He made it all up"? No, they simply do not believe
Let them produce a narrative like this, if they are truthful
Or were they created from nothing? Or was it them who have created
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? No, they do not comprehend
Or do they possess the treasures of your Lord? Are they in control
Or do they have a stairway that enables them to listen? Then let their listeners show their proof
Or to Him belong the daughters, and to you belong the sons
Or do you ask them for a wage, so they are burdened by the fine
Or do they know the future, thus they have it recorded
Or do they want to make a plan? Indeed, it is the rejecters who are being planned against
Or do they have another god besides God? God be glorified above what they set up
And if they see a portion from the heaven falling, they will say: "Piled clouds
So disregard them until they meet their Day in which they are stricken
The Day when their scheming will not protect them in the least, nor will they be helped
And for those who transgressed will be a retribution beyond this, but most of them do not know
You shall be patient for the judgment of your Lord, for you are in Our sights; and glorify the praise of your Lord when you rise
Also from the night glorify Him, and at the fading of the stars
And as the star fell away
Your friend was not astray, nor was he deceived
Nor does he speak from personal desire
It is a divine inspiration
He has been taught by the One mighty in power
Free from any defect, he became stable
While he was at the highest horizon
Then he drew nearer by moving down
Until he became as near as two bow-lengths or nearer
He then inspired to His servant what He inspired
The heart did not invent what it saw
Do you doubt him in what he saw
And indeed, he saw him in another descent
At the ultimate point
Near it is the eternal Paradise
The whole place was overwhelmed
The eyes did not waver, nor go blind
He has seen from the great signs of his Lord
Have you considered Allaat and Al-`Uzzah
And Manaat, the third one
Do you have the males, while He has the females
What a strange distribution
These are but names that you made up, you and your forefathers. God never authorized such. They only follow conjecture, and personal desire, while the guidance has come to them from their Lord
Or shall man have what he wishes
To God belongs the end, and the beginning
And there are many an angel in the heavens, whose intercession does not benefit in the least, unless God gives permission for whom He wishes and is pleased with him
Those who disbelieve in the Hereafter name the angels with feminine names
While they had no knowledge about this; they only followed conjecture. And conjecture is no substitute for the truth
So disregard he who turns away from Our reminder, and only desires this worldly life
This is the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord is fully aware of those who strayed away from His path, and He is fully aware of those who are guided
And to God belongs everything in the heavens and everything on the earth. He will requite those who commit evil for their works, and will reward the righteous for their righteousness
They avoid major sins and immorality, except for minor offences. Your Lord is with vast forgiveness. He has been fully aware of you since He initiated you from the earth, and while you were embryos in the wombs of your mothers. Therefore, do not ascribe purity to yourselves; He is fully aware of the righteous
Have you noted the one who turned away
And he gave very little, then he stopped
Did he possess knowledge of the future? Could he see it
Or was he not informed of the teachings in the scripts of Moses
And of Abraham who fulfilled
None can carry the burdens of another
And man will have what he sought
And his works will be shown
Then he will be paid fully for such works
And to your Lord is the final destiny
And He is the One who makes laughter and tears
And He is the One who takes life and gives it
And He is the One who has created the pair, the male and the female
From a seed that is put forth
And He will effect the recreation
And He is the One who makes you rich or poor
And He is the Lord of Sirius
And He is the One who destroyed `Aad the first
And from Thamud He left none
And the people of Noah before that; they were evil transgressors
And the overthrown city was made to fall
So it was covered by that which covers
So which powers of your Lord do you doubt
This is a warning like the old warnings
That which is inevitable draws near
None besides God can unveil it
Are you surprised by this narrative
And you are laughing, while you should be crying
And you are indulging yourselves
So, prostrate yourselves to God, and serve
The Hour draws near, and the moon is breached
And if they see a sign, they turn away and say: "Ongoing magic
And they disbelieved, and followed their desires, and every old tradition
While the news had come to them in which there was sufficient warning
A perfect wisdom; but the warnings are of no benefit
So turn away from them; the Day will come when the caller will announce a terrible disaster
With their eyes humiliated, they come out of the graves like scattered locusts
Hastening towards the caller, the rejecters will say: "This is a difficult Day
The people of Noah disbelieved before them. They disbelieved Our servant and said: "He is crazy!" And he was oppressed
So he called on his Lord: "I am beaten, so grant me victory
So We opened the gates of the sky with pouring water
And We caused springs to gush out of the earth. Thus the waters met to a command which had been measured
We carried him on a craft made of slabs and mortar
It ran under Our watchful eyes; a reward for one who was rejected
And We have left it as a sign. Are there any who want to learn
So how was My retribution after the warnings
And We made the Qur'an easy to remember. Are there any who want to learn
Aad disbelieved. So how was My retribution after the warnings
We sent upon them a violent wind, on a day of continuous misery
It uprooted the people as if they were decayed palm tree trunks
So how was My retribution after the warnings
And We made the Qur'an easy to remember. Are there any who will learn
Thamud rejected the warnings
They said: "Shall we follow one of us; a human being? We will then go astray, and be in Hell
Has the Reminder come down to him, of all people amongst us? He is an evil liar
They will find out tomorrow who the evil liar is
We are sending the camel as a test for them. So watch them and be patient
And inform them that the water shall be divided between them; each shall be allowed to drink in turn
But they called on their friend, and he was paid to slaughter
So how was My retribution after the warnings
We sent upon them one scream, whereupon they became like harvested hay
And We made the Qur'an easy to remember. Are there any who will learn
The people of Lot rejected the warners
We sent upon them projectiles. Except for the family of Lot, We saved them at dawn
A blessing from Us; it is thus that We reward the thankful
And he warned them about Our punishment, but they ridiculed the warnings
And they sought to remove him from his guests; so We diverted their eyes. "Taste My retribution; you have been warned
And in the early morning, a devastating retribution struck them
Taste My retribution; you have been warned
And We made the Qur'an easy to remember. Are there any who will learn
And the warnings had come to the people of Pharaoh
They rejected all Our signs. So We took them, the taking of the Noble, the Able
Are your rejecters better than those? Or have you been absolved by the scriptures
Or do they say: "We are a large group and we will win
The large group will be defeated; they will turn around and flee
The Hour is their appointed time, and the Hour is far worse and more painful
The criminals are in error and will burn
The Day when they will be dragged upon their faces into the Fire: "Taste the agony of the scorching heat
Everything We have created in measure
And Our commands are done at once with the blink of an eye
And We have destroyed your counterparts. Do any of you wish to learn
And everything they had done, is in the scriptures
And everything, small or large, is written down
The righteous will be in gardens and rivers
In a position of honor, at an Omnipotent King
The Almighty
He has taught the Qur'an
He has created man
He taught him how to distinguish
The sun and the moon are perfectly calculated
And the stars and the trees are yielding
And He raised the heaven and He established the balance
Do not transgress in the balance
And observe the weight with equity, and do not fall short in the balance
And the earth He has made for all creatures
In it are fruits, and date palms with their hanging fruit
And the grain covered with husk and the spices
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
He created man from a sludge, like pottery
And the Jinn He created from a smokeless fire
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
The Lord of the two easts and the two wests
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
He merges the two seas where they meet
A barrier is placed between them, which they do not cross
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Out of both of them comes pearls and coral
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
And to Him are the ships that roam the sea like flags
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Everyone upon it will fade away
And the face of your Lord will remain; One with Majesty and Honor
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Those in the heavens and the earth ask Him, everyday He is in some matter
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
We will call you to account, both of you beings
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
O assembly of Jinn and mankind, if you can penetrate the boundaries of the heavens and the earth, then go ahead and penetrate. You will not penetrate without might
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
He sends against both of you projectiles of fire, and of copper; so you will not succeed
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
When the heaven is torn, and turns like a rose colored paint
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
On that Day, no man or Jinn will be asked of his sins
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
The guilty will be recognized by their features; they will be taken by the forelocks and the feet
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
This is Hell that the criminals used to deny
They will move between it and a boiling liquid
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
And for he who feared the station of his Lord, there will be two gardens
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Full of provisions
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
In them are two springs, flowing
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
In them will be of every fruit, in pairs
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
While reclining upon furnishings lined with satin, the fruits of the two gardens are within reach
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
In them are those with a modest gaze, untouched before by any man or Jinn
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
They look like rubies and coral
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Is there any reward for goodness except goodness
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
And besides these will be two other gardens
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Dark green in color
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
In them, two springs which gush forth
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
In them are fruits, date palms, and pomegranate
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
In them is what is good and beautiful
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Companions, inside grand pavilions
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
No man has ever touched them, nor Jinn
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Reclining on green carpets, in beautiful surroundings
So which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
Glorified be the name of your Lord, possessor of Majesty and Honor
When the inevitable comes to pass
Nothing can stop it from happening
It will bring low, and raise up
When the earth will be shaken a terrible shake
And the mountains will be wiped out
So that they become only scattered dust
And you will be in three groupings
So those on the right, who will be from those on the right
And those on the left, who will be from those on the left
And those foremost, who will be from those foremost
They will be the ones who are brought near
In gardens of bliss
Many from the first generations
And a few from the later generations
Upon luxurious beds
Reclining in them, facing each other
Moving among them will be immortal children
With cups, pitchers, and a cup of pure drink
They do not get a headache from it, nor do they get exhausted
And fruits of their choice
And meat of birds that they desire
And wonderful companions
Like pearls which are sheltered
A reward for their works
They will not hear in it any nonsense, nor blame
Only the utterances of: "Peace. Peace
And those on the right, who will be with those on the right
In lush orchards
And fruit-trees which are ripe
And extended shade
And flowing water
And many fruits
Neither ending; nor disallowed
And raised furnishings
We have developed them completely
And made them never previously touched
Perfect, mature in age
For those on the right side
Many from the early generations
And many from the later generations
And those on the left, who will be from those on the left
In fierce hot winds and boiling water
And a shade that is unpleasant
Neither cool, nor helpful
They used to be indulged in luxury before this
And they persisted in the great oathbreaking
And they used to say: "After we die and turn to dust and bones, we will get resurrected
And also our fathers of old
Say: "The people of old and the later generations
Will be summoned to a meeting on a predetermined Day
Then you, O rejecting strayers
Will eat from the tree of Bitterness
Filling your bellies therefrom
Then drinking on top of it boiling water
So you will drink like diseased camels
Such is their share on the Day of Recompense
We have created you, if you could only believe
Have you noted the semen that you produce
Did you create it, or were We the Ones who have created it
We have predetermined death for you. Nothing can stop Us
From transforming your forms, and establishing you in what you do not know
You have come to know about the first creation. If only you would remember
Have you noted the crops you reap
Did you grow them, or were We the Ones who grew them
If We wished, We can turn them into hay. Then you will be left in wonderment
We are lost
No, we are deprived
Have you noted the water you drink
Did you send it down from the clouds, or is it We who sent it down
If We wished, We can make it salty. If only you would give thanks
Have you noted the fire you kindle
Did you establish its tree, or was it We who established it
We rendered it a reminder, and a useful tool for the users
You shall glorify the name of your Lord, the Great
I do swear by the positions of the stars
This is an oath, if only you knew, that is great
It is an honorable Qur'an
In a protected Book
None can grasp it except those purified
A revelation from the Lord of the worlds
Are you disregarding this narrative
And you have your provisions, yet you are denying
So when the time comes and it reaches your throat
And at that moment you look around
We are closer to it than you are, but you do not see
So if you do not owe any account
Then return it, if you are truthful
So, if he is one of those who are made near
Then joy, and rose buds, and gardens of bliss
And if he is one of the people of the right
Then: "Peace" from the people of the right
But if he is one of the deniers, the strayers
Then an abode of boiling water
And a burning in Hell
This is the absolute truth
You shall glorify the name of your Lord, the Great
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise
To Him is the kingship of the heavens and the earth. He brings life and death. And He is capable of all things
He is the First and the Last, the Evident and the Innermost. And He is fully aware of all things
He is the One who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He settled upon the Throne. He knows everything that enters within the earth, and everything that comes out of it, and everything that comes down from the heaven, and everything that ascends into it. And He is with you wherever you may be. God is Seer of what you do
To Him is the kingship of the heavens and the earth, and to God all matters are returned
He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. He is fully aware of what is in the chests
Believe in God and His messenger, and spend from what He has made you successors to. Those among you who believe and spend have deserved a great recompense
Why should you not believe in God when the messenger is inviting you to believe in your Lord? And He has already taken a covenant from you, if you are believers
He is the One who sends down to His servant clear revelations, to bring you out of the darkness and into the light. God is Compassionate towards you, Merciful
And why do you not spend in the cause of God, when God possesses all wealth in the heavens and the earth? Not equal among you are those who spent before the victory and fought. They attained a greater rank than those who spent after the victory and fought. And for each, God promises goodness. And God is Expert in everything you do
Who will lend God a loan of righteousness that He may multiply it for him, and he will have a generous recompense
The Day will come when you see the believing males and the believing females with their light radiating around them and to their right. "Good news is yours today, you will have estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein. This is the great triumph
On that Day, the hypocrite males and the hypocrite females will say to those who believed: "Wait for us! Let us absorb some of your light." It will be said: "Go back behind you, and seek light." So a barrier will be put forth between them, whose gate separates mercy on the inner side, from retribution on the outer side
They will call upon them: "Were we not with you?" They will reply: "Yes, but you led yourselves into temptation, and you hesitated, and doubted, and became misled by wishful thinking, until the judgment of God came. You were diverted from God by arrogance
This Day, no ransom can be taken from you, nor from those who disbelieved. Your abode is the Fire, it is your patron; what a miserable abode
Has not the time come for those who believed to open up their hearts for the remembrance of God, and the truth that is revealed herein? And they should not be like those who were given the Book before, and the waiting became long for them, so their hearts became hardened, and many of them were wicked
Know that God revives the land after it had died. We have made clear to you the signs, perhaps you may comprehend
Surely, the charitable males and charitable females, who lend God a loan of righteousness, He will multiply their reward, and they will have a generous recompense
And those who believed in God and His messengers are the truthful ones. And the martyrs at their Lord will have their reward and their light. As for those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, they are the dwellers of Hell
Know that the worldly life is no more than play and distraction and adornments, and boasting among you, and to increase in wealth and children. It is like plants that are supplied by an abundant rain, which appear pleasing to the rejecters. But then they dry-up and turn yellow, and become useless hay. And in the Hereafter there is severe retribution, and forgiveness from God and acceptance. This worldly life is no more than a deceiving enjoyment
You shall race towards forgiveness from your Lord, and a Paradise whose width is as the width of the heaven and the earth, prepared for those who believed in God and His messengers. Such is the grace of God that He bestows upon whoever He wills. God is the Possessor of Infinite Grace
No misfortune can happen on the earth, or in yourselves, except it is decreed in a record, before We bring it about. This is easy for God to do
In order that you do not despair over anything that has passed you by, nor be happy of anything He has bestowed upon you. God does not love those who are boastful, proud
They are stingy, and order the people to be stingy. And for anyone who turns away, then know that God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy
We have sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and We sent down with them the Book and the balance, so that the people may uphold justice. And We sent down the iron, wherein there is great strength, and many benefits for the people. So that God would distinguish those who would support Him and His messengers in the unseen. God is Powerful, Noble
And We had sent Noah and Abraham, and We placed in their progeny the prophethood and the Book. Some of them were guided, while many were wicked
Then We sent in their tracks Our messengers. And We sent Jesus, son of Mary, and We gave him the Gospel, and We ordained in the hearts of his followers kindness and mercy. But they invented Monasticism which We never decreed for them. They wanted to please God, but they did not observe it the way it should have been observed. Consequently, We gave those who believed among them their recompense, while many of them were wicked
O you who believe, you shall reverence God and believe in His messenger. He will then grant you double the reward from His mercy, and He will make for you a light by which you shall walk, and He will forgive you. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
So that the followers of the Book should know that they have no power over the grace of God, and that all grace is in the hand of God. He bestows it upon whoever He wills. God is Possessor of Infinite Grace
God has heard the woman who has argued with you regarding her husband, and she complained to God. And God hears the argument between you. God is Hearer, Seer
Those among you who have estranged their women; they can never be made as their mothers, for their mothers are those who gave birth to them. Indeed, they are uttering what is strange and a falsehood. And God is Pardoner, Forgiver
Those who had estranged their women, then they retracted what they had said, they shall free a slave before they have sexual contact between them. This is to enlighten you. God is well aware of everything you do
If he cannot find any, then he shall fast two consecutive months before any sexual contact between them. If he cannot, then he shall feed sixty poor people. That is so you would believe in God and His messenger. And these are the boundaries set by God. The disbelievers have incurred a painful retribution
Those who oppose God and His messenger will be disgraced, like their previous counterparts were disgraced. We have sent down clear proofs, and the rejecters have incurred a shameful retribution
The Day when God resurrects them all, then He informs them of what they had done. God has recorded it, while they have forgotten it. God witnesses all things
Do you not realize that God knows everything in the heavens and everything on the earth? No three people can meet secretly without Him being their fourth, nor five without Him being the sixth, nor less than that, nor more, without Him being there with them wherever they may be. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of everything they had done. God is fully aware of all things
Have you noted those who were prohibited from holding meetings in secret, but then they go back to what they have been prohibited from? They meet secretly to commit sin, transgression, and disobedience of the messenger. When they come to you, they greet you with a greeting other than that which God greets you with. They say inside themselves: "Why does God not punish us for our utterances?" Hell will be sufficient for them, wherein they burn; what a miserable destiny
O you who believe, if you must meet secretly, then you shall not meet to commit sin, transgression, and to disobey the messenger. You shall meet to work righteousness and piety. And be aware of God, before whom you will be summoned
Secret meetings are from the devil, to cause grief to those who believed. However, he cannot harm them except if God wills. In God the believers shall put their trust
O you who believe, if you are told to make room in the assemblies, then you shall make room. God will then make room for you. And if you are told to leave, then leave. God will raise those among you who believe, and those who acquire knowledge to higher ranks. God is fully aware of everything you do
O you who believe, if you wish to hold a private meeting with the messenger, you shall offer a charity before you do so. This is better for you, and purer. If you cannot do so, then God is Forgiver, Merciful
Are you reluctant to offer a charity before such meeting? If you cannot do such, and God has forgiven you; then you shall hold the contact prayer, and contribute towards purification, and obey God and His messenger. God is fully Aware of everything you do
Have you noted those who befriended people with whom God is angry? They are now neither from you nor from them. And they deliberately swear to lies while they know
God has prepared for them a severe retribution. Miserable indeed is what they used to do
They used their oaths as a means of repelling from the path of God. Consequently, they have incurred a shameful retribution
Neither their money nor their children will avail them anything from God. These are the dwellers of the Fire, in it they will abide
The Day will come when God resurrects them all. Then they will swear to Him, just as they swear to you, thinking that they are actually right! Indeed, they are the liars
The devil has overtaken them, and has caused them to forget the remembrance of God. These are the party of the devil. Absolutely, the party of the devil are the losers
Surely, those who oppose God and His messenger, they will be with the lowliest
God has decreed: "I and My messengers will be the victors." God is Powerful, Noble
You will not find any people who believe in God and the Last Day leaning towards those who oppose God and His messenger, even if they were their parents, or their children, or their siblings, or their kin. For these, He decrees faith into their hearts, and supports them with a Spirit from Him, and He admits them into estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein. God is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. These are the party of God. Most assuredly, the party of God are the winners
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and the earth; and He is the Noble, the Wise
He is the One who drove out those who disbelieved among the people of the Book from their homes at the very first mobilization. You never thought that they would leave, and they thought that their fortresses would protect them from God. But then God came to them from where they did not expect, and He cast terror into their hearts. They destroyed their homes with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So learn from this, O you who possess vision
And had God not decreed to banish them He would have punished them in this world; and in the Hereafter they will face the retribution of the Fire
This is because they challenged God and His messenger. And whoever challenges God, then God is severe in punishment
Whether you cut down a tree or left it standing on its root, it was with the permission of God. He will surely humiliate the wicked
And what God provided to His messenger, without you having to battle for it on horses or on foot, was because God sends His emissaries against whoever He wills. And God is capable of all things
Whatever God bestowed upon His messenger from the people of the towns, then it shall be to God and His messenger, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the poor, and the wayfarer. Thus, it will not remain monopolized by the rich among you. And you may take what the messenger gives you, but do not take what he prohibits you from taking. And be aware of God, for God is mighty in retribution
For the immigrants who are poor and were driven out of their homes and deprived of their properties; they were seeking a grace from God and acceptance, and they supported God and His messenger; these are the truthful ones
And those who provided them with shelter, and were believers before them; they love those who immigrated to them, and they find no hesitation in their hearts in helping them, and they readily give them priority over themselves, even when they themselves need what they give away. Indeed, those who overcome their desires are the successful ones
And those who came after them saying: "Our Lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us to the faith, and do not place in our hearts any animosity towards those who believed. Our Lord, You are Compassionate, Merciful
Have you noted those who are hypocrites, they say to their brothers who have rejected among the people of the Book: "If you are driven out we will go out with you, and we will never obey anyone who opposes you. And if anyone fights you, we will support you." God bears witness that they are liars
If they were driven out, they would not have gone out with them, and if anyone fought them, they would not have supported them. And even if they supported them, they would have turned around and fled. They could never win
Indeed, you strike more terror in their hearts than their fear of God. This is because they are people who do not understand
They will not fight you all together unless they are in fortified towns, or from behind walls. Their might appears formidable among themselves. You would think that they are united, but their hearts are divided. This is because they are people who do not comprehend
Like the example of those who preceded them. They suffered the consequences of their decisions. They have incurred a painful retribution
Like the example of the devil, when he says to man: "Reject," then as soon as he rejects, he says: "I am innocent of you. I fear God, Lord of the worlds
So the destiny for both of them is the Fire, abiding therein. And such is the recompense for the wicked
O you who believe, be aware of God, and let every soul examine what it has put forth for tomorrow. And be aware of God; for God is fully aware of everything you do
And do not be like those who forgot God, so He made them forget themselves. These are the wicked
Not equal are the dwellers of the Fire and the dwellers of the Paradise; the dwellers of the Paradise are the winners
Had We sent down this Qur'an to a mountain, you would have seen it trembling, crumbling, out of concern from God. And such are the examples We put forth for the people, that they may reflect
He is God; there is no other god besides Him. Knower of all secrets and declarations. He is the Almighty, the Merciful
He is God; there is no other god besides Him. The King, the Holy, the Peace, the Faithful, the Supreme, the Noble, the Powerful, the Dignified. God be glorified; far above what they set up
He is God; the Creator, the Initiator, the Designer. To Him belong the most beautiful names. Glorifying Him is everything in the heavens and the earth. He is the Noble, the Wise
O you who believe, do not take My enemy and your enemy as allies. You extend love to them, even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you. They drive you and the messenger out, simply because you believe in God, your Lord. If you are mobilizing to strive in My cause, seeking My blessings, then how can you secretly love them? I am fully aware of everything you conceal and what you declare. And whoever of you does this, then he has gone astray from the right path
If they encounter you, they treat you as enemies, and they extend their hands and tongues against you to hurt you. They desire that you reject
Neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you; on the Day of Resurrection He will separate between you. And God is Seer of what you do
There has been a good example set for you by Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people: "We are innocent from you and what you serve besides God. We have rejected you, and it appears that there shall be animosity and hatred between us and you until you believe in God alone." Except for the saying of Abraham to his father: "I will ask forgiveness for you, but I do not possess any power to protect you from God." "Our Lord, we have put our trust in You, and we turn to You, and to You is the final destiny
Our Lord, do not let us become a test for those who rejected, and forgive us. Our Lord, You are the Noble, the Wise
Certainly, a good example has been set by them for those who seek God and the Last Day. And whoever turns away, then God is the Rich, the Praiseworthy
Perhaps God will grant compassion between you and those you consider enemies; and God is Capable. And God is Forgiving, Merciful
God does not prohibit you from those who have not fought you because of your system, nor drove you out of your homes, that you deal kindly and equitably with them. For God loves the equitable
But God does prohibit you regarding those who fought you because of your system, and drove you out of your homes, and helped to drive you out. You shall not ally with them. Those who ally with them, then such are the transgressors
O you who believe, if the believing females come emigrating to you, then you shall test them. God is fully aware of their belief. Thus, if you establish that they are believers, then you shall not return them to the rejecters. They are no longer lawful for one another. And return the dowries that were paid. And there is no sin upon you to marry them, if you have paid their dowries to them. And do not keep disbelieving wives, and ask back what dowries you paid. And let them ask back what dowries they had paid. Such is the judgment of God; He judges between you. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
And if any of your wives have gone-over to the camp of the rejecters, and you are granted victory over them, then you shall compensate those whose wives have gone-over, to the equivalent of what dowry they spent. And be aware of God, in whom you believe
O prophet, if the believing females come to make allegiance to you that they will not set up anything besides God, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor kill their children, nor fabricate any falsehood, nor disobey you in any matter which is righteous, then you shall accept their allegiance, and ask God to forgive them. God is Forgiver, Merciful
O you who believe, do not ally a people with whom God is angry; for they have given-up regarding the Hereafter, just like the rejecters have given-up on the people who are already in the graves
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and everything on the earth. And He is the Noble, the Wise
O you who believe, why do you say what you do not do
It is most despicable with God that you would say what you do not do
God loves those who fight in His cause as one column; they are like bricks in a wall
And when Moses said to his people: "O my people, why do you harm me, while you know that I am a messenger of God to you?" But when they deviated, God diverted their hearts. And God does not guide the wicked people
And when Jesus, son of Mary, said: "O children of Israel, I am a messenger of God to you, authenticating what is between my hands of the Torah and bringing good news of a messenger to come after me whose name will be 'most acclaimed.'" But when he showed them the clear proofs, they said: "This is clearly magic
And who is more evil than he who invents lies about God, while he is being invited to submission? And God does not guide the wicked people
They want to extinguish the light of God with their mouths. But God will continue with His light, even if the rejecters hate it
He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the system of truth, so that it will expose all other systems, even if the polytheists hate it
O you who believe, shall I lead you to a trade that will save you from a painful retribution
That you believe in God and His messenger and strive in the cause of God with your money and your lives. This is best for you, if only you knew
He will then forgive your sins, and admit you into estates with rivers flowing beneath them, and beautiful mansions in gardens of delight. This is the great triumph
And also you will receive what you love: a triumph from God and a victory that is close at hand. And give good news to the believers
O you who believe, be supporters of God, as Jesus, son of Mary, said to his disciples: "Who are my supporters towards God?" The disciples said: "We are supporters of God." Thus, a group from the Children of Israel believed, and another group rejected. So We supported those who believed against their enemy, and they were successful
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and everything on the earth; the King, the Holy, the Noble, the Wise
He is the One who sent to the Gentiles a messenger from among themselves, to recite to them His revelations, and to purify them, and teach them the Book and the wisdom. And before this, they were clearly astray
And to other generations subsequent to them. He is the Noble, the Wise
Such is the grace of God, which He bestows upon whoever He wills. God is Possessor of Infinite Grace
The example of those who were given the Torah, but then failed to uphold it, is like the donkey that is carrying a cargo of books. Miserable indeed is the example of the people who denied the revelations of God. And God does not guide the wicked people
Say: "O you who are Jewish, if you claim that you are the chosen of God, to the exclusion of all other people, then you should long for death if you are truthful
But they will never long for it, because of what their hands have delivered. God is fully aware of the wicked
Say: "The death that you are fleeing from, it will come to find you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of all secrets and declarations, then He will inform you of everything you had done
O you who believe, if the contact prayer is called to at the gathering day, then you shall hasten towards the remembrance of God, and cease all selling. This is better for you, if only you knew
Then, once the contact prayer is complete, you shall disperse through the land and seek the provisions of God, and remember God frequently that you may succeed
And if they come across any trade, or some entertainment, they rush to it and leave you standing! Say: "What God possesses is far better than entertainment or trade. And God is the best Provider
When the hypocrites come to you they say: "We bear witness that you are the messenger of God." And God knows that you are His messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are liars
They have chosen their oath as a deceit, thus they repel from the path of God. Miserable indeed is what they do
That is because they believed, then disbelieved. Hence, their hearts are sealed; they do not understand
And when you see them, you are impressed by their physical stature; and when they speak, you listen to their eloquence. They are like blocks of wood propped-up. They think that every call is intended for them. These are the enemies, so beware of them. May God condemn them; they have deviated
And if they are told: "Come and let the messenger of God ask for your forgiveness," they turn aside their heads, and you see them walking away in pride
It is the same for them,whether you ask for their forgiveness, or do not ask for their forgiveness; God will not forgive them. For God does not guide the wicked people
They are the ones who say: "Do not spend on those who are with the messenger of God, unless they abandon him!" And to God belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites do not understand
They say: "When we go back to the city, the noble therein will evict the lowly." But all nobility belongs to God and His messenger, and the believers. However, the hypocrites do not know
O you who believe, do not be distracted by your money and your children from the remembrance of God. And those who do this, then they are the losers
And give from that which We have provided to you, before death comes to one of you, then he says: "My Lord, if only You could delay this for a short while, I would then be charitable and join the righteous
And God will not delay any soul if its time has come. And God is Expert in all that you do
Glorifying God is everything in the heavens and everything on the earth. To Him is all kingship, and to Him is all praise, and He is capable of all things
He is the One who has created you, then among you there is the rejecter, and among you there is the believer. And God is Seer of what you do
He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and He designed you and perfected your design, and to Him is the final destiny
He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you declare. And God is aware of what is in the chests
Did the news not come to you of those who had rejected before? They had tasted the consequences of their decision and they incurred a painful retribution
That was because their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they said: "Shall mere human beings guide us?" So they rejected and turned away. And God had no need. And God is Rich, Praiseworthy
Those who rejected claim that they will not be resurrected. Say: "Yes, by my Lord, you will be resurrected, then you will be informed of everything you have done, and this is easy for God to do
Therefore, you shall believe in God and His messenger, and the light that We have sent down. And God is Expert over all that you do
The Day when He will gather you; the Day of Gathering; that is the Day of mutual blaming. And whoever believes in God and does good works, He will forgive his sins, and will admit him into estates with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein eternally. Such is the great triumph
As for those who reject and deny Our revelations, they are the dwellers of the Fire; they will abide therein. What a miserable destiny
No misfortune strikes except with the permission of God. And whoever believes in God, He will guide his heart. And God is fully aware of all things
Obey God and obey the messenger. And if you turn away, then it is only required of Our messenger to deliver clearly
God, there is no god besides Him. In God the believers shall put their trust
O you who believe, from among your spouses and your children are enemies to you; so beware of them. And if you pardon, and overlook, and forgive, then God is Forgiver, Merciful
Your money and children are a test, and with God is a great recompense
Therefore, be aware of God as much as you can, and listen, and obey, and give for your own good. And whoever is protected from his own stinginess, then these are the successful ones
If you lend God a loan of righteousness He will multiply it for you, and forgive you. God is Thankful, Compassionate
The Knower of all secrets and declarations; the Noble, the Wise
O prophet, if any of you have divorced the women, then they should be divorced while ensuring that their required interim is fulfilled, and keep count of the interim. You shall reverence God your Lord, and do not evict them from their homes, nor should they leave, unless they commit an evident immorality. And these are the boundaries of God. And anyone who transgresses the boundaries of God has wronged his soul. You never know; perhaps God will make something come out of this
Then, once the interim is fulfilled, either you remain together equitably, or part ways equitably and have it witnessed by two just people from among you; and give the testimony for God. This is to enlighten those who believe in God and the Last Day. And whoever reverences God, He will create a solution for him
And He will provide for him whence he never expected. Anyone who puts his trust in God, then He suffices him. The commands of God will be done. God has decreed for everything its fate
As for those who have reached menopause from your women, if you have any doubts, their interim shall be three months - as well as for those who did not menstruate. And those who are already pregnant, their interim is until they give birth. And anyone who reverences God, He makes his matters easy for him
This is the command of God that He sends down to you. And anyone who is aware of God, He will forgive his sins, and will improve his reward
You shall let them reside in the dwelling you were in when you were together, and do not coerce them to make them leave. And if they are pregnant, you shall spend on them until they give birth. Then, if they nurse the infant, you shall give them their due payment. And you shall maintain the amicable relations between you. If you disagree, then another woman may nurse the child
The rich shall provide support in accordance with his means, and the poor shall provide according to the means that God bestowed upon him. God does not burden any soul more than He has given it. God will provide ease after difficulty
Many a town rebelled against the command of its Lord and His messengers. Thus, We called them to account severely, and We punished them a terrible punishment
They tasted the result of their actions, and the consequence of their actions was a total loss
God has prepared for them a severe retribution. Therefore, you shall be aware of God, O you who possess intelligence and believed. God has sent down to you a remembrance
A messenger who recites to you the revelations of God, which are clear, to lead those who believe and work righteousness out of the darkness into the light. Anyone who believes in God and does good works, He will admit him into estates with rivers flowing beneath them; abiding therein eternally. God has granted for him an excellent reward
God who has created seven heavens and the same number of earths; the command is sent down between them; that you may know that God is capable of all things, and that God has encompassed all things with His knowledge
O prophet, why do you make unlawful what God has made lawful for you, seeking to please your wives? God is Forgiver, Merciful
God has already given the law, regarding the cancellation of oaths. And God is your Lord, and He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise
And when the prophet confided a narrative to some of his wives, then one of them spread it, and God revealed it to him, he recognized part of it and denied part. So when he informed her, she said: "Who informed you of this?" He said: "I was informed by the Knowledgeable, the Expert
If the two of you repent to God, then your hearts have listened. But if you band together against him, then God is his ally, and so are Gabriel and the righteous believers. Also, the angels are his helpers
It may be that he would divorce you, then his Lord will substitute other wives in your place who are better than you; submitting, believing, dutiful, repentant, worshipping, devout, mature and youthful
O you who believe, protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is people and stones. Guarding it are stern and powerful angels who do not disobey God in what He commanded them; and they carry out what they are commanded to
O you who have rejected, do not apologize today. You are being requited only for what you did
O you who believe, you shall repent to God a sincere repentance. It may be that your Lord will forgive your sins and admit you into estates with rivers flowing beneath them. On that Day, God will not disappoint the prophet and those who believed with him. Their light will radiate around them and to their right. They will say: "Our Lord, keep perfect our light for us, and forgive us; You are able to do all things
O prophet, strive against the rejecters and the hypocrites and be stern with them. Their abode is Hell, and a miserable destiny
God puts forth as examples of those who have rejected, the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were married to two of Our righteous servants, but they betrayed them and, consequently, they could not help them at all against God. And it was said: "Enter the Fire, both of you, with those who will enter it
And God puts forth as an example of those who believed the wife of Pharaoh. She said: "My Lord, build a home for me near You in the Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his works; and save me from the transgressing people
And Mary, daughter of Imran, who maintained the chastity of her private part, so We blew into it from Our Spirit, and she believed in the words of her Lord and His Books; and she was of those who were dutiful
Most exalted is the One in whose hands is all sovereignty, and He is capable of all things
The One who has created death and life, that He may test you, which of you will do better works? He is the Noble, the Forgiving
He created seven heavens in layers. You do not see any imperfection in the creation by the Almighty. Keep looking; do you see any flaw
Then look again twice; your eyes will come back humiliated and tired
And We have adorned the lower heaven with lamps, and We made it with projectiles against the devils; and We prepared for them the retribution of the blazing Fire
And for those who rejected their Lord will be the retribution of Hell. What a miserable destiny
When they are cast therein, they hear its furor as it boils
It almost explodes from rage. Whenever a group is thrown therein, its keepers would ask them: "Did you not receive a warner
They said: "Yes indeed; a warner did come to us, but we disbelieved and said: God did not reveal anything, you are being led astray
And they said: "If we had listened or understood, we would not be among the dwellers of the blazing Fire
Thus, they confessed their sins. So away with the dwellers of the blazing Fire
As for those who are concerned towards their Lord while unseen, they have attained forgiveness and a great reward
And whether you keep your utterances secret, or declare them, He is fully aware of what is in the chests
Should He not know what He created? And He is the Sublime, the Expert
He is the One who made the earth subservient for you. So roam its paths, and eat from His provisions; and to Him is the final summoning
Are you secure that the One in the heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you when it shakes
Or are you secure that the One in the heaven will not send upon you a violent storm? Then you will know the value of the warning
And those before them have disbelieved; so how terrible was My requital
Have they not looked to the birds lined-up together above them, and they contract? It is the Almighty who holds them. He is Seer of all things
Where is this army of yours to grant you victory without the Almighty? Indeed, the disbelievers are deceived
Where is this who can give you provisions if He holds back His provisions? Indeed, they have plunged deep into transgression and aversion
Is one who walks while his face is slumped better guided, or one who walks straight on the right path
Say: "He is the One who initiated you, and made for you the hearing, the eyes, and the hearts. Little do you give thanks
Say: "He is the One who placed you on the earth, and to Him you will be gathered
And they say: "When will this promise come to pass, if you are being truthful
Say: "The knowledge is with God, and I am but a clear warner
So when they see it near, the faces of those who rejected will turn miserable, and it will be proclaimed: "This is what you had called for
Say: "Do you see? If God annihilates me and those with me, or He bestows mercy upon us, who is there to protect the rejecters from a painful retribution
Say: "He is the Almighty; we believe in Him, and we put our trust in Him. You will come to find out who is clearly astray
Say: "What if your water becomes deep underground, who then can provide you with pure water
N, the pen, and what they write
You are not, by the blessing of your Lord, crazy
And you will have a reward that will not end
And you are of a high moral character
So you will see, and they will see
Which of you are condemned
Your Lord is fully aware of those who strayed off His path, and He is fully aware of those who are guided
So do not obey those who deny
They wish that you compromise, so they too can compromise
And do not obey every lowly swearer
A slanderer, a backbiter
Forbidder of charity, a transgressor, a sinner
Unappreciative, and greedy
Because he possessed money and sons
When Our revelations are recited to him, he says: "Fictional tales of old
We will mark him on the path
We have tested them like We tested those who owned the farm, when they swore that they will harvest it in the morning
They were without doubt
So a passing sent from your Lord came to it while they all were asleep
Thus, it became barren
They called on one another when they awoke
Let us go this morning to harvest the crop
So they went, while conversing
That from today, none of them would ever be poor
And they went, ready to harvest
But when they saw it, they said: "We have gone astray
Now, we have nothing
The best among them said: "If only you had glorified
They said: "Glory be to our Lord. We have transgressed
Then they started to blame each other
They said: "Woe to us. We sinned
Perhaps our Lord will grant us better than it. We repent to our Lord
Such was the punishment. But the retribution of the Hereafter is far worse, if only they knew
The righteous have deserved, at their Lord, gardens of bliss
Should We treat those who submitted the same as those who are criminals
What is wrong with you, how do you judge
Or do you have a book which you study
In it, you can find what you wish
Or do you have an oath from Us, extending until the Day of Resurrection, that you can judge as you please
Ask them: "Who of them will make such a claim
Or do they have partners? Then let them bring their partners, if they are truthful
The Day will come when they will be exposed, and they will be required to prostrate, but they will be unable to
With their eyes subdued, humiliation will cover them. They were invited to prostrate when they were whole and able
Therefore, let Me deal with those who reject this narrative; We will entice them from where they do not perceive
And I will lead them on; for My planning is formidable
Or do you ask them for a wage, so they are burdened by the fine
Or do they know the future? So they have it recorded
You shall be patient for the judgment of your Lord. And do not be like the companion of the whale who called out while he was in sorrow
Had it not been for the grace of his Lord, he would have remained trapped, while he was to be blamed
But his Lord blessed him, and made him righteous
And those who have rejected almost attack you with their eyes when they hear the Reminder, and they say: "He is crazy
And it is but a reminder for the worlds
The reality
What is the reality
Absolutely, do you know what is the reality
Thamud and 'Aad disbelieved in the Shocker
As for Thamud, they were annihilated by the devastation
And as for 'Aad, they were annihilated by a furious violent wind
He unleashed it upon them for seven nights and eight days, in succession. You could see the people destroyed in it, as if they are decayed palm trunks
Do you see any legacy for them
And Pharaoh, and those before him, and the sinners, came with wrongdoing
They disobeyed the messenger of their Lord. So He took them with a devastating requital
And when the water flooded, We carried you on the vessel
That We would make it as a reminder for you, and so that any listening ear may understand
And when the horn is blown once
And the earth and the mountains will be removed from their place and crushed with a single crush
On that Day the unavoidable event will come to pass
And the sky will be torn, and on that Day it will be flimsy
And the angels will be on its borders; and the Throne of your Lord will be carried, above them on that Day, by eight
On that Day, you will be exposed, nothing from you can be hidden
As for the one who is given his record in his right, he will say: "Here, come and read my record
I knew that I was going to be held accountable
So he shall be in a life, well-pleasing
In a lofty Paradise
Its fruits are within reach
Eat and drink merrily in return for your works in days past
As for him who is given his record in his left, he will say: "Oh, I wish I never received my record
And that I never knew my account
I wish the end had been final
My money cannot help me
All my power is gone
Take him and shackle him
Then to Hell cast him
Then, in a chain that is the length of seventy arms, tie him up
For he did not believe in God, the Great
Nor did he advocate the feeding of the poor
Consequently, he has no friend here today
Nor any food, except from pollutants
Food for the wrongdoers
So I do swear by what you see
And what you do not see
This is the utterance of an honorable messenger
It is not the utterance of a poet; rarely do you believe
Nor the utterance of a soothsayer; rarely do you take heed
A revelation from the Lord of the worlds
And had he attributed anything falsely to Us
We would have seized him by the right
Then, We would have severed his life-line
None of you would be able to prevent it
And this is a reminder for the righteous
And We know that some of you are deniers
And that it is a distress for the rejecters
And it is the absolute truth
Therefore, you shall glorify the name of your Lord, the Great
Someone asked about the inevitable retribution
For the rejecters, there is nothing that will stop it
From God, Possessor of the ascending portals
The angels and the Spirit ascend to Him in a day which is equivalent to fifty thousand years
So be patient with a good patience
They see it as far away
And We see it as near
On the Day the heaven is like molten copper
And the mountains are like wool
And no friend will ask about his friend
When they see it, the criminal will wish he can ransom his children against the retribution
And his mate and his brother
And his relatives who sheltered him
And all who are on the earth, so that he can be saved
No, it is a torching flame
Eager to roast
It calls on those who turned away
And who hoarded and counted
Indeed, man was created anxious
When adversity touches him he is miserable
And when good touches him he is stingy
Except for those who make the contact prayer
Who always observe their contact prayer
And those who set aside part of their wealth
For the seeker and the denied
And those who believe in the Day of Recompense
And those who are fearful of the retribution of their Lord
The retribution of their Lord is not to be taken for granted
And those who keep covered their private parts
Except around their spouses or those maintained by their oaths, there is no blame
Whoever seeks anything beyond this, they are the transgressors
And those who look after what they have been entrusted to and to their pledges
And those who uphold their testimonies
And those who maintain their contact prayer
They will be honored in gardens
So what is wrong with the rejecters staring at you
From the right and the left, in crowds
Does every one of them hope to enter a garden of bliss
No, We have created them from what they know
So I do swear by the Lord of the east and the west, that We are able
To replace them with better people, We can never be defeated
So let them talk in vain and play, until they meet their Day which they are promised
When they will come out of the graves in a rush, as if they are racing towards a goal
Their eyes are cast down, with shame covering them. This is the Day which they were promised
We have sent Noah to his people: "Warn your people before a painful retribution comes to them
He said: "My people, I am to you a clear warner
That you shall serve God and be aware of Him and obey me
He shall forgive your sins and delay you to a predetermined time. When the time of God comes, then it cannot be delayed, if you know
He said: "My Lord, I have called on my people night and day
But my calling only drove them away
And every time I called on them so that You may forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears and they covered their heads with their outer garments and they insisted, and they became greatly arrogant
Then I called to them openly
Then I announced to them, and I spoke to them in secret
And I said: Seek forgiveness from your Lord, for He was forgiving
He sends the sky to you abundantly
And He provides you with wealth and sons, and He makes for you gardens, and He makes for you rivers
Why do you not seek God humbly
While He created you in stages
Did you not see how God created seven heavens in layers
And He made the moon to illuminate in them, and He made the sun to be a lamp
And God made you grow from the earth as plants
Then He returns you to it, and He brings you out totally
And God made the land for you as a plain
So that you may seek in it ways and paths
Noah said: "My Lord, they have disobeyed me and have followed he whose money and children only increased him in loss
And they plotted a great plotting
And they said: "Do not abandon your gods. Do not abandon Destroyer, nor Fertility, nor Lion, Stallion and Eagle
And they have misguided many, but We only increase the wicked in misguidance
Because of their wrongdoing they were drowned, then they were admitted to the Fire, and they could not find besides God any victor
And Noah said: "My Lord, do not leave on the earth any of the rejecters at all
If you are to leave them, then they will misguide Your servants and they will only give birth to a wicked rejecter
My Lord, forgive me, and my parents, and whoever enters my home as a believer, and the believing males, and the believing females; and do not increase the wicked except in destruction
Say: "It has been inspired to me that a group of Jinn were listening." They said: "We have heard a magnificent revelation
It guides to what is correct, so we believed in it, and we will not set up anyone with our Lord
And Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord, He has not taken a wife nor a son
And the foolish one among us used to say lies about God
And we had thought that neither mankind nor the Jinn would ever utter a lie against God
And there were men from among mankind who used to seek help from the men among the Jinn, but they only helped increase them in sin
And they thought as you thought, that God would not send anyone
And we touched the heavens, but found it full of powerful guards and projectiles
And we used to sit in it in places of listening, but anyone who sits now finds a projectile seeking him
And we do not know, is it evil that is intended for those on the earth, or does their Lord want them to be guided
And among us are those who are good doers, and some of us are opposite to that, we are in many paths
And we acknowledge that we cannot escape God on the earth, nor can we escape Him if we run
And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. So whoever believes in his Lord, then he will not fear a decrease in reward, nor a burdensome punishment
And among us are those who submitted, and among us are the compromisers. As for those who have submitted, they have sought what is correct
And as for the compromisers, they are firewood for Hell
And had they walked on a straight path, We would have provided them with abundant water
To test them with it. And whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will enter him a severe retribution
And the temples are for God, so do not call on anyone alongside God
And when the servant of God stood up to call on Him, they nearly banded to oppose him
Say: "I only call on my Lord, and I do not set up anyone with Him
Say: "I have no power to harm you nor to show you what is right
Say: "No one can protect me from God, and I will not find any refuge except with Him
It is but an announcement from God, and His messages. And whoever disobeys God and His messenger, then he will have the fire of Hell to dwell eternally therein
Until they see what they are promised, then they will know who has the weakest ally and is least in number
Say: "I do not know if what you are promised is near, or if my Lord will make it distant
Knower of the unseen, He does not reveal His unseen to anyone
Except to whom He has accepted as a messenger, then He reveals from the past and the future
So that He knows that they have delivered the messages of their Lord, and He surrounds all that is with them, and He has counted the number of all things
O you who are covered with your garments
Stand the night except for a little
Half of it, or a little less than that
Or a little more, and arrange the Qur'an in its arrangement
We will place upon you a saying which is heavy
The time of the night is more effective and better for study
For you have many duties during the day
And remember the name of your Lord, and devote to Him completely
The Lord of the east and the west, there is no god except He, so take Him as a protector
And be patient over what they say, and depart from them in a good manner
And leave Me to deal with the deniers who have been given the good things, and give them time for a while
We have with Us chains and a raging fire
And food that chokes, and a painful retribution
The Day the earth and the mountains shake, and the mountains become a crumbling pile
We have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you, as We have sent to Pharaoh a messenger
But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We took him in a severe manner
So how can you be righteous when you have rejected? A Day which will turn the children white haired
The heavens will crack with it. His promise is always delivered
This is a reminder, so let he who wishes take a path to his Lord
Your Lord knows that you rise a little less than two thirds of the night, and half of it, and one third of it; and a group of those who are with you. And God measures the night and the day. He knows that you will not be able to keep-up, so He pardons you. So read what is made easy of the Qur'an. He knows that there will be sick among you, and others that go forth in the land seeking from the bounty of God, and others who are fighting in the cause of God, so read what you can of it. And hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification and lend God a loan of righteousness. And whatever you put forth yourselves, you will find it with God, for it is better and a greater reward. And seek the forgiveness of God, for God is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who are cloaked
Stand and warn
And your Lord magnify
And purify your garments
And abandon that which afflicts
And do not give for a return
And to your Lord be patient
So when the horn is sounded
That will be a very difficult Day
Upon the rejecters it will not be easy
So leave Me alone with he whom I have created
And I gave him abundant wealth
And sons to bear witness
And I made everything comfortable for him
Then he is greedy, wanting that I give more
No. He was stubborn to Our revelations
I will exhaust him in ascending
He thought and he analyzed
So woe to him for how he thought
Then woe to him for how he thought
Then he looked
Then he frowned and became bad tempered
Then he turned away and was arrogant
So he said: "This is nothing except the magic of old
This is nothing except the saying of a human being
I will cast him in the scorching heat
And do you know what is the scorching heat
It does not spare nor leave anything
A signal to human beings
Upon it is nineteen
And We have made the guardians of the Fire to be angels; and We did not make their number except as a test for those who have rejected, so that those who were given the Book would understand, and those who have faith would be increased in faith, and so that those who have been given the Book and the believers do not have doubt, and so that those who have a sickness in their hearts and the rejecters would say: "What did God mean with an example such as this?" It is such that God misguides whom He wishes, and He guides whom He wishes. And none know the soldiers of your Lord except He; and it is but a reminder for human beings
No, by the moon
And by the night when it withdraws
And by the morning when it brightens
It is one of the great ones
A warning to human beings
For any among you who wishes to advance or regress
Every soul is held by what it earned
Except for the people of the right
In gardens, they will inquire
About the criminals
What has caused you to be in the scorching heat
They said: "We were not as those who made the contact prayer
And we did not feed the poor person
And we used to participate with those who spoke falsehood
And we used to deny the Day of Recompense
Until the certainty came to us
So no intercession of intercessors could help them
Why did they turn away from being reminded
They are like fleeing zebras
Running from the lion
Alas, every one of them wants to be given separate scripts
No, they do not fear the Hereafter
No, it is a reminder
So whoever wishes will remember it
And none will remember except if God wills. He is the source of righteousness and the source of forgiveness
I do swear by the Day of Resurrection
And I do swear by the soul which is self blaming
Does man think that We will not gather his bones
Indeed, We were able to make his fingertips
No, man desires that he continues committing sins
He asks: "When is the Day of Resurrection
So, when the sight is dazzled
And the moon is eclipsed
And the sun and the moon are joined together
Man will say on that Day: "Where can I escape
No. There is no refuge
To your Lord on that Day is the abode
Man will be told on that Day what he has put forward, and what he has done
Indeed, man will testify against himself
Even though he puts forth his excuses
Do not move your tongue with it to make haste
It is for Us to gather and relate it
So when We relate it, you shall follow its revelation
Then it is for Us to explain it
Alas, you all like this world
And neglect the Hereafter
Faces on that Day will be shining
Looking at their Lord
And faces on that Day will be gloomy
Thinking that a punishment is coming to them
Alas, when it reaches the throat
And it will be said: "Who can save him
And he assumes it is the time of passing
And the leg is buckled around the other leg
To your Lord on that Day he will be driven
For he did not believe nor make the contact
But he denied and turned away
Then he went to his family admiring himself
Woe to you and woe to you
Then woe to you and woe to you
Did man think that he will be left neglected
Was he not a seed from sperm put forth
Then he was an embryo, so he was created and developed
Then He made from it the pair, the male and the female
Is One as such then not able to resurrect the dead
Was there not a time in the past when man was nothing to even be mentioned
We have created man from a mixed seed; We test him, so We made him hear and see
We have guided him to the path, either to be thankful or to reject
We have prepared for the rejecters chains and shackles and a blazing Fire
As for the pious, they will drink from a cup with the scent of musk
A spring from which the servants of God drink, it gushes forth abundantly
They fulfill their vows, and they fear a Day whose consequences are wide-spread
And they give food out of love to the poor and the orphan and the captive
We only feed you seeking the face of God; we do not desire from you any reward or thanks
We fear from our Lord a Day, which will be horrible and difficult
So God shielded them from the evil of that Day, and He cast towards them a look and a smile
And He rewarded them for their patience with a paradise and silk
They are reclining in it on raised couches, they do not have in it excessive sun nor bitter cold
And the shade is close upon them, and the fruit is hanging low within reach
And they are served upon with bowls of silver and glasses of crystal
Crystal laced with silver, measured accordingly
And they are given to drink in it from a cup which has the scent of ginger
A spring therein which is called 'Salsabeel
And they are encircled with eternal children. If you see them you will think they are pearls which have been scattered about
And if you look, then you will see a blessing and a great dominion
They will have garments of fine green silk, and necklaces and bracelets from silver, and their Lord will give them a cleansing drink
This is the reward for you, and your struggle is appreciated
We have sent down to you the Qur'an in stages
So be patient to the judgment of your Lord, and do not obey from them any sinner or rejecter
And remember the name of your Lord morning and evening
And from the night you shall prostrate to Him and praise Him throughout
These people like the current life, and they put behind them a heavy Day
We have created them, and established them, and if We wished, We could replace their kind completely
This is a reminder, so let whoever wills take a path to his Lord
And you cannot will unless God wills. God is Knowledgeable, Wise
He admits whom He wills to His mercy. And as for the wicked, He has prepared for them a painful retribution
By the winds which are sent
So the gusts then blow
And all that is scattered about
So the separators which divide
Then the remembrance that is found
An excuse or a warning
What you are being promised will come to pass
So when the stars are plunged
And when the heaven is opened
And when the mountains are destroyed
And when the messengers are gathered
For what day has it been delayed
For the Day of Separation
And do you know what is the Day of Separation
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Did We not destroy the ancient people
Then We made others to succeed them
It is such that We do to the criminals
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Did We not create you from a fragile water
Then We made it in a place of protection
Until a time that is predetermined
So We measured, and We are the best to measure
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Did We not make the earth an abode
Living and dead
And We made massive stabilizers in it, and We gave you to drink fresh water
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Away with you towards what you have disbelieved
Away with you to a shadow with three columns
Neither does it shade, nor does it avail from the flames
It throws sparks as huge as logs
As if they were yellow camels
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
This is a Day when they shall not speak
Nor will it be permitted for them so they can make excuses
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
This is the Day of Separation where We have gathered you with the ancient people
So if you have a plan, then make use of it
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
The righteous are among shades and springs
And fruit from what they desire
Eat and drink comfortably for what you used to do
It is such that We reward the good doers
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Eat and enjoy for a little while, for you are criminals
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
And when they are told to kneel, they do not kneel
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
So in what narrative, after it, will they believe
What are they inquiring about
About the significant news
The one which they are in disagreement about
No, they will come to know
No, then again, they will come to know
Did We not make the earth a resting ground
And the mountains as pegs
And We created you in pairs
And We made your sleep for resting
And We made the night as a covering
And We made the day to work in
And We constructed above you seven mighty ones
And We made a blazing lamp
And We sent down from the clouds abundant water
To bring out with it seeds and plants
And gardens of thick growth
The Day of Separation is an appointed time
The Day when the horn is blown and you come in crowds
And the heaven is opened, so it becomes gates
And the mountains will be moved as if they were a mirage
For Hell is in wait
For the transgressors it is a dwelling
They will be in it for eons
They will not taste any coolness in it nor drink
Except that which is boiling and dark
An exact recompense
They did not expect the reckoning
And they denied Our revelations greatly
And everything We have counted in a record
So taste it, for no increase will come to you from Us except in retribution
As for the righteous, they will have triumph
Gardens and vineyards
And bunches that are ripe
And a cup that is full
They do not hear in it any vain talk or lies
A reward from your Lord, in recognition for what is done
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, the Almighty. They do not possess any authority besides Him
The Day when the Spirit and the angels stand in line, none will speak unless the Almighty permits him and he speaks what is true
That is the Day of truth, so let whoever wills seek refuge to his Lord
I have warned you of a retribution which is close, the Day when man will look at what he has brought forth and the rejecter will say: "I wish I were dust
By those that take the person forcibly
And those that take the person gently
And those that swim along
And those that press forward in a race
So as to carry out a command
On the Day the ground shakes
It will be followed by the second blow
Hearts on that Day will be terrified
Their eyes cast down
They say: "Shall we be returned to live our lives
Even after we were crumbled bones
They said: "This is an impossible recurrence
But all it takes is one blow
Whereupon they will rise-up
Did the narrative of Moses come to you
His Lord called him at the holy valley of Tuwa
Go to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed
Tell him: "Would you not be purified
And I will guide you to your Lord, that you may be concerned
He then showed him the great sign
But he disbelieved and rebelled
Then he turned away in a hurry
So he gathered and proclaimed
He said: "I am your lord, the most high
So God seized him for punishment in the Hereafter, and for the first life
In that is a lesson for those who are concerned
Are you a more powerful creation than the heaven which He built
He raised its height, and perfected it
And He covered its night and brought out its morning
And the land after that He spread out
He brought forth from it its water and pasture
And the mountains He fixed firmly
All this to be a provision for you and your livestock
Then, when the great blow comes
The Day when man remembers all that he strove for
And Hell will be made apparent for all who can see
As for he who transgressed
And was preoccupied with the worldly life
Then Hell will be the abode
And as for he who feared the station of his Lord, and prohibited the self from desire
The Paradise will be the abode
They ask you about the Hour: "When is its appointed time
You have no knowledge of it
To your Lord is its term
You are simply to warn those who are concerned by it
For the Day they see it, it will be as if they had remained an evening or half a day
He frowned and turned away
When the blind one came to him
And what makes you know, perhaps he is seeking to purify
Or to remember, so the remembrance will benefit him
As for the one who was rich
You were addressing yourself to him
And why does it concern you that he does not want to purify
And as for the one who came to you seeking
While he was concerned
You were too occupied for him
No, this is but a reminder
For whoever wills to remember
In scripts which are honorable
Raised and pure
By the hands of scribes
Honorable and righteous
Man is killed for his rejection
From what did He create him
From a seed He created him and molded him
Then the path He made easy for him
Then He made him die and buried him
Then if He wishes He resurrects him
Alas, when what has been ordained is complete
Let man look to his provisions
We have poured the water abundantly
Then We breached the land with cracks
And We made grow in it seeds
And grapes and pasture
And olives and palm trees
And gardens in variety
And fruits and vegetables
An enjoyment for you and your livestock
So when the screaming shout comes
The Day when a person will run from his brother
And his mother and his father
And his mate and his children
For every person on that Day is a matter that concerns him
Faces on that Day which are openly displayed
Laughing and seeking good news
And faces on that Day with dust on them
Being burdened by remorse
Those are the rejecters, the wicked
When the sun extends
And when the stars cannot be seen
And when the mountains are made to move
And when the reproduction is ended
And when the beasts are herded
And when the seas are made to boil
And when the souls are paired
And when the girl killed in infancy is asked
For what crime was she killed
And when the scripts are displayed
And when the sky is removed
And when Hell is ignited
And when the Paradise is made near
Every soul will know what it had done
So I do swear by the planets that move away
Running in their orbits
And the night when it passes
And the morning when it breathes
It is the saying of an honorable messenger
With power and influence from the One upon the Throne
Obeyed, and trustworthy
And your friend is not crazy
And he saw him by the clear horizon
And he has no knowledge of the future
And it is not the saying of an outcast devil
So where will you go
It is but a reminder for the worlds
For whoever of you wishes to be straight
And you cannot will anything except if it is also willed by God, Lord of the worlds
When the heaven is cracked
And when the planets are scattered
And when the seas burst
And when the graves are laid open
Then the soul will know what it has brought forth and what it has left behind
O man, what made you arrogant against your Lord, the Generous
The One who has created you, then evolved you, then made you upright
Inany which picture He chooses, He places you
No, you are but deniers of the system
Andover you are those who watch
Honorable scribes
They know what you do
Thepious are in the Paradise
Andthe wicked are in Hell
They will enter it on the Day of Recompense
Andthey will not be absent from it
Anddo you know what is the Day of Recompense
Then again, do you know what is the Day of Recompense
TheDay when no soul possesses anything for any other soul, and the decision on that Day is to God
Woe to those who cheat
Those who when they are receiving any measure from the people, they take it in full
And when they are the ones giving measure or weight, they give less than due
Dothese not assume that they will be resurrected
Toa great Day
The Day the people will stand before the Lord of the worlds
No, the record of the wicked is in 'Sijjeen
And do you know what is 'Sijjeen
A numbered record
Woeon that Day to the deniers
Those who denied the Day of Recompense
Andnone will deny it, except every transgressor, sinner
When Our revelations are recited to him, he says: "Fictional tales of old
No,a covering has been placed on their hearts for what they have earned
No,they will be blocked from their Lord on that Day
Then they will be entered into Hell
Then it will be said: "This is what you used to deny
No,the record of the pious is in 'Elliyeen
Anddo you know what is 'Elliyeen
A numbered record
To be witnessed by those brought near
Thepious are in the Paradise
Upon raised couches, they are looking
Youwill recognize in their faces the look of bliss
They are given to drink from a pure sealed vial
Itsseal will be of musk, so in that let those who are in competition compete
Andits taste will be special
A spring from which those who are brought near will drink
Those who were criminals used to laugh at those who had believed
Andwhen they passed by them they used to wink to each other
Andwhen they returned to their people, they would return jesting
Andif they see them they say: "These are indeed misguided
Butthey were not sent over them as caretakers
Andtoday, those who had believed are laughing at the rejecters
Upon raised couches, they are looking
Have the rejecters been rewarded for what they used to do
When the heaven is torn
And it admits its Lord, and is ready
And when the land is stretched
And it spits out what is in it and becomes empty
And it permits its Lord, and is ready
O man, you will be moving towards your Lord and meeting Him
Sowhoever is given his record in his right
Hewill then receive an easy reckoning
And he will return to his family in joy
Andas for he who is given his record behind his back
He will invoke his destruction
Andhe will enter a blazing Fire
He used to be joyful among his people
He thought he would not be returned
No,He is ever seeing of him
SoI do swear by the redness of dusk
Andthe night and what it is driven on
Andthe moon when it is full
Youwill ride a platform upon a platform
So what is the matter with them that they do not believe
Andwhen the Qur'an is read over them, they do not prostrate
No,those who have rejected are in denial
AndGod is more aware of what they gather
So inform them of a painful retribution
Except for those who believe and do good works, they will have a reward that will not end
By the heaven laden with towers
And the appointed Day
And a witness and a witnessed
Destroyed will be the people of the ditch
The fire they supplied with fuel
Which they then sat around
And they were witness to what they did to the believers
And they hated them simply because they had asked them to believe in God, the Noble, the Praiseworthy
The One to whom belongs the kingship of the heavens and the earth, and God is witness over everything
Those who have persecuted the believing males and the believing females, and then did not repent, they will have the retribution of Hell, and they will have the retribution of the burning
Those who believe and do good works, they will have estates with rivers flowing beneath them. Such is the great reward
Thepunishment of your Lord is severe
It is He who initiates and then returns
AndHe is the Forgiver, the Most Kind
Possessor of the Throne, the Glorious
Doer of what He wills
Hasnarrative of the soldiers come to you
Pharaoh and Thamud
No,those who rejected are in denial
AndGod after them is encompassing
No,it is a glorious Qur'an
In a tablet, preserved
By the heaven and the herald
And do you know what the herald is
The piercing star
Every soul has a recorder over it
Solet man see from what he was created
Hewas created from a water that spurts forth
Itcomes out from between the spine and the testicles
For He is able to bring him back
The Day when all is revealed
Then he will not have any power or victor
Andthe sky which gives rain
Andthe land with cracks
This is the word that separates matters
Andit is not a thing for amusement
They are planning a plan
AndI am planning a plan
So respite the rejecters, respite them for a while
Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High
The One who has created and developed
And the One who measured and then guided
And the One who brought out the pasture
SoHe made it dry-up into hay
We will let you read, so do not forget
Except for what God wills, He knows what is declared and what is hidden
And We will make easy for you the way
Soremind, perhaps the reminder will help
He who is concerned will remember
Andhe who is wicked will avoid it
He will enter the great Fire
Then he will neither die in it nor live
Whoever purifies will succeed
Andremembers the name of his Lord, so he makes the contact
No,you desire the worldly life
Butthe Hereafter is better and more lasting
This has been revealed in the previous scripts
Thescripts of Abraham and Moses
Has the narrative of that which will overwhelm come to you
Faces on that Day which will be shamed
Laboring and weary
They will enter a blazing Fire
And be given to drink from a boiling spring
They will have no food except from a thorny plant
Itdoes not nourish nor avail against hunger
And faces on that Day which are soft
For their pursuit they are content
In a high paradise
Youwill not hear in it any nonsense
In it is a running spring
In it are raised beds
Andcups that are set
Andcushions arranged in rows
Andrich carpets spread out
Will they not look at the camels, how were they created
Andto the sky, how was it raised
Andto the mountains, how were they set
And to the land, how was it flattened
So remind, for you are but a reminder
You have no power over them
Except for he who turns away and rejects
Then God will punish him with the great retribution
Indeed, to Us is their return
Then to Us is their judgment
By the dawn
And ten nights
And the even and the odd
And the night when it passes
Is there in that an oath for he who is confined
Did you not see what your Lord did to 'Aad
Irum, with the great columns
The one which was like no other in the land
And Thamud who carved the rocks in the valley
And Pharaoh with the planks
They all transgressed in the land
And made much corruption therein
So your Lord poured upon them a measure of retribution
Your Lord is ever watchful
As for man, if his Lord tests him and grants him much, then he says: "My Lord has blessed me
And if his Lord tests him and gives him little wealth, then he says: "My Lord has humiliated me
No, you are not generous to the orphan
And you do not look to feeding the poor
And you consume others inheritance, all with greed
And you love money, a love that is excessive
Alas, when the earth is pounded into rubble
And your Lord comes with the angels row after row
And Hell on that Day is brought. On that Day man will remember, but how will the remembrance now help him
He says: "I wish I had worked towards my life
On that Day, no other will bear his punishment
And none can bind as He will bind
O you soul which is peaceful
Return to your Lord happy and content
And enter in among My servants
And enter My Paradise
I do swear by this land
And you are a dweller in this land
And a father and what he begets
We have created man in struggle
Does he think that no one is able to best him
He says: "I spent so much money
Does he think that no one saw him
Did We not make for him two eyes
And a tongue and two lips
And We guided him to both paths
He should choose the better path
Do you know which is the better path
The freeing of slaves
Or the feeding on a day of great hardship
An orphan of relation
Or a poor person in need
Then he has become one of those who have believed, and exhort one another to patience, and exhort one another to kindness
Those are the people of the right
As for those who rejected Our revelations, they are the people of misery
Upon them is a Fire closed over
By the Sun and its brightness
And the Moon that comes after it
And the day when it reveals
And the night when it covers
And the heaven and what He built
And the earth and what He sustains
And a soul and what He made
So He gave it its evil and good
Successful is the one who betters it
And failing is the one who hides it
Thamud denied their transgression
They followed the worst among them
So the messenger of God said to them: "This is the camel of God and her place of drinking
But they disbelieved him, and they killed her. So their Lord repaid them for their sin and leveled it
Yet, those who came after remain heedless
By the night when it covers
And by the day when it appears
And by what He has created, the male and female
Your works are various
As for he who gives and is righteous
And trusts in goodness
We will make for him the easy path
And as for he who is stingy and holds back
And denies goodness
We will make for him the difficult path
And his wealth will not avail him when he demises
It is upon Us to guide
And to Us is the end and the beginning
I have warned you of a Fire that blazes
None shall have it except the wicked
The one who denies and turns away
As for the righteous, he will be spared it
The one who gives his money to purify
Seeking nothing in return
Except the face of His Lord, the Most High
And he will be pleased
By the late morning
And the night when it falls
Your Lord has not left you, nor did He forget you
And the Hereafter is better for you than the first
And your Lord will give you and you will be pleased
Did he not find you an orphan and He sheltered you
And He found you lost, and He guided you
And He found you in need, so He gave you riches
As for the orphan, you shall not make him sad
And as for the beggar, you shall not reprimand
And you shall proclaim the blessings from your Lord
Did We not comfort your chest
And take from you your load
Which had put strain on your back
And We have raised your remembrance
So with hardship comes ease
With hardship comes ease
So when you are done, then stand
And to your Lord you shall seek
By the fig and the olive
And the mount of ages
And this land of peace
We have created man in the best form
Then We returned him to the lowest of the low ones
Except those who have believed and done good works, they will have a reward that will not end
So what would make you deny the system after that
Is God not the Wisest of the wise ones
Read in the name of your Lord who has created
He created man from an embryo
Read, and your Lord is the Generous One
The One who taught by the pen
He taught man what he did not know
Alas, man is bound to transgress
When he achieves, he no longer has need
To your Lord is the return
Have you seen the one who prohibits
A servant from making the contact
Have you seen if he was being guided
Or he ordered righteousness
Have you seen if he lied and turned away
Did he not know that God can see
Alas, if he does not cease, We will strike the forelock
A forelock which lies and errs
So let him call on his supporter
We will call on the guardians
So do not obey him, prostrate and come near
We have sent it down in the Night of Decree
And do you know what is the Night of Decree
The Night of Decree is better than one thousand months
The angels and the Spirit come down in it with the permission of their Lord to carry out every matter
It is peaceful until the coming of dawn
Those who rejected among the people of the Book and the polytheists would not leave until a proof came to them
A messenger from God reciting purified scripts
In them are valuable books
And those who had previously received the Book did not divide except after the proof came to them
And they were not commanded except to serve God and be loyal to His system, monotheists, and hold the contact prayer and contribute towards purification. Such is the valuable system
Those who rejected from the people of the Book and the polytheists are in the fires of Hell abiding therein, those are the worst of creation
As for those who believe and do good works, they are the best of creation
Their reward with their Lord are gardens of delight with rivers flowing beneath them, abiding therein eternally. God is satisfied with them, and they are satisfied with Him. That is for whoever is concerned towards His Lord
When the earth rumbles and shakes
And the earth brings out its mass
And man will say: "What is wrong with her
On that Day it will inform its news
That your Lord had inspired her to do so
On that Day, the people will be brought out in throngs to be shown their works
So whoever does the weight of an atom of good will see it
And whoever does the weight of an atom of evil will see it
By the fast gallopers
Striking sparks
Charging in the morning
Forming clouds of dust
Penetrating to the midst together
Surely, man is unappreciative to his Lord
He will indeed bear witness to this
He loves wealth tenaciously
Does he not realize that when what are in the graves are scattered
And what is in the chests is gathered
That their Lord has been fully aware of them
The Shocker
What is the Shocker
And how would you know what the Shocker is
The Day when people come out like swarms of butterflies
And the mountains will be like fluffed up wool
As for him whose weights are heavy
He will be in a happy life
As for him whose weights are light
His destiny is the lowest
And how would you know what it is
A blazing Fire
Hoarding has distracted you
Until you visit the graves
No, you will find out
Then again, you will find out
No, if only you had the knowledge of certainty
You would then see Hell
Then you would see it with the eye of certainty
Then you would be questioned, on that Day, about the blessings
By time
Man is indeed in loss
Except those who believe, and do good works, and support one another with the truth, and support one another with perseverance
Woe to every backbiter, slanderer
Who gathered his wealth and counted it
He thinks that his wealth will make him immortal
Never! He will be thrown into the Destroyer
And do you know what is the Destroyer
The kindled Fire of God
Which reaches the inside of the hearts
It will confine them therein
In extended columns
Have you not seen what your Lord did to the people of the elephant
Did He not cause their plans to go astray
And He sent upon them mighty flying creatures
Striking them with fiery projectiles
Until He made them like chewed up hay
This should be cherished by Quraysh
The way they cherish the journey of the winter and summer
So let them serve the Lord of this Sanctuary
The One who fed them from hunger, and protected them from fear
Have you seen he who is denying in the system
It is the one who mistreats the orphan
And the one who does not encourage the feeding of the poor
So woe to those who make the contact prayer
Who are towards their contact prayer absent minded
They only want to be seen
And they withhold from any assistance
We have given you plenty
Therefore, you shall make contact to your Lord and sacrifice
Indeed your rival will be the loser
Say: "O rejecters
I do not serve what you serve
Nor do you serve what I serve
Nor will I serve what you serve
Nor will you serve what I serve
To you is your system, and to me is mine
When the victory of God and conquest comes
And you see the people entering into the system of God in flocks
You shall glorify the grace of your Lord, and seek His forgiveness; for He is the Redeemer
Condemned are the hands of the fire maker; condemned
His money will not avail him, nor what he has earned
He will be sent to a flaming fire
And his wife who carries the logs
On her neck will be a rope of thorns
Say: "He is God, the One
God, the Indivisible
He does not beget, nor was He begotten
And there is none who is His equal
Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of the rising dawn
From the evil among His creation
And from the evil of murkiness as it falls
And from the evil of those who blow on knots
And from the evil of an envier when he envies
Say: "I seek refuge with the Lord of the people
The King of the people
The god of the people
From the evil of the sneaking whisperer
Who whispers into the chests of the people
From the Jinn and the people
{
    "name": "eng-themonotheistgr1",
    "author": "The Monotheist Group Edition",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-themonotheistgr1.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-themonotheistgr1.min.json"
}