In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
Praise belongs to God, Lord of the Worlds
the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
Master of the Day of Judgement
It is You we worship; it is You we ask for help
Guide us to the straight path
the path of those You have blessed, those who incur no anger and who have not gone astray
Alif Lam Mim
This is the Scripture in which there is no doubt, containing guidance for those who are mindful of God
who believe in the unseen, keep up the prayer, and give out of what We have provided for them
those who believe in the revelation sent down to you [Muhammad], and in what was sent before you, those who have firm faith in the Hereafter
Such people are following their Lord’s guidance and it is they who will prosper
As for those who disbelieve, it makes no difference whether you warn them or not: they will not believe
God has sealed their hearts and their ears, and their eyes are covered. They will have great torment
Some people say, ‘We believe in God and the Last Day,’ when really they do not believe
They seek to deceive God and the believers but they only deceive themselves, though they do not realize it
There is a disease in their hearts, to which God has added more: agonizing torment awaits them for their persistent lying
When it is said to them, ‘Do not cause corruption in the land,’ they say, ‘We are only putting things right,’
but really they are causing corruption, though they do not realize it
When it is said to them, ‘Believe, as the others believe,’ they say, ‘Should we believe as the fools do?’ but they are the fools, though they do not know it
When they meet the believers, they say, ‘We believe,’ but when they are alone with their evil ones, they say, ‘We’re really with you; we were only mocking.’
God is mocking them, and allowing them more slack to wander blindly in their insolence
They have bought error in exchange for guidance, so their trade reaps no profit, and they are not rightly guided
They are like people who [labour to] kindle a fire: when it lights up everything around them, God takes away all their light, leaving them in utter darkness, unable to see
deaf, dumb, and blind: they will never return
Or [like people who, under] a cloudburst from the sky, with its darkness, thunder, and lightning, put their fingers into their ears to keep out the thunderclaps for fear of death- God surrounds the disbelievers
The lightning almost snatches away their sight: whenever it crashes on
People, worship your Lord, who created you and those before you, so that you may be mindful [of Him]
who spread out the earth for you and built the sky; who sent water down from it and with that water produced things for your sustenance. Do not, knowing this, set up rivals to God
If you have doubts about the revelation We have sent down to Our servant, then produce a single sura like it- enlist whatever supporters you have other than God- if you truly [think you can]
If you cannot do this- and you never will- then beware of the Fire prepared for the disbelievers, whose fuel is men and stones
[Prophet], give those who believe and do good the news that they will have Gardens graced with flowing streams. Whenever they are given sustenance from the fruits of these Gardens, they will say, ‘We have been given this before,’ because they were provided with something like it. They will have pure spouses and there they will stay
God does not shy from drawing comparisons even with something as small as a gnat, or larger: the believers know it is the truth from their Lord, but the disbelievers say, ‘What does God mean by such a comparison?’ Through it He makes many go astray and leads many to the right path. But it is only the rebels He makes go astray
those who break their covenant with God after it has been confirmed, who sever the bonds that God has commanded to be joined, who spread corruption on the earth- these are the losers
How can you ignore God when you were lifeless and He gave you life, when He will cause you to die, then resurrect you to be returned to Him
It was He who created all that is on the earth for you, then turned to the sky and made the seven heavens; it is He who has knowledge of all things
[Prophet], when your Lord told the angels, ‘I am putting a successor on earth,’ they said, ‘How can You put someone there who will cause damage and bloodshed, when we celebrate Your praise and proclaim Your holiness?’ but He said, ‘I know things you do not.’
He taught Adam all the names [of things], then He showed them to the angels and said, ‘Tell me the names of these if you truly [think you can].’
They said, ‘May You be glorified! We have knowledge only of what You have taught us. You are the All Knowing and All Wise.’
Then He said, ‘Adam, tell them the names of these.’ When he told them their names, God said, ‘Did I not tell you that I know what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you reveal and what you conceal?’
When We told the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they all bowed. But not Iblis, who refused and was arrogant: he was one of the disobedient
We said, ‘Adam, live with your wife in this garden. Both of you eat freely there as you will, but do not go near this tree, or you will both become wrongdoers.’
But Satan made them slip, and removed them from the state they were in. We said, ‘Get out, all of you! You are each other’s enemy. On earth you will have a place to stay and livelihood for a time.’
Then Adam received some words from his Lord and He accepted his repentance: He is the Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful
We said, ‘Get out, all of you! But when guidance comes from Me, as it certainly will, there will be no fear for those who follow My guidance nor will they grieve
those who disbelieve and deny Our messages shall be the inhabitants of the Fire, and there they will remain.’
Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you. Honour your pledge to Me and I will honour My pledge to you: I am the One you should fear
Believe in the message I have sent down confirming what you already possess. Do not be the first to disbelieve in it, and do not sell My messages for a small price: I am the One of whom you should be mindful
Do not mix truth with falsehood, or hide the truth when you know it
Keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and bow your heads [in worship] with those who bow theirs
How can you tell people to do what is right and forget to do it yourselves, even though you recite the Scripture? Have you no sense
Seek help with steadfastness and prayer- though this is hard indeed for anyone but the humble
who know that they will meet their Lord and that it is to Him they will return
Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you and favoured you over other people
Guard yourselves against a Day when no soul will stand in place of another, no intercession will be accepted for it, nor any ransom; nor will they be helped
Remember when We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who subjected you to terrible torment, slaughtering your sons and sparing only your women- this was a great trial from your Lord
and when We parted the sea for you, so saving you and drowning Pharaoh’s people right before your eyes
We appointed forty nights for Moses [on Mount Sinai] and then, while he was away, you took to worshipping the calf- a terrible wrong
Even then We forgave you, so that you might be thankful
Remember when We gave Moses the Scripture, and the means to distinguish [right and wrong], so that you might be guided
Moses said to his people, ‘My people, you have wronged yourselves by worshipping the calf, so repent to your Maker and kill [the guilty among] you. That is the best you can do in the eyes of your Maker.’ He accepted your repentance: He is the Ever Relenting and the Most Merciful
Remember when you said, ‘Moses, we will not believe you until we see God face to face.’ At that, thunderbolts struck you as you looked on
Then We revived you after your death, so that you might be thankful
We made the clouds cover you with shade, and sent manna and quails down to you, saying, ‘Eat the good things We have provided for you.’ It was not Us they wronged; they wronged themselves
Remember when We said, ‘Enter this town and eat freely there as you will, but enter its gate humbly and say, “Relieve us!” Then We shall forgive you your sins and increase the rewards of those who do good.’
But the wrongdoers substituted a different word from the one they had been given. So, because they persistently disobeyed, We sent a plague down from the heavens upon the wrongdoers
Remember when Moses prayed for water for his people and We said to him, ‘Strike the rock with your staff.’ Twelve springs gushed out, and each group knew its drinking place. ‘Eat and drink the sustenance God has provided and do not cause corruption in the land.’
Remember when you said, ‘Moses, we cannot bear to eat only one kind of food, so pray to your Lord to bring out for us some of the earth’s produce, its herbs and cucumbers, its garlic, lentils, and onions.’ He said, ‘Would you exchange better for worse? Go to Egypt and there you will find what you have asked for.’ They were struck with humiliation and wretchedness, and they incurred the wrath of God because they persistently rejected His messages and killed prophets contrary to all that is right. All this was because they disobeyed and were lawbreakers
The [Muslim] believers, the Jews, the Christians, and the Sabians- all those who believe in God and the Last Day and do good- will have their rewards with their Lord. No fear for them, nor will they grieve
Remember when We took your pledge, and made the mountain tower high above you, and said, ‘Hold fast to what We have given you and bear its contents in mind, so that you may be conscious of God.’
Even after that you turned away. Had it not been for God’s favour and mercy on you, you would certainly have been lost
You know about those of you who broke the Sabbath, and so We said to them, ‘Be like apes! Be outcasts!’
We made this an example to those people who were there at the time and to those who came after them, and a lesson to all who are mindful of God
Remember when Moses said to his people, ‘God commands you to sacrifice a cow.’ They said, ‘Are you making fun of us?’ He answered, ‘God forbid that I should be so ignorant.’
They said, ‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us what sort of cow it should be.’ He answered, ‘God says it should be neither too old nor too young, but in between, so do as you are commanded.’
They said, ‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us what colour it should be.’ He answered, ‘God says it should be a bright yellow cow, pleasing to the eye.’
They said, ‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us [exactly] what it is: all cows are more or less alike to us. With God’s will, we shall be guided.’
He replied, ‘It is a perfect and unblemished cow, not trained to till the earth or water the fields.’ They said, ‘Now you have brought the truth,’ and so they slaughtered it, though they almost failed to do so
Then, when you [Israelites] killed someone and started to blame one another- although God was to bring what you had concealed to light
We said, ‘Strike the [body] with a part of [the cow]’: thus God brings the dead to life and shows His signs so that you may understand
Even after that, your hearts became as hard as rocks, or even harder, for there are rocks from which streams spring out, and some from which water comes when they split open, and others which fall down in awe of God: He is not unaware of what you do
So can you [believers] hope that such people will believe you, when some of them used to hear the words of God and then deliberately twist them, even when they understood them
When they meet the believers, they say, ‘We too believe.’ But when they are alone with each other they say, ‘How could you tell them about God’s revelation [to us]? They will be able to use it to argue against you before your Lord! Have you no sense?’
Do they not know that God is well aware of what they conceal and what they reveal
Some of them are uneducated, and know the Scripture only through wish-ful thinking. They rely on guesswork
So woe to those who write something down with their own hands and then claim, ‘This is from God,’ in order to make some small gain. Woe to them for what their hands have written! Woe to them for all that they have earned
They say, ‘The Fire will only touch us for a few days.’ Say to them, ‘Have you received a promise from God- for God never breaks His promise- or are you saying things about Him of which you have no real knowledge?’
Truly those who do evil and are surrounded by their sins will be the inhabitants of the Fire, there to remain
while those who believe and do good deeds will be the inhabitants of the Garden, there to remain
Remember when We took a pledge from the Children of Israel: ‘Worship none but God; be good to your parents and kinsfolk, to orphans and the poor; speak good words to all people; keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms.’ Then all but a few of you turned away and paid no heed
We took a pledge from you, ‘Do not shed one another’s blood or drive one another from your homelands.’ You acknowledged it at the time, and you can testify to this
Yet here you are, killing one another and driving some of your own people from their homes, helping one another in sin and aggression against them. If they come to you as captives, you still pay to set them free, although you had no right to drive them out. So do you believe in some parts of the Scripture and not in others? The punishment for those of you who do this will be nothing but disgrace in this life, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be condemned to the harshest torment: God is not unaware of what you do
These are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the Hereafter: their torment will not be lightened, nor will they be helped
We gave Moses the Scripture and We sent messengers after him in succession. We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. So how is it that, whenever a messenger brings you something you do not like, you become arrogant, calling some impostors and killing others
They say, ‘Our hearts are impenetrably wrapped [against whatever you say],’ but God has rejected them for their disbelief: they have little faith
When a Scripture came to them from God confirming what they already had, and when they had been praying for victory against the disbelievers, even when there came to them something they knew [to be true], they disbelieved in it: God rejects those who disbelieve
Low indeed is the price for which they have sold their souls by denying the God-sent truth, out of envy that God should send His bounty to any of His servants He pleases. The disbelievers have ended up with wrath upon wrath, and a humiliating torment awaits them
When it is said to them, ‘Believe in God’s revelations,’ they reply, ‘We believe in what was revealed to us,’ but they do not believe in what came afterwards, though it is the truth confirming what they already have. Say [Muhammad], ‘Why did you kill God’s prophets in the past if you were true believers
Moses brought you clear signs, but then, while he was away, you chose to worship the calf- you did wrong.’
Remember when We took your pledge, making the mountain tower above you, and said, ‘Hold on firmly to what We have given you, and listen to [what We say].’ They said, ‘We hear and we disobey,’ and through their disbelief they were made to drink [the love of] the calf deep into their hearts
Say, ‘How evil are the things your belief commands you to do, if you really are believers!’ Say, ‘If the last home with God is to be for you alone and no one else, then you should long for death, if your claim is true.’
But they will never long for death, because of what they have stored up with their own hands: God is fully aware of the evildoers
[Prophet], you are sure to find them clinging to life more eagerly than any other people, even the polytheists. Any of them would wish to be given a life of a thousand years, though even such a long life would not save them from the torment: God sees everything they do
Say [Prophet], ‘If anyone is an enemy of Gabriel- who by God’s leave brought down the Quran to your heart confirming previous scriptures as a guide and good news for the faithful
if anyone is an enemy of God, His angels and His messengers, of Gabriel and Michael, then God is certainly the enemy of such disbelievers.’
For We have sent down clear messages to you and only those who defy [God] would refuse to believe them
How is it that whenever they make a covenant or a pledge, some of them throw it away? In fact, most of them do not believe
When God sent them a messenger confirming the Scriptures they already had, some of those who had received the Scripture before threw the Book of God over their shoulders as if they had no knowledge
and followed what the evil ones had fabricated about the Kingdom of Solomon instead. Not that Solomon himself was a disbeliever; it was the evil ones who were disbelievers. They taught people witchcraft and what was revealed in Babylon to the two angels Harut and Marut. Yet these two never taught anyone without first warning him, ‘We are sent only to tempt- do not disbelieve.’ From these two, they learned what can cause discord between man and wife, although they harm no one with it except by God’s leave. They learned what harmed them, not what benefited them, knowing full well that whoever gained [this knowledge] would lose any share in the Hereafter. Evil indeed is the [price] for which they sold their souls, if only they knew
If they had believed and been mindful of God, their reward from Him would have been far better, if only they knew
Believers, do not say [to the Prophet], ‘Raina,’ but say, ‘Unzurna,’ and listen [to him]: an agonizing torment awaits those who ignore [God’s words]
Neither those People of the Book who disbelieve nor the idolaters would like anything good to be sent down to you from your Lord, but God chooses for His grace whoever He will: His bounty has no limits
Any revelation We cause to be superseded or forgotten, We replace with something better or similar. Do you [Prophet] not know that God has power over everything
Do you not know that control of the heavens and the earth belongs to Him? You [believers] have no protector or helper but God
Do you wish to demand of your messenger something similar to what was demanded of Moses? Whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed far from the right path
Even after the truth has become clear to them, many of the People of the Book wish they could turn you back to disbelief after you have believed, out of their selfish envy. Forgive and forbear until God gives his command: He has power over all things
Keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms. Whatever good you store up for yourselves, you will find it with God: He sees everything you do
They also say, ‘No one will enter Paradise unless he is a Jew or a Christian.’ This is their own wishful thinking. [Prophet], say, ‘Produce your evidence, if you are telling the truth.’
In fact, any who direct themselves wholly to God and do good will have their reward with their Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve
The Jews say, ‘The Christians have no ground whatsoever to stand on,’ and the Christians say, ‘The Jews have no ground whatsoever to stand on,’ though they both read the Scripture, and those who have no knowledge say the same; God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning their differences
Who could be more wicked than those who prohibit the mention of God’s name in His places of worship and strive to have them deserted? Such people should not enter them without fear: there is disgrace for them in this world and painful punishment in the Hereafter
The East and the West belong to God: wherever you turn, there is His Face. God is all pervading and all knowing
They have asserted, ‘God has a child.’ May He be exalted! No! Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Him, everything devoutly obeys His will
He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth, and when He decrees something, He says only, ‘Be,’ and it is
Those who have no knowledge also say, ‘If only God would speak to us!’ or ‘If only a miraculous sign would come to us!’ People before them said the same things: their hearts are all alike. We have made Our signs clear enough to those who have solid faith
We have sent you [Prophet] with the truth, bearing good news and warning. You will not be responsible for the inhabitants of the Blaze
The Jews and the Christians will never be pleased with you unless you follow their ways. Say, ‘God’s guidance is the only true guidance.’ If you were to follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you, you would find no one to protect you from God or help you
Those to whom We have given the Scripture, who follow it as it deserves, are the ones who truly believe in it. Those who deny its truth will be the losers
Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you and favoured you over other people
and beware of a Day when no soul can stand in for another. No compensation will be accepted from it, nor intercession be of use to it, nor will anyone be helped
When Abraham’s Lord tested him with certain commandments, which he fulfilled, He said, ‘I will make you a leader of people.’ Abraham asked, ‘And will You make leaders from my descendants too?’ God answered, ‘My pledge does not hold for those who do evil.’
We made the House a resort and a sanctuary for people, saying, ‘Take the spot where Abraham stood as your place of prayer.’ We commanded Abraham and Ishmael: ‘Purify My House for those who walk round it, those who stay there, and those who bow and prostrate themselves in worship.’
Abraham said, ‘My Lord, make this land secure and provide with produce those of its people who believe in God and the Last Day.’ God said, ‘As for those who disbelieve, I will grant them enjoyment for a short while and then subject them to the torment of the Fire- an evil destination.’
As Abraham and Ishmael built up the foundations of the House [they prayed], ‘Our Lord, accept [this] from us. You are the All Hearing, the All Knowing
Our Lord, make us devoted to You; make our descendants into a community devoted to You. Show us how to worship and accept our repentance, for You are the Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful
Our Lord, make a messenger of their own rise up from among them, to recite Your revelations to them, teach them the Scripture and wisdom, and purify them: You are the Mighty, the Wise.’
Who but a fool would forsake the religion of Abraham? We have chosen him in this world and he will rank among the righteous in the Hereafter
His Lord said to him, ‘Devote yourself to Me.’ Abraham replied, ‘I devote myself to the Lord of the Universe,’
and commanded his sons to do the same, as did Jacob: ‘My sons, God has chosen [your] religion for you, so make sure you devote yourselves to Him, to your dying moment.’
Were you [Jews] there to see when death came upon Jacob? When he said to his sons, ‘What will you worship after I am gone?’ they replied, ‘We shall worship your God and the God of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, one single God: we devote ourselves to Him.’
That community passed away. What they earned belongs to them, and what you earn belongs to you: you will not be answerable for their deeds
They say, ‘Become Jews or Christians, and you will be rightly guided.’ Say [Prophet], ‘No, [ours is] the religion of Abraham, the upright, who did not worship any god besides God.’
So [you believers], say, ‘We believe in God and in what was sent down to us and what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and all the prophets by their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and we devote ourselves to Him.’
So if they believe like you do, they will be rightly guided. But if they turn their backs, then they will be entrenched in opposition. God will protect you from them: He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing. And say [believers]
‘[Our life] takes its colour from God, and who gives a better colour than God? It is Him we worship.’
Say [Prophet] [to the Jews and Christians], ‘How can you argue with us about God when He is our Lord and your Lord? Our deeds belong to us, and yours to you. We devote ourselves entirely to Him
Or are you saying that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians?’ [Prophet], ask them, ‘Who knows better: you or God? Who could be more wicked than those who hide a testimony [they received] from God? God is not unmindful of what you do.’
That community passed away: what they earned belongs to them, and what you earn belongs to you. You will not be answerable for their deeds
The foolish people will say, ‘What has turned them away from the prayer direction they used to face?’ Say, ‘East and West belong to God. He guides whoever He will to the right way.’
We have made you [believers] into a just community, so that you may bear witness [to the truth] before others and so that the Messenger may bear witness [to it] before you. We only made the direction the one you used to face [Prophet] in order to distinguish those who follow the Messenger from those who turn on their heels: that test was hard, except for those God has guided. God would never let your faith go to waste [believers], for God is most compassionate and most merciful towards people
Many a time We have seen you [Prophet] turn your face towards Heaven, so We are turning you towards a prayer direction that pleases you. Turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque: wherever you [believers] may be, turn your faces to it. Those who were given the Scripture know with certainty that this is the Truth from their Lord: God is not unaware of what they do
Yet even if you brought every proof to those who were given the Scripture, they would not follow your prayer direction, nor will you follow theirs, nor indeed will any of them follow one another’s direction. If you [Prophet] were to follow their desires, after the knowledge brought to you, you would be doing wrong
Those We gave Scripture know it as well as they know their own sons, but some of them hide the truth that they know
The truth is from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt
Each community has its own direction to which it turns: race to do good deeds and wherever you are, God will bring you together. God has power to do everything
[Prophet], wherever you may have started out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque- this is the truth from your Lord: He is not unaware of what you do
wherever you may have started out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque; wherever any of you may be, turn your faces towards it, so that people may have no argument against you- except for the wrongdoers among them: do not fear them; fear Me- and so that I may perfect My favour on you and you may be guided
just as Wehave sent among you a Messenger of your own to recite Our revelations to you, purify you and teach you the Scripture, wisdom, and [other] things you did not know
So remember Me; I will remember you. Be thankful to Me, and never ungrateful
You who believe, seek help through steadfastness and prayer, for God is with the steadfast
Do not say that those who are killed in God’s cause are dead; they are alive, though you do not realize it
We shall certainly test you with fear and hunger, and loss of property, lives, and crops. But [Prophet], give good news to those who are steadfast
those who say, when afflicted with a calamity, ‘We belong to God and to Him we shall return.’
These will be given blessings and mercy from their Lord, and it is they who are rightly guided
Safa and Marwa are among the rites of God, so for those who make major or minor pilgrimage to the House it is no offence to circulate between the two. Anyone who does good of his own accord will be rewarded, for God rewards good deeds, and knows everything
As for those who hide the proofs and guidance We send down, after We have made them clear to people in the Scripture, God rejects them, and so do others
unless they repent, make amends, and declare the truth. I will certainly accept their repentance: I am the Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful
As for those who disbelieve and die as disbelievers, God rejects them, as do the angels and all people
They will remain in this state of rejection: their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be reprieved
Your God is the one God: there is no god except Him, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
In the creation of the heavens and earth; in the alternation of night and day; in the ships that sail the seas with goods for people; in the water which God sends down from the sky to give life to the earth when it has been barren, scattering all kinds of creatures over it; in the changing of the winds and clouds that run their appointed courses between the sky and earth: there are signs in all these for those who use their minds
Even so, there are some who choose to worship others besides God as rivals to Him, loving them with the love due to God, but the believers have greater love for God. If only the idolaters could see- as they will see when they face the torment- that all power belongs to God, and that God punishes severely
When those who have been followed disown their followers, when they all see the suffering, when all bonds between them are severed
the followers will say, ‘If only we had one last chance, we would disown them as they now disown us.’ In this way, God will make them see their deeds as a source of bitter regret: they shall not leave the Fire
People, eat what is good and lawful from the earth, and do not follow Satan’s footsteps, for he is your sworn enemy
He always commands you to do what is evil and indecent, and to say things about God that you do not really know
But when it is said to them, ‘Follow the message that God has sent down,’ they answer, ‘We follow the ways of our fathers.’ What! Even though their fathers understood nothing and were not guided
Calling to disbelieversis like a herdsman calling to things that hear nothing but a shout and a cry: they are deaf, dumb, and blind, and they understand nothing
You who believe, eat the good things We have provided for you and be grateful to God, if it is Him that you worship
He has only forbidden you carrion, blood, pig’s meat, and animals over which any name other than God’s has been invoked. But if anyone is forced to eat such things by hunger, rather than desire or excess, he commits no sin: God is most merciful and forgiving
As for those who conceal the Scripture that God sent down and sell it for a small price, they only fill their bellies with Fire. God will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them: an agonizing torment awaits them
These are the ones who exchange guidance for error, and forgiveness for torment. What can make them patient in the face of the Fire
This is because God has sent the Scripture with the Truth; those who pursue differences in the Scripture are deeply entrenched in opposition
Goodness does not consist in turning your face towards East or West. The truly good are those who believe in God and the Last Day, in the angels, the Scripture, and the prophets; who give away some of their wealth, however much they cherish it, to their relatives, to orphans, the needy, travellers and beggars, and to liberate those in bondage; those who keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms; who keep pledges whenever they make them; who are steadfast in misfortune, adversity, and times of danger. These are the ones who are true, and it is they who are aware of God
You who believe, fair retribution is prescribed for you in cases of murder: the free man for the free man, the slave for the slave, the female for the female. But if the culprit is pardoned by his aggrieved brother, this shall be adhered to fairly, and the culprit shall pay what is due in a good way. This is an alleviation from your Lord and an act of mercy. If anyone then exceeds these limits, grievous suffering awaits him
Fair retribution saves life for you, people of understanding, so that you may guard yourselves against what is wrong. When death approaches one of you who leaves wealth
it is prescribed that he should make a proper bequest to parents and close relatives- a duty incumbent on those who are mindful of God
If anyone alters the bequest after hearing it, the guilt of the alteration will fall on them: God is all hearing and all knowing
But if anyone knows that the testator has made a mistake, or done wrong, and so puts things right between the parties, he will incur no sin: God is most forgiving and merciful
You who believe, fasting is prescribed for you, as it was prescribed for those before you, so that you may be mindful of God
Fast for a specific number of days, but if one of you is ill, or on a journey, on other days later. For those who can fast only with extreme difficulty, there is a way to compensate- feed a needy person. But if anyone does good of his own accord, it is better for him, and fasting is better for you, if only you knew
It was in the month of Ramadan that the Quran was revealed as guidance for mankind, clear messages giving guidance and distinguishing between right and wrong. So any one of you who is present that month should fast, and anyone who is ill or on a journey should make up for the lost days by fasting on other days later. God wants ease for you, not hardship. He wants you to complete the prescribed period and to glorify Him for having guided you, so that you may be thankful
[Prophet], if My servants ask you about Me, I am near. I respond to those who call Me, so let them respond to Me, and believe in Me, so that they may be guided
You [believers] are permitted to lie with your wives during the night of the fast: they are [close] as garments to you, as you are to them. God was aware that you were betraying yourselves, so He turned to you in mercy and pardoned you: now you can lie with them- seek what God has ordained for you- eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct from the black. Then fast until nightfall. Do not lie with them during the nights of your devotional retreat in the mosques: these are the bounds set by God, so do not go near them. In this way God makes His messages clear to people, that they may guard themselves against doing wrong
Do not consume your property wrongfully, nor use it to bribe judges, intending sinfully and knowingly to consume parts of other people’s property
They ask you [Prophet] about crescent moons. Say, ‘They show the times appointed for people, and for the pilgrimage.’ Goodness does not consist of entering houses by the back [door]; the truly good person is the one who is mindful of God. So enter your houses by their [main] doors and be mindful of God so that you may prosper
Fight in God’s cause against those who fight you, but do not overstep the limits: God does not love those who overstep the limits
Kill them wherever you encounter them, and drive them out from where they drove you out, for persecution is more serious than killing. Do not fight them at the Sacred Mosque unless they fight you there. If they do fight you, kill them- this is what such disbelievers deserve
but if they stop, then God is most forgiving and merciful
Fight them until there is no more persecution, and worship is devoted to God. If they cease hostilities, there can be no [further] hostility, except towards aggressors
A sacred month for a sacred month: violation of sanctity [calls for] fair retribution. So if anyone commits aggression against you, attack him as he attacked you, but be mindful of God, and know that He is with those who are mindful of Him
Spend in God’s cause: do not contribute to your destruction with your own hands, but do good, for God loves those who do good
Complete the pilgrimages, major and minor, for the sake of God. If you are prevented [from doing so], then [send] whatever offering for sacrifice you can afford, and do not shave your headsuntil the offering has reached the place of sacrifice. If any of you is ill, or has an ailment of the scalp, he should compensate by fasting, or feeding the poor, or offering sacrifice. When you are in safety, anyone wishing to take a break between the minor pilgrimage and the major one must make whatever offering he can afford. If he lacks the means, he should fast for three days during the pilgrimage, and seven days on his return, making ten days in all. This applies to those whose household is not near the Sacred Mosque. Always be mindful of God, and be aware that He is stern in His retribution
The pilgrimage takes place during the prescribed months. There should be no indecent speech, misbehaviour, or quarrelling for anyone undertaking the pilgrimage- whatever good you do, God is well aware of it. Provide well for yourselves: the best provision is to be mindful of God- always be mindful of Me, you who have understanding
but it is no offence to seek some bounty from your Lord. When you surge down from Arafat remember God at the sacred place. Remember Him: He has guided you. Before that you were astray
Surge down where the rest of the people do, and ask forgiveness of God: He is most forgiving and merciful
When you have completed your rites, remember God as much as you remember your own fathers, or even more. There are some who pray, ‘Our Lord, give us good in this world,’ and they will have no share in the Hereafter
others pray, ‘Our Lord, give us good in this world and in the Hereafter, and protect us from the torment of the Fire.’
They will have the share they have worked for: God is swift in reckoning
Remember God on the appointed days. If anyone is in a hurry to leave after two days, there is no blame on him, nor is there any blame on anyone who stays on, so long as they are mindful of God. Be mindful of God, and remember that you will be gathered to Him
There is [a kind of] man whose views on the life of this world may please you [Prophet], he even calls on God to witness what is in his heart, yet he is the bitterest of opponents
When he leaves, he sets out to spread corruption in the land, destroying crops and live-stock- God does not like corruption
When he is told, ‘Beware of God,’ his arrogance leads him to sin. Hell is enough for him: a dreadful resting place
But there is also a kind of man who gives his life away to please God, and God is most compassionate to His servants
You who believe, enter wholeheartedly into submission to God and do not follow in Satan’s footsteps, for he is your sworn enemy
If you slip back after clear proof has come to you, then be aware that God is almighty and wise
Are these people waiting for God to come to them in the shadows of the clouds, together with the angels? But the matter would already have been decided by then: all matters are brought back to God
[Prophet], ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We brought them. If anyone alters God’s blessings after he has received them, God is stern in punishment
The life of this world is made to seem glamorous to the disbelievers, and they laugh at those who believe. But those who are mindful of God will be above them on the Day of Resurrection: God provides immeasurably for whoever He pleases
Mankind was a single community, then God sent prophets to bring good news and warning, and with them He sent the Scripture with the Truth, to judge between people in their disagreements. It was only those to whom it was given who disagreed about it after clear signs had come to them, because of rivalry between them. So by His leave God guided the believers to the truth they had differed about: God guides whoever He will to a straight path
Do you suppose that you will enter the Garden without first having suffered like those before you? They were afflicted by misfortune and hardship, and they were so shaken that even [their] messenger and the believers with him cried, ‘When will God’s help arrive?’ Truly, God’s help is near
They ask you [Prophet] what they should give. Say, ‘Whatever you give should be for parents, close relatives, orphans, the needy, and travellers. God is well aware of whatever good you do
Fighting is ordained for you, though you dislike it. You may dislike something although it is good for you, or like something although it is bad for you: God knows and you do not.’
They ask you [Prophet] about fighting in the prohibited month. Say, ‘Fighting in that month is a great offence, but to bar others from God’s path, to disbelieve in Him, prevent access to the Sacred Mosque, and expel its people, are still greater offences in God’s eyes: persecution is worse than killing.’ They will not stop fighting you [believers] until they make you revoke your faith, if they can. If any of you revoke your faith and die as disbelievers, your deeds will come to nothing in this world and the Hereafter, and you will be inhabitants of the Fire, there to remain
But those who have believed, migrated, and striven for God’s cause, it is they who can look forward to God’s mercy: God is most forgiving and merciful
They ask you [Prophet] about intoxicants and gambling: say, ‘There is great sin in both, and some benefit for people: the sin is greater than the benefit.’ They ask you what they should give: say, ‘Give what you can spare.’ In this way, God makes His messages clear to you, so that you may reflect
on this world and the next. They ask you about [the property of] orphans: say, ‘It is good to set things right for them. If you combine their affairs with yours, remember they are your brothers and sisters: God knows those who spoil things and those who improve them. Had He so willed, He could have made you vulnerable too: He is almighty and wise.’
Do not marry idolatresses until they believe: a believing slave woman is certainly better than an idolatress, even though she may please you. And do not give your women in marriage to idolaters until they believe: a believing slave is certainly better than an idolater, even though he may please you. Such people call [you] to the Fire, while God calls [you] to the Garden and forgiveness by His leave. He makes His messages clear to people, so that they may bear them in mind
They ask you [Prophet] about menstruation. Say, ‘Menstruation is a painful condition, so keep away from women during it. Do not approach them until they are cleansed; when they are cleansed, you may approach them as God has ordained. God loves those who turn to Him, and He loves those who keep themselves clean
Your wives are your fields, so go into your fields whichever way you like,and send [something good] ahead for yourselves. Be mindful of God: remember that you will meet Him.’ [Prophet], give good news to the believers
[Believers], do not allow your oaths in God’s name to hinder you from doing good, being mindful of God and making peace between people. God hears and knows everything
He will not call you to account for oaths you have uttered unintentionally, but He will call you to account for what you mean in your hearts. God is most forgiving and forbearing
For those who swear that they will not approach their wives, there shall be a waiting period of four months:if they go back, remember God will be most forgiving and merciful
but if they are determined to divorce, remember that God hears and knows all
Divorced women must wait for three monthly periods before remarrying, and, if they really believe in God and the Last Day, it is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in their wombs: their husbands would do better to take them back during this period, provided they wish to put things right. Wives have [rights] similar to their [obligations], according to what is recognized to be fair, and husbands have a degree [of right] over them: [both should remember that] God is almighty and wise
Divorce can happen twice, and [each time] wives either be kept on in an acceptable manner or released in a good way. It is not lawful for you to take back anything that you have given [your wives], except where both fear that they cannot maintain [the marriage] within the bounds set by God: if you [arbiters] suspect that the couple may not be able to do this, then there will be no blame on either of them if the woman opts to give something for her release. These are the bounds set by God: do not overstep them. It is those who overstep God’s bounds who are doing wrong
If a husband re-divorces his wife after the second divorce, she will not be lawful for him until she has taken another husband; if that one divorces her, there will be no blame if she and the first husband return to one another, provided they feel that they can keep within the bounds set by God. These are God’s bounds, which He makes clear for those who know
When you divorce women and they have reached their set time, then either keep or release them in a fair manner. Do not hold on to them with intent to harm them and commit aggression: anyone who does this wrongs himself. Do not make a mockery of God’s revelations; remember the favour He blessed you with, and the Scripture and wisdom He sent to teach you. Be mindful of God and know that He has full knowledge of everything
When you divorce women and they have reached their set time, do not prevent them from remarrying their husbands if they both agree to do so in a fair manner. Let those of you who believe in God and the Last Day take this to heart: that is more wholesome and purer for you. God knows and you do not
Mothers suckle their children for two whole years, if they wish to complete the term, and clothing and maintenance must be borne by the father in a fair manner. No one should be burdened with more than they can bear: no mother shall be made to suffer harm on account of her child, nor any father on account of his. The same duty is incumbent on the father’s heir. If, by mutual consent and consultation, the couple wish to wean [the child], they will not be blamed, nor will there be any blame if you wish to engage a wet nurse, provided you pay as agreed in a fair manner. Be mindful of God, knowing that He sees everything you do
If any of you die and leave widows, the widows should wait for four months and ten nights before remarrying. When they have completed this set time, you will not be blamed for anything they may reasonably choose to do with themselves. God is fully aware of what you do
You will not be blamed whether you give a hint that you wish to marry these women, or keep it to yourselves- God knows that you intend to propose to them. Do not make a secret arrangement with them; speak to them honourably and do not confirm the marriage tie until the prescribed period reaches its end. Remember that God knows what is in your souls, so be mindful of Him. Remember that God is most forgiving and forbearing
You will not be blamed if you divorce women when you have not yet consummated the marriage or fixed a bride-gift for them, but make fair provision for them, the rich according to his means and the poor according to his- this is a duty for those who do good
If you divorce wives before consummating the marriage but after fixing a bride-gift for them, then give them half of what you had previously fixed, unless they waive [their right], or unless the one who holds the marriage tie waives [his right]. Waiving [your right] is nearer to godliness, so do not forget to be generous towards one another: God sees what you do
Take care to do your prayers, praying in the best way, and stand before God in devotion
If you are in danger, pray when you are out walking or riding; when you are safe again, remember God, for He has taught you what you did not know
If any of you die and leave widows, make a bequest for them: a year’s maintenance and no expulsion from their homes [for that time]. But if they leave of their own accord, you will not be blamed for what they may reasonably choose to do with themselves: God is almighty and wise
Divorced women shall also have such maintenance as is considered fair: this is a duty for those who are mindful of God
In this way God makes His revelations clear to you, so that you may grow in understanding
[Prophet], consider those people who abandoned their homeland in fear of death, even though there were thousands of them. God said to them, ‘Die!’ and then brought them back to life again; God shows real favour to people, but most of them are ungrateful
Fight in God’s cause and remember that He is all hearing and all knowing
Who will give God a good loan, which He will increase for him many times over? It is God who withholds and God who gives abundantly, and it is to Him that you will return
[Prophet], consider the leaders of the Children of Israel who came after Moses, when they said to one of their prophets, ‘Set up a king for us and we shall fight in God’s cause.’ He said, ‘But could it be that you would not fight, if it were ordained for you?’ They said, ‘How could we not fight in God’s cause when we and our children have been driven out of our homeland?’ Yet when they were commanded to fight, all but a few of them turned away: God has full knowledge of those who do wrong
Their prophet said to them, ‘God has now appointed Talut to be your king,’ but they said, ‘How can he be king over us when we have a greater right to rule than he? He does not even have great wealth.’ He said, ‘God has chosen him over you, and has given him great knowledge and stature. God grants His authority to whoever He pleases: God is magnanimous, all knowing.’
Their prophet said to them, ‘The sign of his authority will be that the Ark [of the Covenant] will come to you. In it there will be [the gift of] tranquillity from your Lord and relics of the followers of Moses and Aaron, carried by the angels. There is a sign in this for you if you believe.’
When Talut set out with his forces, he said to them, ‘God will test you with a river. Anyone who drinks from it will not belong with me, but anyone who refrains from tasting it will belong with me; if he scoops up just one handful [he will be excused].’ But they all drank [deep] from it, except for a few. When he crossed it with those who had kept faith, they said, ‘We have no strength today against Goliath and his warriors.’ But those who knew that they were going to meet their Lord said, ‘How often a small force has defeated a large army with God’s permission! God is with those who are steadfast.’
And when they met Goliath and his warriors, they said, ‘Our Lord, pour patience on us, make us stand firm, and help us against the disbelievers,’
and so with God’s permission they defeated them. David killed Goliath, and God gave him sovereignty and wisdom and taught him what He pleased. If God did not drive some back by means of others the earth would be completely corrupt, but God is bountiful to all
These are the revelations of God which We recite to you [Muhammad] with the truth, and you truly are one of the messengers
We favoured some of these messengers above others. God spoke to some; others He raised in rank; We gave Jesus, son of Mary, Our clear signs and strengthened him with the holy spirit. If God had so willed, their successors would not have fought each other after they had been brought clear signs. But they disagreed: some believed and some disbelieved. If God had so willed, they would not have fought each other, but God does what He will
You who believe, give from what We have provided for you, before the Day comes when there is no bargaining, no friendship, and no intercession. It is the disbelievers who are wrong
God: there is no god but Him, the Ever Living, the Ever Watchful.Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. All that is in the heavens and in the earth belongs to Him. Who is there that can intercede with Him except by His leave? He knows what is before them and what is behind them, but they do not comprehend any of His knowledge except what He wills. His throne extends over the heavens and the earth; it does not weary Him to preserve them both. He is the Most High, the Tremendous
There is no compulsion in religion: true guidance has become distinct from error, so whoever rejects false gods and believes in God has grasped the firmest hand-hold, one that will never break. God is all hearing and all knowing
God is the ally of those who believe: He brings them out of the depths of darkness and into the light. As for the disbelievers, their allies are false gods who take them from the light into the depths of darkness, they are the inhabitants of the Fire, and there they will remain
[Prophet], have you not thought about the man who disputed with Abraham about his Lord, because God had given him power to rule? When Abraham said, ‘It is my Lord who gives life and death,’ he said, ‘I too give life and death.’ So Abraham said, ‘God brings the sun from the east; so bring it from the west.’ The disbeliever was dumbfounded: God does not guide those who do evil
Or take the one who passed by a ruined town. He said, ‘How will God give this life when it has died?’ So God made him die for a hundred years, and then raised him up, saying, ‘How long did you stay like that?’ He answered, ‘A day, or part of a day.’ God said, ‘No, you stayed like that for a hundred years. Look at your food and drink: they have not gone bad. Look at your donkey- We will make you a sign for the people- look at the bones: see how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh!’ When all became clear to him, he said, ‘Now I know that God has power over everything.’
And when Abraham said, ‘My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead,’ He said, ‘Do you not believe, then?’ ‘Yes,’ said Abraham, ‘but just to put my heart at rest.’ So God said, ‘Take four birds and train them to come back to you. Then place them on separate hilltops, call them back, and they will come flying to you: know that God is all powerful and wise.’
Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause are like grains of corn that produce seven ears, each bearing a hundred grains. God gives multiple increase to whoever He wishes: He is limitless and all knowing
Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause, and do not follow their spending with reminders of their benevolence or hurtful words, will have their rewards with their Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve
A kind word and forgiveness is better than a charitable deed followed by hurtful [words]: God is self-sufficient, forbearing
You who believe, do not cancel out your charitable deeds with reminders and hurtful words, like someone who spends his wealth only to be seen by people, not believing in God and the Last Day. Such a person is like a rock with earth on it: heavy rain falls and leaves it completely bare. Such people get no rewards for their works: God does not guide the disbelievers
But those who spend their wealth in order to gain God’s approval, and as an affirmation of their own faith, are like a garden on a hill: heavy rain falls and it produces double its normal yield; even if no heavy rain falls, it will still be watered by the dew. God sees all that you do
Would any of you like to have a garden of palm trees and vines, graced with flowing streams and all kinds of produce, which, when you are afflicted with old age and feeble offspring, is struck by a fiery whirlwind and burnt down? In this way God makes His messages clear to you, so that you may reflect on them
You who believe, give charitably from the good things you have acquired and that We have produced for you from the earth. Do not give away the bad things that you yourself would only accept with your eyes closed: remember that God is self-sufficient, worthy of all praise
Satan threatens you with the prospect of poverty and commands you to do foul deeds; God promises you His forgiveness and His abundance: God is limitless and all knowing
and He gives wisdom to whoever He will. Whoever is given wisdom has truly been given much good, but only those with insight bear this in mind
Whatever you may give, or vow to give, God knows it well, and those who do wrong will have no one to help them
If you give charity openly, it is good, but if you keep it secret and give to the needy in private, that is better for you, and it will atone for some of your bad deeds: God is well aware of all that you do
It is not for you [Prophet] to guide them; it is God who guides whoever He will. Whatever charity you give benefits your own soul, provided you do it for the sake of God: whatever you give will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged
[Give] to those needy who are wholly occupied in God’s way and cannot travel in the land [for trade]. The unknowing might think them rich because of their self-restraint, but you will recognize them by their characteristic of not begging persistently. God is well aware of any good you give
Those who give, out of their own possessions, by night and by day, in private and in public, will have their reward with their Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve
But those who take usury will rise up on the Day of Resurrection like someone tormented by Satan’s touch. That is because they say, ‘Trade and usury are the same,’
but God has allowed trade and forbidden usury. Whoever, on receiving God’s warning, stops taking usury may keep his past gains- God will be his judge- but whoever goes back to usury will be an inhabitant of the Fire, there to remain. God blights usury, but blesses charitable deeds with multiple increase: He does not love the ungrateful sinner
Those who believe, do good deeds, keep up the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms will have their reward with their Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve
You who believe, beware of God: give up any outstanding dues from usury, if you are true believers
If you do not, then be warned of war from God and His Messenger. You shall have your capital if you repent, and without suffering loss or causing others to suffer loss
If the debtor is in difficulty, then delay things until matters become easier for him; still, if you were to write it off as an act of charity, that would be better for you, if only you knew
Beware of a Day when you will be returned to God: every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned, and no one will be wronged
You who believe, when you contract a debt for a stated term, put it down in writing: have a scribe write it down justly between you. No scribe should refuse to write: let him write as God has taught him, let the debtor dictate, and let him fear God, his Lord, and not diminish [the debt] at all. If the debtor is feeble-minded, weak, or unable to dictate, then let his guardian dictate justly. Call in two men as witnesses. If two men are not there, then call one man and two women out of those you approve as witnesses, so that if one of the two women should forget the other can remind her. Let the witnesses not refuse when they are summoned. Do not disdain to write the debt down, be it small or large, along with the time it falls due: this way is more equitable in God’s eyes, more reliable as testimony, and more likely to prevent doubts arising between you. But if the merchandise is there and you hand it over, there is no blame on you if you do not write it down. Have witnesses present whenever you trade with one another, and let no harm be done to either scribe or witness, for if you did cause them harm, it would be a crime on your part. Be mindful of God, and He will teach you: He has full knowledge of everything
If you are on a journey, and cannot find a scribe, something should be handed over as security, but if you decide to trust one another, then let the one who is trusted fulfil his trust; let him be mindful of God, his Lord. Do not conceal evidence: anyone who does so has a sinful heart, and God is fully aware of everything you do
Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth belongs to God and, whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts, God will call you to account for them. He will forgive whoever He will and punish whoever He will: He has power over all things
The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord, as do the faithful. They all believe in God, His angels, His scriptures, and His messengers. ‘We make no distinction between any of His messengers,’ they say, ‘We hear and obey. Grant us Your forgiveness, our Lord. To You we all return!’
God does not burden any soul with more than it can bear: each gains whatever good it has done, and suffers its bad- ‘ Lord, do not take us to task if we forget or make mistakes. Lord, do not burden us as You burdened those before us. Lord, do not burden us with more than we have strength to bear. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Protector, so help us against the disbelievers.’
Alif Lam Mim
God: there is no god but Him, the Ever Living, the Ever Watchful
Step by step, He has sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with the Truth, confirming what went before: He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
earlier as a guide for people and He has sent down the distinction [between right and wrong]. Those who deny God’s revelations will suffer severe torment: God is almighty and capable of retribution
Nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from God
it is He who shapes you all in the womb as He pleases. There is no God but Him, the Mighty, the Wise
it is He who has sent this Scripture down to you [Prophet]. Some of its verses are definite in meaning- these are the cornerstone of the Scripture- and others are ambiguous. The perverse at heart eagerly pursue the ambiguities in their attempt to make trouble and to pin down a specific meaning of their own: only God knows the true meaning. Those firmly grounded in knowledge say, ‘We believe in it: it is all from our Lord’- only those with real perception will take heed
‘Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate after You have guided us. Grant us Your mercy: You are the Ever Giving
Our Lord, You will gather all people on the Day of which there is no doubt: God never breaks His promise.’
Neither their possessions nor their children will be any use to the disbelievers against God. The disbelievers will be fuel for the Fire
just as Pharaoh’s people and their predecessors denied Our revelations, and God punished them for their sins: God is severe in punishing
[Prophet], say to the disbelievers, ‘You will be defeated and driven together into Hell, a foul resting place
You have already seen a sign in the two armies that met in battle, one fighting for God’s cause and the other made up of disbelievers. With their own eyes [the former] saw [the latter] to be twice their number, but God helps whoever He will. There truly is a lesson in this for all with eyes to see.’
The love of desirable things is made alluring for men- women, children, gold and silver treasures piled up high, horses with fine markings, livestock, and farmland- these may be the joys of this life, but God has the best place to return to
[Prophet], say, ‘Would you like me to tell you of things that are better than all of these? Their Lord will give those who are mindful of God Gardens graced with flowing streams, where they will stay with pure spouses and God’s good pleasure- God is fully aware of His servants
those who say, “Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us our sins and protect us from suffering in the Fire,”
those who are steadfast, truthful, truly devout, who give [in God’s cause] and pray before dawn for forgiveness.’
God bears witness that there is no god but Him, as do the angels and those who have knowledge. He upholds justice. There is no god but Him, the Almighty, the All Wise
True Religion, in God’s eyes, is islam: [devotion to Him alone]. Those who were given the Scripture disagreed out of rivalry, only after they had been given knowledge- if anyone denies God’s revelations, God is swift to take account
if they argue with you [Prophet], say, ‘I have devoted myself to God alone and so have my followers.’ Ask those who were given the Scripture, as well as those without one, ‘Do you too devote yourselves to Him alone?’ If they do, they will be guided, but if they turn away, your only duty is to convey the message. God is aware of His servants
Give news of agonizing torment to those who ignore God’s revelations, who unjustifiably kill prophets, who kill those who command that justice is done
the deeds of such people will come to nothing in this world and in the next and no one will help them
Have you considered those who were given a share of the Scripture? When they are asked to accept judgement from God’s Scripture, some of them turn their backs and walk away, all because they declare
‘The Fire will only touch us for a limited number of days.’ The lies they have invented have led them astray in their own religion
How will they fare when We gather them together for a Day of which there is no doubt, when every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and they will not be wronged
Say, ‘God, holder of all control, You give control to whoever You will and remove it from whoever You will; You elevate whoever You will and humble whoever You will. All that is good lies in Your hand: You have power over everything
You merge night into day and day into night; You bring the living out of the dead and the dead out of the living; You provide limitlessly for whoever You will.’
The believers should not make the disbelievers their allies rather than other believers- anyone who does such a thing will isolate himself completely from God- except when you need to protect yourselves from them. God warns you to beware of Him: the Final Return is to God
Say [Prophet], ‘God knows everything that is in your hearts, whether you conceal or reveal it; He knows everything in the heavens and earth; God has power over all things.’
On the Day when every soul finds all the good it has done present before it, it will wish all the bad it has done to be far, far away. God warns you to beware of Him, but God is compassionate towards His servants
Say, ‘If you love God, follow me, and God will love you and forgive you your sins; God is most forgiving, most merciful.’
Say, ‘Obey God and the Messenger,’ but if they turn away, [know that] God does not love those who ignore [His commands]
God chose Adam, Noah, Abraham’s family, and the family of Imran, over all other people
in one line of descent- God hears and knows all
Imran’s wife said, ‘Lord, I have dedicated what is growing in my womb entirely to You; so accept this from me. You are the One who hears and knows all,’
but when she gave birth, she said, ‘My Lord! I have given birth to a girl’- God knew best what she had given birth to: the male is not like the female- ‘ I name her Mary and I commend her and her offspring to Your protection from the rejected Satan.’
Her Lord graciously accepted her and made her grow in goodness, and entrusted her to the charge of Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah went in to see her in her sanctuary, he found her supplied with provisions. He said, ‘Mary, how is it you have these provisions?’ and she said, ‘They are from God: God provides limitlessly for whoever He will.’
There and then Zachariah prayed to his Lord, saying, ‘Lord, from Your grace grant me virtuous offspring: You hear every prayer.’
The angels called out to him, while he stood praying in the sanctuary, ‘God gives you news of John, confirming a Word from God. He will be noble and chaste, a prophet, one of the righteous.’
He said, ‘My Lord, how can I have a son when I am so old and my wife is barren?’ [An angel] said, ‘It will be so: God does whatever He will.’
He said, ‘My Lord, give me a sign.’ ‘Your sign,’ [the angel] said, ‘is that you will not communicate with anyone for three days, except by gestures. Remember your Lord often; celebrate His glory in the evening and at dawn.’
The angels said to Mary: ‘Mary, God has chosen you and made you pure: He has truly chosen you above all women
Mary, be devout to your Lord, prostrate yourself in worship, bow down with those who pray.’
This is an account of things beyond your knowledge that We reveal to you [Muhammad]: you were not present among them when they cast lots to see which of them should take charge of Mary, you were not present with them when they argued [about her]
The angels said, ‘Mary, God gives you news of a Word from Him, whose name will be the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, who will be held in honour in this world and the next, who will be one of those brought near to God
He will speak to people in his infancyand in his adulthood. He will be one of the righteous.’
She said, ‘My Lord, how can I have a son when no man has touched me?’ [The angel] said, ‘This is how God creates what He will: when He has ordained something, He only says, “Be”, and it is
He will teach him the Scripture and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel
He will send him as a messenger to the Children of Israel: “I have come to you with a sign from your Lord: I will make the shape of a bird for you out of clay, then breathe into it and, with God’s permission, it will become a real bird; I will heal the blind and the leper, and bring the dead back to life with God’s permission; I will tell you what you may eat and what you may store up in your houses. There truly is a sign for you in this, if you are believers
I have come to confirm the truth of the Torah which preceded me, and to make some things lawful to you which used to be forbidden. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. Be mindful of God, obey me
God is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him- that is a straight path.”’
When Jesus realized they [still] did not believe, he said, ‘Who will help me in God’s cause?’ The disciples said, ‘We will be God’s helpers; we believe in God- witness our devotion to Him
Lord, we believe in what You have revealed and we follow the messenger: record us among those who bear witness [to the Truth].’
The [disbelievers] schemed but God also schemed; God is the Best of Schemers
God said, ‘Jesus, I will take you back and raise you up to Me: I will purify you of the disbelievers. To the Day of Resurrection I will make those who follow you superior to those who disbelieved. Then you will all return to Me and I will judge between you regarding your differences
I will make the disbelievers suffer severely in this world and the next; no one will help them.’
God will pay those who believe and do good deeds their reward in full; God does not love evildoers
We relate to you [Muhammad] this revelation, a decisive statement
In God’s eyes Jesus is just like Adam: He created him from dust, said to him, ‘Be’, and he was
This is the truth from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt
If anyone disputes this with you now that you have been given this knowledge, say, ‘Come, let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, and let us pray earnestly and invoke God’s rejection on those of us who are lying
This is the truth of the matter: there is no god but God; God is the Exalted, the Decider.’
If they turn away, [know that] God is well aware of anyone who causes corruption
Say, ‘People of the Book, let us arrive at a statement that is common to us all: we worship God alone, we ascribe no partner to Him, and none of us takes others beside God as lords.’ If they turn away, say, ‘Witness our devotion to Him.’
People of the Book, why do you argue about Abraham when the Torah and the Gospels were not revealed until after his time? Do you not understand
You argue about some things of which you have some knowledge, but why do you argue about things of which you know nothing? God knows and you do not
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian. He was upright and devoted to God, never an idolater
and the people who are closest to him are those who truly follow his ways, this Prophet, and [true] believers- God is close to [true] believers
Some of the People of the Book would dearly love to lead you [believers] astray, but they only lead themselves astray, though they do not realize it
People of the Book, why do you deny God’s revelations when you can see they are true
People of the Book, why do you mix truth with falsehood? Why do you hide the truth when you recognize it
Some of the People of the Book say, ‘At the beginning of the day, believe in what has been revealed to these believers [the Muslims], then at the end of the day reject it, so that they too may turn back
but do not sincerely believe in anyone unless he follows your own religion’- [Prophet], tell them, ‘True guidance is the guidance of God’- [they say], ‘Do not believe that anyone else could be given a revelation similar to what you were given, or that they could use it to argue against you in your Lord’s presence.’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘All grace is in God’s hands: He grants it to whoever He will- He is all embracing, all knowing
and He singles out for His mercy whoever He will. His grace is infinite.’
There are People of the Book who, if you [Prophet] entrust them with a heap of gold, will return it to you intact, but there are others of them who, if you entrust them with a single dinar, will not return it to you unless you keep standing over them, because they say, ‘We are under no obligation towards the gentiles.’ They tell a lie against God and they know it
No indeed! God loves those who keep their pledges and are mindful of Him
but those who sell out God’s covenant and their own oaths for a small price will have no share in the life to come. God will neither speak to them nor look at them on the Day of Resurrection- He will not cleanse them [of their sins]- agonizing torment awaits them
There are some who twist the Scripture with their tongues to make you [people] think that what they say is part of the Scripture when it is not; they say it is from God when it is not; they attribute lies to God and they know it
No person to whom God had given the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood would ever say to people, ‘Be my servants, not God’s.’ [He would say], ‘You should be devoted to God because you have taught the Scripture and studied it closely.’
He would never command you to take angels and prophets as lords. How could he command you to be disbelievers after you had devoted yourselves to God
God took a pledge from the prophets, saying, ‘If, after I have bestowed Scripture and wisdom upon you, a messenger comes confirming what you have been given, you must believe in him and support him. Do you affirm this and accept My pledge as binding on you?’ They said, ‘We do.’ He said, ‘Then bear witness and I too will bear witness.’
Those who turn away after this are the ones who break pledges
Do they seek anything other than submission to God? Everyone in the heavens and earth submits to Him, willingly or unwillingly; they will all be returned to Him
Say [Muhammad], ‘We [Muslims] believe in God and in what has been sent down to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes. We believe in what has been given to Moses, Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord. We do not make a distinction between any of the [prophets]. It is to Him that we devote ourselves.’
If anyone seeks a religion other than [islam] complete devotion to God, it will not be accepted from him: he will be one of the losers in the Hereafter
Why would God guide people who deny the truth, after they have believed and acknowledged that the Messenger is true, and after they have been shown clear proof? God does not guide evildoers
such people will be rewarded with rejection by God, by the angels, by all people
and so they will remain, with no relief or respite for their suffering
Not so those who afterwards repent and mend their ways- God is most forgiving and merciful
[although] the repentance of those who, having believed, then increase in their disbelief, will not be accepted. They are the ones who have gone [far] astray
those who disbelieve and die disbelievers will not be saved even if they offer enough gold to fill the entire earth. Agonizing torment is in store for them, and there will be no one to help them
None of you [believers] will attain true piety unless you give out of what you cherish: whatever you give, God knows about it very well
Except for what Israel made unlawful for himself, all food was lawful to the Children of Israel before the Torah was revealed. Say, ‘Bring the Torah and read out [the relevant passage] if you are telling the truth
Those who persist in making up lies and attributing them to God after this are the wrongdoers.’
[Prophet], say, ‘God speaks the truth, so follow Abraham’s religion: he had true faith and he was never an idolater.’
The first House [of worship] to be established for people was the one at Mecca. It is a blessed place; a source of guidance for all people
there are clear signs in it; it is the place where Abraham stood to pray; whoever enters it is safe. Pilgrimage to the House is a duty owed to God by people who are able to undertake it. Those who reject this [should know that] God has no need of anyone
Say, ‘People of the Book, why do you reject God’s revelations? God witnesses everything you do.’
Say, ‘People of the Book, why do you turn the believers away from God’s path and try to make it crooked, when you yourselves [should be] witnesses to the [truth]? God is not heedless of anything you do.’
You who believe, some of those who were given the Scripture would turn you into disbelievers if you were to yield to them
How can you disbelieve when God’s revelations are being recited to you and His Messenger is living among you? Whoever holds fast to God will be guided to the straight path
You who believe, be mindful of God, as is His due, and make sure you devote yourselves to Him, to your dying moment
Hold fast to God’s rope all together; do not split into factions. Remember God’s favour to you: you were enemies and then He brought your hearts together and you became brothers by His grace; you were about to fall into a pit of Fire and He saved you from it- in this way God makes His revelations clear to you so that you may be rightly guided
Be a community that calls for what is good, urges what is right, and forbids what is wrong: those who do this are the successful ones
Do not be like those who, after they have been given clear revelation, split into factions and fall into disputes: a terrible punishment awaits such people
On the Day when some faces brighten and others darken, it will be said to those with darkened faces, ‘How could you reject your faith after believing? Taste the torment for doing so,’
but those with brightened faces will be in God’s grace, there to remain
These are God’s revelations: We recite them to you [Prophet] with the Truth. God does not will injustice for His creatures
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God; it is to Him that all things return
[Believers], you are the best community singled out for people: you order what is right, forbid what is wrong, and believe in God. If the People of the Book had also believed, it would have been better for them. For although some of them do believe, most of them are lawbreakers
they will not do you much harm: even if they come out to fight you, they will soon turn tail; they will get no help
and, unless they hold fast to a lifeline from God and from mankind, they are overshadowed by vulnerability wherever they are found. They have drawn God’s wrath upon themselves. They are overshadowed by weakness, too, because they have persistently disbelieved in God’s revelation and killed prophets without any right, all because of their disobedience and boundless transgression
But they are not all alike. There are some among the People of the Book who are upright, who recite God’s revelations during the night, who bow down in worship
who believe in God and the Last Day, who order what is right and forbid what is wrong, who are quick to do good deeds. These people are among the righteous
and they will not be denied [the reward] for whatever good deeds they do: God knows exactly who is conscious of Him
As for those who disbelieve, neither their possessions nor their children will help them against God- they will be companions in the Fire, there to remain
and whatever they give away in this life will be nullified: a frosty wind strikes and destroys the harvest of people who have wronged themselves. It was not God who wronged them; they wronged themselves
You who believe, do not take for your intimates such outsiders as spare no effort to ruin you and want to see you suffer: their hatred is evident from their mouths, but what their hearts conceal is far worse. We have made Our revelations clear for you; will you not use your reason
This is how it is: here you are, you love them, but they do not love you; you believe in all the Scriptures and when they meet you, they say, ‘We believe,’ but when they are alone, they bite their fingertips in rage at you. [Prophet], say, ‘Die of rage [if you wish]!’ God knows exactly what is in everyone’s hearts
They grieve at any good that befalls you [believers] and rejoice at your misfortunes. But if you are steadfast and conscious of God, their scheming will not harm you in the least: God encircles everything they do
[Prophet], remember when you left your home at dawn to assign battle positions to the believers: God hears and knows everything
Remember when two groups of you were about to lose heart and God protected them- let the believers put their trust in God
God helped you at Badr when you were very weak. Be mindful of God, so that you may be grateful
Remember when you said to the believers, ‘Will you be satisfied if your Lord reinforces you by send-ing down three thousand angels
Well, if you are steadfast and mindful of God, your Lord will reinforce you with five thousand swooping angels if the enemy should suddenly attack you!’ and God arranged it so
as a message of hope for you [believers] to put your hearts at rest- help comes only from God, the Mighty, the Wise
and in order to cut off the flanks of the disbelievers’ army and frustrate them, to make them withdraw in total defeat
Whether God relents towards them or punishes them is not for you [Prophet] to decide: they are wrongdoers
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God. He forgives whoever He will and punishes whoever He will: God is most forgiving and merciful
You who believe, do not consume usurious interest, doubled and redoubled. Be mindful of God so that you may prosper
beware of the Fire prepared for those who ignore [Him]
and obey God and the Prophet so that you may be given mercy
Hurry towards your Lord’s forgiveness and a Garden as wide as the heavens and earth prepared for the righteous
who give, both in prosperity and adversity, who restrain their anger and pardon people- God loves those who do good
those who remember God and implore forgiveness for their sins if they do something shameful or wrong themselves- who forgives sins but God?- and who never knowingly persist in doing wrong
The reward for such people is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens graced with flowing streams, where they will remain. How excellent is the reward of those who labour
God’s ways have operated before your time: travel through the land, and see what was the end of those who disbelieved
This is a clear lesson to people, and guidance and teaching for those who are mindful of God
Do not lose heart or despair- if you are true believers you have the upper hand
if you have suffered a blow, they too have suffered one like it. We deal out such days among people in turn, for God to find out who truly believes, for Him to choose martyrs from among you- God does not love evildoers
for Him to cleanse those who believe and for Him to destroy the disbelievers
Did you think you would enter the Garden without God first proving which of you would struggle for His cause and remain steadfast
Before you encountered death, you were hoping for it. Well, now you have seen it with your own eyes
Muhammad is only a messenger before whom many messengers have been and gone. If he died or was killed, would you revert to your old ways? If anyone did so, he would not harm God in the least. God will reward the grateful
No soul may die except with God’s permission at a predestined time. If anyone strives for the rewards of this world, We will give him some of them. If anyone strives for the rewards of the Hereafter, We will give him some of them: We will reward the grateful
Many prophets have fought, with large bands of godly men alongside them who, in the face of their sufferings for God’s cause, did not lose heart or weaken or surrender: God loves those who are steadfast
All they said was, ‘Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our excesses. Make our feet firm, and give us help against the disbelievers,’
and so God gave them both the rewards of this world and the excellent rewards of the Hereafter: God loves those who do good
You who believe, if you obey the disbelievers, they will make you revert to your old ways and you will turn into losers
No indeed! It is God who is your protector: He is the best of helpers
We will strike panic into the disbelievers’ hearts because they attribute partners to God although He has sent no authority for this: their shelter will be the Fire- how miserable is the home of the evildoers
God fulfilled His promise to you: you were routing them, with His permission, but then you faltered, disputed the order, and disobeyed, once He had brought you within sight of your goal- some of you desire the gains of this world and others desire the world to come- and then He prevented you from [defeating] them as a punishment. He has now forgiven you: God is most gracious to the believers
You fled without looking back while the Messenger was calling out to you from behind, and God rewarded you with sorrow for sorrow. [He has now forgiven you] so that you may not grieve for what you missed or for what happened to you. God is well aware of everything you do
After sorrow, He caused calm to descend upon you, a sleep that overtook some of you. Another group, caring only for themselves, entertained false thoughts about God, thoughts more appropriate to pagan ignorance, and said, ‘Do we get a say in any of this?’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘Everything to do with this affair is in God’s hands.’ They conceal in their hearts things they will not reveal to you. They say, ‘If we had had our say in this, none of us would have been killed here.’ Tell them, ‘Even if you had resolved to stay at home, those who were destined to be killed would still have gone out to meet their deaths.’ God did this in order to test everything within you and in order to prove what is in your hearts. God knows your innermost thoughts very well
As for those of you who turned away on the day the two armies met in battle, it was Satan who caused them to slip, through some of their actions. God has now pardoned them: God is most forgiving and forbearing
You who believe, do not be like those who disbelieved and said of their brothers who went out on a journey or a raid, ‘If only they had stayed with us they would not have died or been killed,’ for God will make such thoughts a source of anguish in their hearts. It is God who gives life and death; God sees everything you do
Whether you are killed for God’s cause or die, God’s forgiveness and mercy are better than anything people amass
Whether you die or are killed, it is to God that you will be gathered
By an act of mercy from God, you [Prophet] were gentle in your dealings with them- had you been harsh, or hard-hearted, they would have dispersed and left you- so pardon them and ask forgiveness for them. Consult with them about matters, then, when you have decided on a course of action, put your trust in God: God loves those who put their trust in Him
If God helps you [believers], no one can overcome you; if He forsakes you, who else can help you? Believers should put their trust in God
It is inconceivable that a prophet would ever dishonestly take something from the battle gains. Anyone who does so will carry it with him on the Day of Resurrection, when each soul will be fully repaid for what it has done: no one will be wronged
Can the man who pursues God’s good pleasure be like the man who has brought God’s wrath upon himself and whose home will be Hell- a foul destination
They are in a different class in God’s eyes; God sees exactly what they do
God has been truly gracious to the believers in sending them a Messenger from among their own, to recite His revelations to them, to make them grow in purity, and to teach them the Scripture and wisdom- before that they were clearly astray
Why do you [believers] say, when a calamity befalls you, even after you have inflicted twice as much damage [on your enemy], ‘How did this happen?’? [Prophet], say, ‘You brought it upon yourselves.’ God has power over everything
what befell you on the day the two armies met in battle happened with God’s permission and in order for Him to see who were the true believers and who were the hypocrites who
when it was said to them, ‘Come, fight for God’s cause, or at least defend yourselves,’ answered, ‘We would follow you if we knew there was going to be fighting.’ On that day they were closer to disbelief than belief. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts: God knows exactly what they conceal
As for those who stayed behind, and said of their brothers, ‘If only they had listened to us, they would not have been killed,’ tell them [Prophet], ‘Ward off death from yourselves, if what you say is true.’
[Prophet], do not think of those who have been killed in God’s way as dead. They are alive with their Lord, well provided for
happy with what God has given them of His favour; rejoicing that for those they have left behind who have yet to join them there is no fear, nor will they grieve
[rejoicing] in God’s blessing and favour, and that God will not let the reward of the believers be lost
Those who responded to God and the Messenger after suffering defeat, who do good and remain conscious of God, will have a great reward
Those whose faith only increased when people said, ‘Fear your enemy: they have amassed a great army against you,’ and who replied, ‘God is enough for us: He is the best protector,’
returned with grace and bounty from God; no harm befell them. They pursued God’s good pleasure. God’s favour is great indeed
It is Satan who urges you to fear his followers; do not fear them, but fear Me, if you are true believers
[Prophet], do not be grieved by those who are quick to disbelieve. They will not harm God in the least; it is God’s will that they will have no share in the Hereafter- a terrible torment awaits them
Those who sell their faith for disbelief will not harm God in any way; agonizing torment awaits them
The disbelievers should not think that it is better for them that We give them more time: when We give them more time they become more sinful- a shameful torment awaits them
Nor was it God’s aim to leave you as you were, with no separation between the bad and the good. God would not show you [people] what is hidden; God chooses as His messengers whoever He will. So believe in God and His messengers: if you believe and stay mindful of God, you will have a great reward
Those who are miserly with what God has granted them out of His grace should not think that it is good for them; on the contrary, it is bad for them. Whatever they meanly withhold will be hung around their necks on the Day of Resurrection. It is God who will inherit the heavens and earth: God is well aware of everything you do
God has certainly heard the words of those who sneer, ‘So God is poor, while we are rich’. We shall record everything they say––as well as their killing of prophets in defiance of all that is right- and We shall say to them, ‘Taste the torment of the scorching fire
That is on account of what you stored up for yourselves with your own hands: God is never unjust to His servants.’
To those who say, ‘God has commanded us not to believe in any messenger unless he brings us an offering that fire [from heaven] consumes,’ say [Prophet], ‘Messengers before me have come to you with clear signs, including the one you mention. If you are sincere, why did you kill them?’
If they reject you, so have other messengers been rejected before you, even though they came with clear evidence, books of wisdom and enlightening scripture
Every soul will taste death and you will be paid in full only on the Day of Resurrection. Whoever is kept away from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will have triumphed. The present world is only an illusory pleasure
you are sure to be tested through your possessions and persons; you are sure to hear much that is hurtful from those who were given the Scripture before you and from those who associate others with God. If you are steadfast and mindful of God, that is the best course
God took a pledge from those who were given the Scripture- ‘Make it known to people; do not conceal it’- but they tossed the pledge over their shoulders, they bartered it for a small price: what a bad bargain they made
Do not think [Prophet] that those who exult in what they have done and seek praise for things they have not done will escape the torment; agonizing torment awaits them
Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God; God has power over everything
There truly are signs in the creation of the heavens and earth, and in the alternation of night and day, for those with understanding
who remember God standing, sitting, and lying down, who reflect on the creation of the heavens and earth: ‘Our Lord! You have not created all this without purpose- You are far above that!- so protect us from the torment of the Fire
Our Lord! You will truly humiliate those You commit to the Fire. The evildoers have no one to help them
Our Lord! We have heard someone calling us to faith- “ Believe in your Lord”- and we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, wipe out our bad deeds, and grant that we join the righteous when we die
Our Lord! Bestow upon us all that You have promised us through Your messengers- do not humiliate us on the Day of Resurrection- You never break Your promise.’
Their Lord has answered them: ‘I will not allow the deeds of any one of you to be lost, whether you are male or female, each is like the other [in rewards]. I will certainly wipe out the bad deeds of those who emigrated and were driven out of their homes, who suffered harm for My cause, who fought and were killed. I will certainly admit them to Gardens graced with flowing streams, as a reward from God: the best reward is with God.’
[Prophet], do not be deceived by the disbelievers’ [lucrative] trading to and fro in the land
this is only a brief enjoyment, after which Hell will be their home- a miserable resting place
But those who were mindful of their Lord will have Gardens graced with flowing streams where they will stay as a reward from God. What God has is best for those who are truly good
Some of the People of the Book believe in God, in what has been sent down to you and in what was sent down to them: humbling themselves before God, they would never sell God’s revelation for a small price. These people will have their rewards with their Lord: God is swift in reckoning
You who believe, be steadfast, more steadfast than others; be ready; always be mindful of God, so that you may prosper
People, be mindful of your Lord, who created you from a single soul, and from it created its mate, and from the pair of them spread countless men and women far and wide; be mindful of God, in whose name you make requests of one another. Beware of severing the ties of kinship: God is always watching over you
Give orphans their property, do not replace [their] good things with bad, and do not consume their property with your own- a great sin
If you fear that you will not deal fairly with orphan girls, you may marry whichever [other] women seem good to you, two, three, or four. If you fear that you cannot be equitable [to them], then marry only one, or your slave(s): that is more likely to make you avoid bias
Give women their bridal gift upon marriage, though if they are happy to give up some of it for you, you may enjoy it with a clear conscience
Do not entrust your property to the feeble-minded. God has made it a means of support for you: make provision for them from it, clothe them, and address them kindly
Test orphans until they reach marriageable age; then, if you find they have sound judgement, hand over their property to them. Do not consume it hastily before they come of age: if the guardian is well off he should abstain from the orphan’s property, and if he is poor he should use only what is fair. When you give them their property, call witnesses in; but God takes full account of everything you do
Men shall have a share in what their parents and closest relatives leave, and women shall have a share in what their parents and closest relatives leave, whether the legacy be small or large: this is ordained by God
If other relatives, orphans, or needy people are present at the distribution, give them something too, and speak kindly to them
Let those who would fear for the future of their own helpless children, if they were to die, show the same concern [for orphans]; let them be mindful of God and speak out for justice
Those who consume the property of orphans unjustly are actually swallowing fire into their own bellies: they will burn in the blazing Flame
Concerning your children, God commands you that a son should have the equivalent share of two daughters. If there are only daughters, two or more should share two-thirds of the inheritance, if one, she should have half. Parents inherit a sixth each if the deceased leaves children; if he leaves no children and his parents are his sole heirs, his mother has a third, unless he has brothers, in which case she has a sixth. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or debts. You cannot know which of your parents or your children is more beneficial to you: this is a law from God, and He is all knowing, all wise
You inherit half of what your wives leave, if they have no children; if they have children, you inherit a quarter. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or debts. If you have no children, your wives’ share is a quarter; if you have children, your wives get an eighth. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or debts. If a man or a woman dies leaving no children or parents, but a single brother or sister, he or she should take one-sixth of the inheritance; if there are more siblings, they share one-third between them. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or debts, with no harm done to anyone: this is a commandment from God: God is all knowing and benign to all
These are the bounds set by God: God will admit those who obey Him and His Messenger to Gardens graced with flowing streams, and there they will stay- that is the supreme triumph
But those who disobey God and His Messenger and overstep His limits will be consigned by God to the Fire, and there they will stay- a humiliating torment awaits them
If any of your women commit a lewd act, call four witnesses from among you, then, if they testify to their guilt, keep the women at home until death comes to them or until God shows them another way
If two men commit a lewd act, punish them both; if they repent and mend their ways, leave them alone- God is always ready to accept repentance, He is full of mercy
But God only undertakes to accept repentance from those who do evil out of ignorance and soon afterwards repent: these are the ones God will forgive, He is all knowing, all wise
It is not true repentance when people continue to do evil until death confronts them and then say, ‘Now I repent,’ nor when they die defiant: We have prepared a painful torment for these
You who believe, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will, nor should you treat your wives harshly, hoping to take back some of the bride-gift you gave them, unless they are guilty of something clearly outrageous. Live with them in accordance with what is fair and kind: if you dislike them, it may well be that you dislike something in which God has put much good
If you wish to replace one wife with another, do not take any of her bride-gift back, even if you have given her a great amount of gold
How could you take it when this is unjust and a blatant sin? How could you take it when you have lain with each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you
Do not marry women that your fathers married- with the exception of what is past- this is indeed a shameful thing to do, loathsome and leading to evil
You are forbidden to take as wives your mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal and maternal aunts, the daughters of brothers and daughters of sisters, your milk-mothers and milk-sisters, your wives’ mothers, the stepdaughters in your care- those born of women with whom you have consummated marriage, if you have not consummated the marriage, then you will not be blamed- wives of your begotten sons, two sisters simultaneously- with the exception of what is past: God is most forgiving and merciful
women already married, other than your slaves.God has ordained all this for you. Other women are lawful to you, so long as you seek them in marriage, with gifts from your property, looking for wedlock rather than fornication. If you wish to enjoy women through marriage, give them their bride-gift- this is obligatory- though if you should choose mutually, after fulfilling this obligation, to do otherwise [with the bride-gift], you will not be blamed: God is all knowing and all wise
If any of you does not have the means to marry a believing free woman, then marry a believing slave- God knows best [the depth of] your faith: you are [all] part of the same family- so marry them with their people’s consent and their proper bride-gifts. [Make them] married women, not adulteresses or lovers. If they commit adultery when they are married, their punishment will be half that of free women. This is for those of you who fear that you will sin; it is better for you to practise selfrestraint. God is most forgiving and merciful
He wishes to make His laws clear to you and guide you to the righteous ways of those who went before you. He wishes to turn towards you in mercy- He is all knowing, all wise
He wishes to turn towards you, but those who follow their lusts want you to go far astray
God wishes to lighten your burden; man was created weak
You who believe, do not wrongfully consume each other’s wealth but trade by mutual consent. Do not kill each other, for God is merciful to you
If any of you does these things, out of hostility and injustice, We shall make him suffer Fire: that is easy for God
But if you avoid the great sins you have been forbidden, We shall wipe out your minor misdeeds and let you in through the entrance of honour
Do not covet what God has given to some of you more than others- men have the portion they have earned; and women the portion they have earned- you should rather ask God for some of His bounty: He has full knowledge of everything
We have appointed heirs for everything that parents and close relatives leave behind, including those to whom you have pledged your hands [in marriage], so give them their share: God is witness to everything
Husbands should take good care of their wives, with [the bounties] God has given to some more than others and with what they spend out of their own money. Righteous wives are devout and guard what God would have them guard in their husbands’ absence. If you fear high-handedness from your wives, remind them [of the teachings of God], then ignore them when you go to bed, then hit them.If they obey you, you have no right to act against them: God is most high and great
If you [believers] fear that a couple may break up, appoint one arbiter from his family and one from hers. Then, if the couple want to put things right, God will bring about a reconciliation between them: He is all knowing, all aware
Worship God; join nothing with Him. Be good to your parents, to relatives, to orphans, to the needy, to neighbours near and far, to travellers in need, and to your slaves. God does not like arrogant, boastful people
who are miserly and order other people to be the same, hiding the bounty God has given them. We have prepared a humiliating torment for such ungrateful people
[Nor does He like those] who spend their wealth to show off, who do not believe in Him or the Last Day. Whoever has Satan as his companion has an evil companion
What harm would it do them to believe in God and the Last Day, and give charitably from the sustenance God has given them? God knows them well
He does not wrong anyone by as much as the weight of a speck of dust: He doubles any good deed and gives a tremendous reward of His own
What will they do when We bring a witness from each community, with you [Muhammad] as a witness against these people
On that day, those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Prophet will wish that the earth could swallow them up: they will not be able to hide anything from God
You who believe, do not come anywhere near the prayer if you are intoxicated, not until you know what you are saying; nor if you are in a state of major ritual impurity- though you may pass through the mosque- not until you have bathed; if you are ill, on a journey, have relieved yourselves, or had intercourse, and cannot find any water, then find some clean sand and wipe your faces and hands with it. God is always ready to pardon and forgive
[Prophet], have you not considered how those who were given a share of the Scripture purchase misguidance and want you [believers], too, to lose the right path
God knows your enemies best: God is enough to protect and to help you
Some Jews distort the meaning of [revealed] words: they say, ‘We hear and disobey,’ and ‘Listen,’ [adding the insult] ‘May you not hear,’ and ‘Raina [Look at us],’ twisting it abusively with their tongues so as to disparage religion. If they had said, ‘We hear and obey,’ ‘Listen,’ and ‘Unzurna [Look at us],’ that would have been better and more proper for them. But God has spurned them for their defiance; they believe very little
People of the Book, believe in what We have sent down to confirm what you already have before We wipe out [your sense of ] direction, turning you back, or reject you, as We rejected those who broke the Sabbath: God’s will is always done
God does not forgive the joining of partners with Him: anything less than that He forgives to whoever He will, but anyone who joins partners with God has concocted a tremendous sin
[Prophet], have you considered those who claim purity for themselves? No! God purifies whoever He will: no one will be wronged by as much as the husk of a date stone
See how they invent lies about God, this in itself is a flagrant sin
Do you not see how those given a share of the Scripture, [evidently] now believe in idols and evil powers? They say of the disbelievers, ‘They are more rightly guided than the believers.’
Those are the ones God has rejected: you [Prophet] will not find anyone to help those God has rejected
Do they have any share of what He possesses? If they did they would not give away so much as the groove of a date stone
Do they envy [other] people for the bounty God has granted them? We gave the descendants of Abraham the Scripture and wisdom- and We gave them a great kingdom
but some of them believed in it and some turned away from it. Hell blazes fiercely enough
We shall send those who reject Our revelations to the Fire. When their skins have been burned away, We shall replace them with new ones so that they may continue to feel the pain: God is mighty and wise
As for those who believe and do good deeds, We shall admit them into Gardens graced with flow-ing streams and there they will remain forever. They will have pure spouses there, and We shall admit them into cool refreshing shade
God commands you [people] to return things entrusted to you to their rightful owners, and, if you judge between people, to do so with justice: God’s instructions to you are excellent, for He hears and sees everything
You who believe, obey God and the Messenger, and those in authority among you. If you are in dispute over any matter, refer it to God and the Messenger, if you truly believe in God and the Last Day: that is better and fairer in the end
Do you [Prophet] not see those who claim to believe in what has been sent down to you, and in what was sent down before you, yet still want to turn to unjust tyrants for judgement, although they have been ordered to reject them? Satan wants to lead them far astray
When they are told, ‘Turn to God’s revelations and the Messenger [for judgement],’ you see the hypocrites turn right away from you [Prophet]
If disaster strikes them because of what they themselves have done, then they will come to you, swearing by God, ‘We only wanted to do good and achieve harmony.’
God knows well what is in the hearts of these people, so ignore what they say, instruct them, and speak to them about themselves using penetrating words
All the messengers We sent were meant to be obeyed, by God’s leave. If only [the hypocrites] had come to you [Prophet] when they wronged themselves, and begged God’s forgiveness, and the Messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found that God accepts repentance and is most merciful
By your Lord, they will not be true believers until they let you decide between them in all matters of dispute, and find no resistance in their souls to your decisions, accepting them totally
if We had ordered, ‘Lay down your lives’ or ‘Leave your homes,’ they would not have done so, except for a few- it would have been far better for them and stronger confirmation of their faith, if they had done as they were told
and We would have given them a rich reward of Our own
and guided them to a straight path
Whoever obeys God and the Messenger will be among those He has blessed: the messengers, the truthful, those who bear witness to the truth, and the righteous- what excellent companions these are
That is God’s favour. No one knows better than Him
You who believe, be on your guard. March [to battle] in small groups or as one body
Among you there is the sort of person who is sure to lag behind: if a calamity befalls you, he says, ‘God has been gracious to me that I was not there with them,’
yet he is sure to say, if you are favoured by God, ‘If only I had been with them, I could have made great gains,’ as if there had been no ties of affection between you and him
Let those of you who are willing to trade the life of this world for the life to come, fight in God’s way. To anyone who fights in God’s way, whether killed or victorious, We shall give a great reward
Why should you not fight in God’s cause and for those oppressed men, women, and children who cry out, ‘Lord, rescue us from this town whose people are oppressors! By Your grace, give us a protector and give us a helper!’
The believers fight for God’s cause, while those who reject faith fight for an unjust cause. Fight the allies of Satan: Satan’s strategies are truly weak
[Prophet], do you not see those who were told, ‘Restrain yourselves from fighting, perform the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms’? When fighting was ordained for them, some of them feared men as much as, or even more than, they feared God, saying, ‘Lord, why have You ordained fighting for us? If only You would give us just a little more time.’ Say to them, ‘Little is the enjoyment in this world, the Hereafter is far better for those who are mindful of God: you will not be wronged by as much as the fibre in a date stone
Death will overtake you no matter where you may be, even inside high towers.’ When good fortune comes their way, they say, ‘This is from God,’ but when harm befalls them, they say, ‘This is from you [Prophet].’ Say to them, ‘Both come from God.’ What is the matter with these people that they can barely understand what they are told
Anything good that happens to you [Prophet] is from God; anything bad is [ultimately] from yourself. We have sent you as a messenger to people; God is sufficient witness
Whoever obeys the Messenger obeys God. If some pay no heed, We have not sent you to be their keeper
They say, ‘We obey you,’ but as soon as they leave your presence, some of them scheme by night to do other than what you said. God records what they scheme, so leave them alone, and put your trust in God: He is sufficient protector
Will they not think about this Quran? If it had been from anyone other than God, they would have found much inconsistency in it
Whenever news of any matter comes to them, whether concerning peace or war, they spread it about; if they referred it to the Messenger and those in authority among them, those seeking its meaning would have found it out from them. If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy towards you, you would almost all have followed Satan
So [Prophet] fight in God’s way. You are accountable only for yourself. Urge the believers on. God may well curb the power of the disbelievers, for He is stronger in might and more terrible in punishment
Whoever speaks for a good cause will share in its benefits and whoever speaks for a bad cause will share in its burden: God controls everything
But [even in battle] when you [believers] are offered a greeting, respond with a better one, or at least return it: God keeps account of everything
He is God: there is no god but Him. He will gather you all together on the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. Whose word can be truer than God’s
[Believers], why are you divided in two about the hypocrites, when God Himself has rejected them because of what they have done? Do you want to guide those God has left to stray? If God leaves anyone to stray, you [Prophet] will never find the way for him
They would dearly like you to reject faith, as they themselves have done, to be like them. So do not take them as allies until they migrate [to Medina] for God’s cause. If they turn [on you], then seize and kill them wherever you encounter them. Take none of them as an ally or supporter
But as for those who seek refuge with people with whom you have a treaty, or who come over to you because their hearts shrink from fighting against you or against their own people, God could have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. So if they withdraw and do not fight you, and offer you peace, then God gives you no way against them
You will find others who wish to be safe from you, and from their own people, but whenever they are back in a situation where they are tempted [to fight you], they succumb to it. So if they neither withdraw, nor offer you peace, nor restrain themselves from fighting you, seize and kill them wherever you encounter them: We give you clear authority against such people
Never should a believer kill another believer, except by mistake. If anyone kills a believer by mistake he must free one Muslim slave and pay compensation to the victim’s relatives, unless they charitably forgo it; if the victim belonged to a people at war with you but is a believer, then the compensation is only to free a believing slave; if he belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, then compensation should be handed over to his relatives, and a believing slave set free. Anyone who lacks the means to do this must fast for two consecutive months by way of repentance to God: God is all knowing, all wise
If anyone kills a believer deliberately, the punishment for him is Hell, and there he will remain: God is angry with him, and rejects him, and has prepared a tremendous torment for him
So, you who believe, be careful when you go to fight in God’s way, and do not say to someone who offers you a greeting of peace, ‘You are not a believer,’ out of desire for the chance gains of this life- God has plenty of gains for you. You yourself were in the same position [once], but God was gracious to you, so be careful: God is fully aware of what you do
Those believers who stay at home, apart from those with an incapacity, are not equal to those who commit themselves and their possessions to striving in God’s way. God has raised such people to a rank above those who stay at home- although He has promised all believers a good reward, those who strive are favoured with a tremendous reward above those who stay at home
high ranks conferred by Him, as well as forgiveness, and mercy: God is most forgiving and merciful
When the angels take the souls of those who have wronged themselves, they ask them, ‘What circumstances were you in?’ They reply, ‘We were oppressed in this land,’ and the angels say, ‘But was God’s earth not spacious enough for you to migrate to some other place?’ These people will have Hell as their refuge, an evil destination
but not so the truly helpless men, women, and children who have no means in their power nor any way to leave
God may well pardon these, for He is most pardoning and most forgiving. Anyone who migrates for God’s cause will find many a refuge and great plenty in the earth
and if anyone leaves home as a migrant towards God and His Messenger and is then overtaken by death, his reward from God is sure. God is most forgiving and most merciful
When you [believers] are travelling in the land, you will not be blamed for shortening your prayers, if you fear the disbelievers may harm you: they are your sworn enemies
When you [Prophet] are with the believers, leading them in prayer, let a group of them stand up in prayer with you, taking their weapons with them, and when they have finished their prostration, let them take up their positions at the back. Then let the other group, who have not yet prayed, pray with you, also on their guard and armed with their weapons: the disbelievers would dearly like you to be heedless of your weapons and baggage, in order for them to take you in a single assault. You will not be blamed if you lay aside your arms when you are overtaken by heavy rain or illness, but be on your guard. Indeed, God has prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers
After performing the ritual prayer, continue to remember God- standing, sitting, and lying on your sides- and once you are safe, keep up regular prayer, for prayer is obligatory for the believers at prescribed times
Do not be faint-hearted in pursuing the enemy: if you are suffering hardship, so are they, but you hope to receive something from God for which they cannot hope. God is all knowing and wise
We have sent down the Scripture to you [Prophet] with the truth so that you can judge between people in accordance with what God has shown you. Do not be an advocate for those who betray trust
Ask God for forgiveness: He is most forgiving and merciful
Do not argue for those who betray their own souls: God does not love anyone given to treachery and sin
They try to hide themselves from people, but they cannot hide from God. He is with them when they plot at night, saying things that do not please Him: He is fully aware of everything they do
There you [believers] are, arguing on their behalf in this life, but who will argue on their behalf with God on the Day of Resurrection? Who will be their defender
Yet anyone who does evil or wrongs his own soul and then asks God for forgiveness will find Him most forgiving and merciful
He who commits sin does so against his own soul- God is all knowing and wise
and anyone who commits an offence or a sin, and then throws the blame on to some innocent person, has burdened himself with deceit as well as flagrant sin
If it were not for the grace of God and His mercy to you [Prophet], a party of them would have tried to lead you astray; they only lead themselves astray, and cannot harm you in any way, since God has sent down the Scripture and Wisdom to you, and taught you what you did not know. God’s bounty to you is great indeed
There is no good in most of their secret talk, only in commanding charity, or good, or reconciliation between people. To anyone who does these things, seeking to please God, We shall give a rich reward
if anyone opposes the Messenger, after guidance has been made clear to him, and follows a path other than that of the believers, We shall leave him on his chosen path- We shall burn him in Hell, an evil destination
God does not forgive the worship of others beside Him- though He does forgive whoever He will for lesser sins- for whoever does this has gone far, far astray
In His place the idolaters invoke only females, and Satan, the rebel
God rejected, who said, ‘I will certainly take my due share of Your servants
I will mislead them and incite vain desires in them; I will command them to slit the ears of cattle; I will command them to tamper with God’s creation.’ Whoever chooses Satan as a patron instead of God is utterly ruined
he makes them promises and raises false hopes, but Satan’s promises are nothing but delusion
Such people will have Hell for their home and will find no escape from it
but We shall admit those who believe and do good deeds into Gardens graced with flowing streams, there to remain for ever––a true promise from God. Who speaks more truly than God
It will not be according to your hopes or those of the People of the Book: anyone who does wrong will be requited for it and will find no one to protect or help him against God
anyone, male or female, who does good deeds and is a believer, will enter Paradise and will not be wronged by as much as the dip in a date stone
Who could be better in religion than those who direct themselves wholly to God, do good, and follow the religion of Abraham, who was true in faith? God took Abraham as a friend
It is to God that everything in the heavens and earth belongs: God is fully aware of all things
They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling about women. Say, ‘God Himself gives you a ruling about them. You already have what has been recited to you in the Scripture about orphan girls [in your charge] from whom you withhold the prescribed shares [of their inheritance] and whom you wish to marry, and also about helpless children- God instructs you to treat orphans fairly: He is well aware of whatever good you do.’
If a wife fears high-handedness or alienation from her husband, neither of them will be blamed if they come to a peaceful settlement, for peace is best. Although human souls are prone to selfishness, if you do good and are mindful of God, He is well aware of all that you do
You will never be able to treat your wives with equal fairness, however much you may desire to do so, but do not ignore one wife altogether, leaving her suspended [between marriage and divorce]. If you make amends and remain conscious of God, He is most forgiving and merciful
but if husband and wife do separate, God will provide for each out of His plenty: He is infinite in plenty, and all wise
Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to God. We have commanded those who were given the Scripture before you, and We command you, to be mindful of God. Even if you do ignore Him, everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him, and He is self-sufficient, worthy of all praise
Yes, indeed, everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to God, and He is enough for those who trust in Him
If He so willed, He could remove you altogether and replace you with new people: He has full power to do so
If some want the rewards of this world, the rewards of this world and the next are both God’s to give: He hears and sees everything
You who believe, uphold justice and bear witness to God, even if it is against yourselves, your parents, or your close relatives. Whether the person is rich or poor, God can best take care of both. Refrain from following your own desire, so that you can act justly- if you distort or neglect justice, God is fully aware of what you do
You who believe, believe in God and His Messenger and in the Scripture He sent down to His Messenger, as well as what He sent down before. Anyone who does not believe in God, His angels, His Scriptures, His messengers, and the Last Day has gone far, far astray
As for those who believe, then reject the faith, then believe again, then reject the faith again and become increasingly defiant, God will not forgive them, nor will He guide them on any path
[Prophet], tell such hypocrites that an agonizing torment awaits them
Do those who ally themselves with the disbelievers rather than the believers seek power through them? In reality all power is God’s to give
As He has already revealed to you [believers] in the Scripture, if you hear people denying and ridiculing God’s revelation, do not sit with them unless they start to talk of other things, or else you yourselves will become like them: God will gather all the hypocrites and disbelievers together into Hell
The [hypocrites] wait to see what happens to you and, if God brings you success, they say, ‘Were we not on your side?’ but if the disbelievers have some success, they say to them, ‘Did we not have the upper hand over you, and [yet] protect you from the believers?’ God will judge between you all on the Day of Resurrection, and He will give the disbelievers no means of overcoming the believers
The hypocrites try to deceive God, but it is He who causes them to be deceived. When they stand up to pray, they do so sluggishly, showing off in front of people, and remember God only a little
wavering all the time between this and that, belonging neither to one side nor the other. If God leaves someone to stray, you [Prophet] will never find a way for him
You who believe, do not take the disbelievers as allies and protectors instead of the believers: do you want to offer God clear proof against you
The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of Hell, and you will find no one to help them
Not so those who repent, mend their ways, hold fast to God, and devote their religion entirely to Him: these will be joined with the believers, and God will give the believers a mighty reward
Why should God make you suffer torment if you are thankful and believe in Him? God always rewards gratitude and He knows everything
God does not like bad words to be made public unless someone has been wronged: He is all hearing and all knowing
If you do good, openly or in secret, or if you pardon something bad,then God is most forgiving and powerful
As for those who ignore God and His messengers and want to make a distinction between them, saying, ‘We believe in some but not in others,’ seeking a middle way
they are really disbelievers: We have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who disbelieve
But God will give [due] rewards to those who believe in Him and His messengers and make no distinction between any of them. God is most forgiving and merciful
The People of the Book demand that you [Prophet] make a book physically come down to them from heaven, but they demanded even more than that of Moses when they said, ‘Show us God face to face,’ and were struck by the thunderbolt for their presumption. Even after clear revelations had come down to them, they took the calf as an object of worship, yet We pardoned this, and gave Moses clear authority
We made the mountain tower high above them at their pledge; We said to them, ‘Enter the gate humbly,’ and, ‘Do not break the Sabbath,’ and took a solemn pledge from them
And so for breaking their pledge, for rejecting God’s revelations, for unjustly killing their prophets, for saying ‘Our minds are closed’- No! God has sealed them in their disbelief, so they believe only a little
and because they disbelieved and uttered a terrible slander against Mary
and said, ‘We have killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of God.’ (They did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, though it was made to appear like that to them; those that disagreed about him are full of doubt, with no knowledge to follow, only supposition: they certainly did not kill him)
God raised him up to Himself. God is almighty and wise
There is not one of the People of the Book who will not believe in [Jesus] before his death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness against them
For the wrongdoings done by the Jews, We forbade them certain good things that had been permitted to them before: for having frequently debarred others from God’s path
for taking usury when they had been forbidden to do so; and for wrongfully devouring other people’s property. For those of them that reject the truth we have prepared an agonizing torment
But those of them who are well grounded in knowledge and have faith do believe in what has been revealed to you [Muhammad], and in what was revealed before you- those who perform the prayers, pay the prescribed alms, and believe in God and the Last Day- to them We shall give a great reward
We have sent revelation to you [Prophet] as We did to Noah and the prophets after him, to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon- to David We gave the book [of Psalms]
to other messengers We have already mentioned to you, and also to some We have not. To Moses God spoke directly
They were messengers bearing good news and warning, so that mankind would have no excuse before God, once the messengers had been sent: God is almighty and all wise
But God Himself bears witness to what He has sent down to you––He sent it down with His full knowledge- the angels too bear witness, though God is sufficient witness
Those who have disbelieved and barred others from God’s path have gone far astray
God will not forgive those who have disbelieved and do evil, nor will He guide them to any path
except that of Hell, where they will remain for ever- this is easy for God
The Messenger has come to you [people] with the truth from your Lord, so believe- that is best for you- for even if you disbelieve, all that is in the heavens and the earth still belongs to God, and He is all knowing and all wise
People of the Book, do not go to excess in your religion, and do not say anything about God except the truth: the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was nothing more than a messenger of God, His word, directed to Mary, a spirit from Him. So believe in God and His messengers and do not speak of a ‘Trinity’- stop [this], that is better for you- God is only one God, He is far above having a son, everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Him and He is the best one to trust
The Messiah would never disdain to be a servant of God, nor would the angels who are close to Him. He will gather before Him all those who disdain His worship and are arrogant
to those who believe and do good works He will give due rewards and more of His bounty; to those who are disdainful and arrogant He will give an agonizing torment, and they will find no one besides God to protect or help them
People, convincing proof has come to you from your Lord and We have sent a clear light down to you
God will admit those who believe in Him and hold fast to Him into His mercy and favour; He will guide them towards Him on a straight path
They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling. Say, ‘God gives you a ruling about inheritance from someone who dies childless with no surviving parents. If a man leaves a sister, she is entitled to half of the inheritance; if she has no child her brother is her sole heir; if there are two sisters, they are entitled to two-thirds of the inheritance between them, but if there are surviving brothers and sisters, the male is entitled to twice the share of the female. God makes this clear to you so that you do not make mistakes: He has full knowledge of everything.’
You who believe, fulfil your obligations. Livestock animals are lawful as food for you, with the exception of what is about to be announced to you. You are forbidden to kill game while you are on pilgrimage––God commands what He will
so, you who believe, do not violate the sanctity of God’s rites, the Sacred Month, the offerings, their garlands, nor those going to the Sacred House to seek the bounty and pleasure of their Lord––but when you have completed the rites of pilgrimage you may hunt. Do not let your hatred for the people who barred you from the Sacred Mosque induce you to break the law: help one another to do what is right and good; do not help one another towards sin and hostility. Be mindful of God, for His punishment is severe
You are forbidden to eat carrion; blood; pig’s meat; any animal over which any name other than God’s has been invoked; any animal strangled, or victim of a violent blow or a fall, or gored or savaged by a beast of prey, unless you still slaughter it [in the correct manner]; or anything sacrificed on idolatrous altars. You are also forbidden to allot shares [of meat] by drawing marked arrows -a heinous practice- today the disbelievers have lost all hope that you will give up your religion. Do not fear them: fear Me. Today I have perfected your religion for you, completed My blessing upon you, and chosen as your religion islam: [total devotion to God]; but if any of you is forced by hunger to eat forbidden food, with no intention of doing wrong, then God is most forgiving and merciful
They ask you, Prophet, what is lawful for them. Say, ‘All good things are lawful for you.’ [This includes] what you have taught your birds and beasts of prey to catch, teaching them as God has taught you, so eat what they catch for you, but first pronounce God’s name over it. Be mindful of God: He is swift to take account
Today all good things have been made lawful for you. The food of the People of the Book is lawful for you as your food is lawful for them. So are chaste, believing, women as well as chaste women of the people who were given the Scripture before you, as long as you have given them their bride-gifts and married them, not taking them as lovers or secret mistresses. The deeds of anyone who rejects faith will come to nothing, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers
You who believe, when you are about to pray, wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, wipe your heads, wash your feet up to the ankles and, if required, wash your whole body. If any of you is sick or on a journey, or has just relieved himself, or had intimate contact with a woman, and can find no water, then take some clean sand and wipe your face and hands with it. God does not wish to place any burden on you: He only wishes to cleanse you and perfect His blessing on you, so that you may be thankful
Remember God’s blessing on you and the pledge with which you were bound when you said, ‘We hear and we obey.’ Be mindful of God: God has full knowledge of the secrets of the heart
You who believe, be steadfast in your devotion to God and bear witness impartially: do not let hatred of others lead you away from justice, but adhere to justice, for that is closer to awareness of God. Be mindful of God: God is well aware of all that you do
God has promised forgiveness and a rich reward to those who have faith and do good works
those who reject faith and deny Our revelations will inhabit the blazing Fire
You who believe, remember God’s blessing on you when a certain people were about to raise their hands against you and He restrained them. Be mindful of God: let the believers put their trust in Him
God took a pledge from the Children of Israel. We made twelve leaders arise among them, and God said, ‘I am with you: if you keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, believe in My messengers and support them, and lend God a good loan, I will wipe out your sins and admit you into Gardens graced with flowing streams. Any of you who now ignore this [pledge] will be far from the right path.’
But they broke their pledge, so We distanced them [from Us] and hardened their hearts. They distort the meaning of [revealed] words and have forgotten some of what they were told to remember: you [Prophet] will always find treachery in all but a few of them. Overlook this and pardon them: God loves those who do good
We also took a pledge from those who say, ‘We are Christians,’ but they too forgot some of what they were told to remember, so We stirred up enmity and hatred among them until the Day of Resurrection, when God will tell them what they have done
People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to make clear to you much of what you have kept hidden of the Scripture, and to overlook much [you have done]. A light has now come to you from God, and a Scripture making things clear
with which God guides to the ways of peace those who follow what pleases Him, bringing them from darkness out into light, by His will, and guiding them to a straight path
Those who say, ‘God is the Messiah, the son of Mary,’ are defying the truth. Say, ‘If it had been God’s will, could anyone have prevented Him from destroying the Messiah, son of Mary, together with his mother and everyone else on earth? Control of the heavens and earth and all that is between them belongs to God: He creates whatever He will. God has power over everything.’
The Jews and the Christians say, ‘We are the children of God and His beloved ones.’ Say, ‘Then why does He punish you for your sins? You are merely human beings, part of His creation: He forgives whoever He will and punishes whoever He will. Control of the heavens and earth and all that is between them belongs to Him: all journeys lead to Him.’
People of the Book, Our Messenger comes to you now, after a break in the sequence of messengers, to make things clear for you in case you should say, ‘No one has come to give us good news or to warn us.’ So someone has come to you, to give you good news and warn you: God has the power to do all things
Moses said to his people, ‘My people, remember God’s blessing on you: how He raised prophets among you and appointed kings for you and gave you what he had not given to any other people
My people, go into the holy land which God has ordained for you––do not turn back or you will be the losers.’
They said, ‘Moses, there is a fearsome people in this land. We will not go there until they leave. If they leave, then we will enter.’
Yet two men whom God had blessed among those who were afraid said, ‘Go in to them through the gate and when you go in you will overcome them. If you are true believers, put your trust in God.’
They said, ‘Moses, we will never enter while they are still there, so you and your Lord go in and fight, and we will stay here.’
He said, ‘Lord, I have authority over no one except myself and my brother: judge between the two of us and these disobedient people.’
God said, ‘The land is forbidden to them for forty years: they will wander the earth aimlessly. Do not grieve over those who disobey.’
[Prophet], tell them the truth about the story of Adam’s two sons: each of them offered a sacrifice, and it was accepted from one and not the other. One said, ‘I will kill you,’ but the other said, ‘God only accepts the sacrifice of those who are mindful of Him
If you raise your hand to kill me, I will not raise mine to kill you. I fear God, the Lord of all worlds
and I would rather you were burdened with my sins as well as yours and became an inhabitant of the Fire: such is the evildoers’ reward.’
But his soul prompted him to kill his brother: he killed him and became one of the losers
God sent a raven to scratch up the ground and show him how to cover his brother’s corpse and he said, ‘Woe is me! Could I not have been like this raven and covered up my brother’s body?’ He became remorseful
On account of [his deed], We decreed to the Children of Israel that if anyone kills a person- unless in retribution for murder or spreading corruption in the land- it is as if he kills all mankind, while if any saves a life it is as if he saves the lives of all mankind. Our messengers came to them with clear signs, but many of them continued to commit excesses in the land
Those who wage war against God and His Messenger and strive to spread corruption in the land should be punished by death, crucifixion, the amputation of an alternate hand and foot, or banishment from the land: a disgrace for them in this world, and then a terrible punishment in the Hereafter
unless they repent before you overpower them- in that case bear in mind that God is forgiving and merciful
You who believe, be mindful of God, seek ways to come closer to Him and strive for His cause, so that you may prosper
If the disbelievers possessed all that is in the earth and twice as much again and offered it to ransom themselves from torment on the Day of Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them- they will have a painful torment
They will wish to come out of the Fire but they will be unable to do so: theirs will be a lasting torment
Cut off the hands of thieves, whether they are man or woman, as punishment for what they have done- a deterrent from God: God is almighty and wise
But if anyone repents after his wrongdoing and makes amends, God will accept his repentance: God is most forgiving, most merciful
Do you [Prophet] not know that control of the heavens and earth belongs solely to God? He punishes whoever He will and forgives whoever He will: God has power over everything
Messenger, do not be grieved by those who race to surpass one another in disbelief- those who say with their mouths, ‘We believe,’ but have no faith in their hearts, and the Jews who listen eagerly to lies and to those who have not even met you, who distort the meanings of [revealed] words and say [to each other], ‘If you are given this ruling, accept it, but if you are not, then beware!’––if God intends some people to be so misguided, you will be powerless against God on their behalf. These are the ones whose hearts God does not intend to cleanse- a disgrace for them in this world, and then a heavy punishment in the Hereafter
they listen eagerly to lies and consume what is unlawful. If they come to you [Prophet] for judgement, you can either judge between them, or decline- if you decline, they will not harm you in any way, but if you do judge between them, judge justly: God loves the just
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the Torah with God’s judgement, and even then still turn away? These are not believers
We revealed the Torah with guidance and light, and the prophets, who had submitted to God, judged according to it for the Jews. So did the rabbis and the scholars in accordance with that part of God’s Scripture which they were entrusted to preserve, and to which they were witnesses. So [rabbis and scholars] do not fear people, fear Me; do not barter away My messages for a small price; those who do not judge according to what God has sent down are rejecting [God’s teachings]
In the Torah We prescribed for them a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, an equal wound for a wound: if anyone forgoes this out of charity, it will serve as atonement for his bad deeds. Those who do not judge according to what God has revealed are doing grave wrong
We sent Jesus, son of Mary, in their footsteps, to confirm the Torah that had been sent before him: We gave him the Gospel with guidance, light, and confirmation of the Torah already revealed- a guide and lesson for those who take heed of God
So let the followers of the Gospel judge according to what God has sent down in it. Those who do not judge according to what God has revealed are lawbreakers
We sent to you [Muhammad] the Scripture with the truth, confirming the Scriptures that came before it, and with final authority over them: so judge between them according to what God has sent down. Do not follow their whims, which deviate from the truth that has come to you. We have assigned a law and a path to each of you. If God had so willed, He would have made you one community, but He wanted to test you through that which He has given you, so race to do good: you will all return to God and He will make clear to you the matters you differed about
So [Prophet] judge between them according to what God has sent down. Do not follow their whims, and take good care that they do not tempt you away from any of what God has sent down to you. If they turn away, remember that God intends to punish them for some of the sins they have committed: a great many people are lawbreakers
Do they want judgement according to the time of pagan ignorance? Is there any better judge than God for those of firm faith
You who believe, do not take the Jews and Christians as allies:they are allies only to each other. Anyone who takes them as an ally becomes one of them- God does not guide such wrongdoers
yet you [Prophet] will see the perverse at heart rushing to them for protection, saying, ‘We are afraid fortune may turn against us.’ But God may well bring about a triumph or some other event of His own making: then they will rue the secrets they harboured in their hearts
and the believers will say, ‘Are these the men who swore by God using their strongest oaths that they were with you?’ All they did was in vain: they have lost everything
You who believe, if any of you go back on your faith, God will soon replace you with people He loves and who love Him, people who are humble towards the believers, hard on the disbelievers, and who strive in God’s way without fearing anyone’s reproach. Such is God’s favour. He grants it to whoever He will. God has endless bounty and knowledge
Your true allies are God, His Messenger, and the believers- those who keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and bow down in worship
Those who turn for protection to God, His Messenger, and the believers [are God’s party]: God’s party is sure to triumph
You who believe, do not take as allies those who ridicule your religion and make fun of it- whether people who were given the Scripture before you, or disbelievers- and be mindful of God if you are true believers
When you make the call to prayer, they ridicule it and make fun of it: this is because they are people who do not reason
Say [Prophet], ‘People of the Book, do you resent us for any reason other than the fact that we believe in God, in what has been sent down to us, and in what was sent before us, while most of you are disobedient?’
Say, ‘Shall I tell you who deserves a worse punishment from God than [the one you wish upon] us? Those God distanced from Himself, was angry with, and condemned as apes and pigs, and those who worship idols: they are worse in rank and have strayed further from the right path
When they come to you [believers], they say, ‘We believe,’ but they come disbelieving and leave disbelieving- God knows best what they are hiding
You [Prophet] see many of them rushing into sin and hostility and consuming what is unlawful. How evil their practices are
Why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them to speak sinfully and consume what is unlawful? How evil their deeds are
The Jews have said, ‘God is tight-fisted,’ but it is they who are tight-fisted, and they are rejected for what they have said. Truly, God’s hands are open wide: He gives as He pleases. What has been sent down to you from your Lord is sure to increase insolence and defiance in many of them. We have sown enmity and hatred amongst them till the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they kindle the fire of war, God will put it out. They try to spread corruption in the land, but God does not love those who corrupt
If only the People of the Book would believe and be mindful of God, We would take away their sins and bring them into the Gardens of Delight
If they had upheld the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent down to them from their Lord, they would have been given abundance from above and from below: some of them are on the right course, but many of them do evil
Messenger, proclaim everything that has been sent down to you from your Lord- if you do not, then you will not have communicated His message- and God will protect you from people. God does not guide those who defy Him
Say, ‘People of the Book, you have no true basis [for your religion] unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel, and that which has been sent down to you from your Lord,’ but what has been sent down to you [Prophet] from your Lord is sure to increase many of them in their insolence and defiance: do not worry about those who defy [God]
For the [Muslim] believers, the Jews, the Sabians, and the Christians- those who believe in God and the Last Day and do good deeds- there is no fear: they will not grieve
We took a pledge from the Children of Israel, and sent messengers to them. Whenever a messenger brought them anything they did not like, they accused some of lying and put others to death
they thought no harm could come to them and so became blind and deaf [to God]. God turned to them in mercy but many of them again became blind and deaf: God is fully aware of their actions
Those who say, ‘God is the Messiah, son of Mary,’ have defied God. The Messiah himself said, ‘Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord and your Lord.’ If anyone associates others with God, God will forbid him from the Garden, and Hell will be his home. No one will help such evildoers
Those people who say that God is the third of three are defying [the truth]: there is only One God. If they persist in what they are saying, a painful punishment will afflict those of them who persist
Why do they not turn to God and ask His forgiveness, when God is most forgiving, most merciful
The Messiah, son of Mary, was only a messenger; other messengers had come and gone before him; his mother was a virtuous woman; both ate food [like other mortals]. See how clear We make these signs for them; see how deluded they are
Say, ‘How can you worship something other than God, that has no power to do you harm or good? God alone is the All Hearing and All Knowing.’
Say, ‘People of the Book, do not overstep the bounds of truth in your religion and do not follow the whims of those who went astray before you- they led many others astray and themselves continue to stray from the even path.’
Those Children of Israel who defied [God] were rejected through the words of David, and Jesus, son of Mary, because they disobeyed, they persistently overstepped the limits
they did not forbid each other to do wrong. How vile their deeds were
You [Prophet] see many of them allying themselves with the disbelievers. How terrible is what their souls have stored up for them: God is angry with them and they will remain tormented
If they had believed in God, in the Prophet, and in what was sent down to him, they would never have allied themselves with the disbelievers, but most of them are rebels
You [Prophet] are sure to find that the most hostile to the believers are the Jews and those who associate other deities with God; you are sure to find that the closest in affection towards the believers are those who say, ‘We are Christians,’ for there are among them people devoted to learning and ascetics. These people are not given to arrogance
and when they listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger, you will see their eyes overflowing with tears because they recognize the Truth [in it]. They say, ‘Our Lord, we believe, so count us amongst the witnesses
Why should we not believe in God and in the Truth that has come down to us, when we long for our Lord to include us in the company of the righteous?’
For saying this, God has rewarded them with Gardens graced with flowing streams, and there they will stay: that is the reward of those who do good
Those who reject the truth and deny Our messages will be the inhabitants of Hellfire
You who believe, do not forbid the good things God has made lawful to you- do not exceed the limits: God does not love those who exceed the limits
but eat the lawful and good things that God provides for you. Be mindful of God, in whom you believe
God does not take you [to task] for what is thoughtless in your oaths, only for your binding oaths: the atonement for breaking an oath is to feed ten poor people with food equivalent to what you would normally give your own families, or to clothe them, or to set free a slave- if a person cannot find the means, he should fast for three days. This is the atonement for breaking your oaths- keep your oaths. In this way God makes clear His revelations to you, so that you may be thankful
You who believe, intoxicants and gambling, idolatrous practices, and [divining with] arrows are repugnant acts- Satan’s doing- shun them so that you may prosper
With intoxicants and gambling, Satan seeks only to incite enmity and hatred among you, and to stop you remembering God and prayer. Will you not give them up
Obey God, obey the Messenger, and always be on your guard: if you pay no heed, bear in mind that the sole duty of Our Messenger is to deliver the message clearly
Those who believe and do good deeds will not be blamed for what they may have consumed [in the past] as long as they are mindful of God, believe and do good deeds, then are mindful of God and believe, then are mindful of God and do good deeds: God loves those who do good deeds
You who believe, God is sure to test you with game within reach of your hands and spears, to find out who fears Him even though they cannot see Him: from now on, anyone who transgresses will have a painful punishment
You who believe, do not kill game while you are in the state of consecration [for pilgrimage]. If someone does so intentionally the penalty is an offering of a domestic animal brought to the Kaba, equivalent- as judged by two just men among you- to the one he has killed; alternatively, he may atone by feeding the needy or by fasting an equivalent number of days, so that he may taste the full gravity of his deed. God forgives what is past, but if anyone re-offends, God will exact the penalty from him: God is mighty, and capable of exacting the penalty
It is permitted for you to catch and eat seafood- an enjoyment for you and the traveller- but hunting game is forbidden while you are in the state of consecration [for pilgrimage]. Be mindful of God to whom you will be gathered
God has made the Ka'ba- the Sacred House- a means of support for people, and the Sacred Months, the animals for sacrifice and their garlands: all this. Know that God has knowledge of all that is in the heavens and earth and that He is fully aware of all things
Know too that God is severe in punishment yet most forgiving and merciful
The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver the message: God knows what you reveal and what you conceal
Say [Prophet], ‘Bad cannot be likened to good, though you may be dazzled by how abundant the bad is. Be mindful of God, people of understanding, so that you may prosper.’
You who believe, do not ask about matters which, if made known to you, might make things difficult for you- if you ask about them while the Quran is being revealed, they will be made known to you- for God has kept silent about them: God is most forgiving and forbearing
Before you, some people asked about things, then ignored [the answers]
God did not institute the dedication of such things as bahira, saiba, wasila, or ham to idols; but the disbelievers invent lies about God. Most of them do not use reason
when it is said to them, ‘Come to what God has sent down, and to the Messenger,’ they say, ‘What we inherited from our forefathers is good enough for us,’ even though their forefathers knew nothing and were not guided
You who believe, you are responsible for your own souls; if anyone else goes astray it will not harm you so long as you follow the guidance; you will all return to God, and He will make you realize what you have done
You who believe, when death approaches any of you, let two just men from among you act as witnesses to the making of a bequest, or two men from another people if you are journeying in the land when death approaches. Keep the two witnesses back after prayer, if you have any doubts, and make them both swear by God, ‘We will not sell our testimony for any price, even if a close relative is involved. We will not hide God’s testimony, for then we should be doing wrong.’
If it is discovered that these two are guilty [of perjury], two of those whose rights have been usurped have a better right to bear witness in their place. Let them swear by God, ‘Our testimony is truer than theirs. We have said nothing but the truth, for that would make us wrongdoers’
that will make it more likely they will give true and proper testimony, or fear that their oaths might be refuted by others afterwards. Be mindful of God and listen; God does not guide those who break His laws
On the Day when God assembles all the messengers and asks, ‘What response did you receive?’ they will say, ‘We do not have that knowledge: You alone know things that cannot be seen.’
Then God will say, ‘Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favour to you and to your mother: how I strengthened you with the holy spirit, so that you spoke to people in your infancy and as a grown man; how I taught you the Scripture and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel; how, by My leave, you fashioned the shape of a bird out of clay, breathed into it, and it became, by My leave, a bird; how, by My leave, you healed the blind person and the leper; how, by My leave, you brought the dead back to life; how I restrained the Children of Israel from [harming] you when you brought them clear signs, and those of them who disbelieved said, “This is clearly nothing but sorcery”
and how I inspired the disciples to believe in Me and My messengers- they said, “We believe and bear witness that we devote ourselves [to God].”’
When the disciples said, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord send down a feast to us from heaven?’ he said, ‘Beware of God if you are true believers.’
They said, ‘We wish to eat from it; to have our hearts reassured; to know that you have told us the truth; and to be witnesses of it.’
Jesus, son of Mary, said, ‘Lord, send down to us a feast from heaven so that we can have a festival- the first and last of us- and a sign from You. Provide for us: You are the best provider.’
God said, ‘I will send it down to you, but anyone who disbelieves after this will be punished with a punishment that I will not inflict on anyone else in the world.’
When God says, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, did you say to people, “Take me and my mother as two gods alongside God”?’ he will say, ‘May You be exalted! I would never say what I had no right to say- if I had said such a thing You would have known it: You know all that is within me, though I do not know what is within You, You alone have full knowledge of things unseen
I told them only what You commanded me to: “Worship God, my Lord and your Lord.” I was a witness over them during my time among them. Ever since You took my soul, You alone have been the watcher over them: You are witness to all things
and if You punish them, they are Your servants; if You forgive them, You are the Almighty, the Wise.’
God will say, ‘This is a Day when the truthful will benefit from their truthfulness. They will have Gardens graced with flowing streams, there to remain for ever. God is pleased with them and they with Him: that is the supreme triumph.’
Control of the heavens and earth and everything in them belongs to God: He has power over all things
Praise belongs to God who created the heavens and the earth and made darkness and light; yet the disbelievers set up equals to their Lord
He is the one who created you from clay and specified a term [for you] and another fixed time, known only to Him; yet still you doubt
He is God in the heavens and on earth, He knows your secrets and what you reveal, and He knows what you do
but every time revelation comes to them from their Lord, they turn their backs on it
So they denied the truth when it came to them, but the very thing they laughed at will be brought home to them
Do they not realize how many generations We destroyed before them? We established them in the earth more firmly than you, sent down abundant rain on them from the sky and made running rivers flow at their feet, yet We destroyed them for their misdeeds and raised other generations after them
Even if We had sent down to you [Prophet] a book inscribed on parchment, and they had touched it with their own hands, the disbelievers would still say, ‘This is nothing but blatant sorcery.’
They say, ‘Why was no angel sent down to [support] him?’ But had We sent down an angel, their judgement would have come at once with no respite given
Indeed, if We had sent an angel as messenger, We would still have sent him in the form of a man, so increasing their confusion
Messengers have been mocked before you [Muhammad], and those who mocked them were engulfed by the very punishment they had mocked
Say, ‘Travel throughout the earth and see what fate befell those who rejected the truth.’
Say, ‘To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and earth?’ Say, ‘To God. He has taken it upon Himself to be merciful. He will certainly gather you on the Day of Resurrection, which is beyond all doubt. Those who deceive themselves will not believe
All that rests by night or by day belongs to Him. He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.’
Say, ‘Shall I take for myself a protector other than God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, who feeds but is not fed?’ Say, ‘I am commanded to be the first [of you] to devote myself [to Him].’ Do not be one of the idolaters
Say, ‘I fear the punishment of a dreadful Day if I disobey my Lord
God will have been truly merciful to whoever is spared on that Day: that is the clearest triumph.’
If God touches you [Prophet] with affliction, no one can remove it except Him, and if He touches you with good, He has power over all things
He is the Supreme Master over His creatures, the All Wise, the All Aware
Say, ‘What counts most as a witness?’ Say, ‘God is witness between you and me. This Quran was revealed for me to warn you [people] and everyone it reaches. Do you really bear witness that there are other gods beside God?’ Say, ‘I myself do not bear witness [to any such thing].’ Say, ‘He is only one God, and I disown whatever you join with Him.’
Those to whom We have given the Scripture know this as well as they know their own sons. Those who have lost their souls will not believe
Who does greater wrong than someone who fabricates a lie against God or denies His revelation? Those who do such wrong will not prosper
When We gather them all together and say to the polytheists, ‘Where are those you claimed were partners with God?’ in their utter dismay
they will only say, ‘By God, our Lord, we have not set up partners beside Him!’
See how they lie against themselves and how those they invented have deserted them
Among them are some who [appear to] listen to you, but we have placed covers over their hearts- so they do not understand the Quran- and deafness in their ears. Even if they saw every sign they would not believe in them. So, when they come to you, they argue with you: the disbelievers say, ‘These are nothing but ancient fables,’
and tell others not to listen [to the Quran], while they themselves keep away from it. But they ruin no one but themselves, though they fail to realize this
If you could only see, when they are made to stand before the Fire, how they will say, ‘If only we could be sent back, we would not reject the revelations of our Lord, but be among the believers.’
No! The truth they used to hide will become all too clear to them. Even if they were brought back, they would only return to the very thing that was forbidden to them- they are such liars
They say, ‘There is nothing beyond our life in this world: we shall not be raised from the dead.’
If you could only see, when they are made to stand before their Lord, how He will say, ‘Is this not real?’ They will say, ‘Yes indeed, by our Lord.’ He will say, ‘Then taste the torment for having disbelieved.’
Lost indeed are those who deny the meeting with their Lord until, when the Hour suddenly arrives, they say, ‘Alas for us that we disregarded this!’ They will bear their burdens on their backs. How terrible those burdens will be
The life of this world is nothing but a game and a distraction; the Home in the Hereafter is best for those who are aware of God. Why will you [people] not understand
We know well that what they say grieves you [Prophet]. It is not you they disbelieve: the evildoers reject God’s revelation
Other messengers were disbelieved before you, and they bore their rejection and persecution steadfastly until Our aid arrived- no one can alter God’s promises. You have already received accounts of these messengers
If you find rejection by the disbelievers so hard to bear, then seek a tunnel into the ground or a ladder into the sky, if you can, and bring them a sign: God could bring them all to guidance if it were His will, so do not join the ignorant
Only those who can hear will respond; as for the dead, God will raise them up, and to Him they will all be returned
They also say, ‘Why has no sign been sent down to him from his Lord?’ Say, ‘God certainly has the power to send down a sign,’ though most of them do not know
all the creatures that crawl on the earth and those that fly with their wings are communities like yourselves. We have missed nothing out of the Record- in the end they will be gathered to their Lord
Those who reject Our signs are deaf, dumb, and in total darkness. God leaves whoever He will to stray, and sets whoever He will on a straight path
Say, ‘Think: if the punishment of God or the Hour should come to you, would you call on anyone other than God, if you are being truthful?’
No indeed, it is on Him that you would call. If it were His will, He could remove whatever harm made you call on Him, and then you would forget what you now associate with Him
We sent messengers before you [Prophet] to many communities and afflicted their people with suffering and hardships, so that they could learn humility
If only they had learned humility when suffering came from Us! But no, their hearts became hard and Satan made their foul deeds alluring to them
So, when they had forgotten the warning they had received, We opened the gates to everything for them. Then, as they revelled in what they had been given, We struck them suddenly and they were dumbfounded
The evildoers were wiped out: praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds
Say [Prophet], ‘Think: if God were to take away your hearing and your sight and seal up your hearts, what god other than He could restore them?’ See how We explain Our revelations in various ways, yet still they turn away
Say, ‘Think: if the punishment of God should come to you, by surprise or openly, would anyone but the evildoers be destroyed?’
We send messengers only to give good news and to warn, so for those who believe and do good deeds there will be no fear, nor will they grieve
As for those who rejected Our signs, torment will afflict them as a result of their defiance
Say, ‘I do not have the treasures of God, nor do I know the unseen, nor do I tell you that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me.’ Say, ‘Is a blind person like one who can see? Why will you not reflect?’
Use the Quran to warn those who fear being gathered before their Lord- they will have no one but Him to protect them and no one to intercede- so that they may beware
Do not drive away those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking nothing but His Face. You are in no way accountable for them, nor they for you; if you drove the believers away, you would become one of the evildoers
We have made some of them a test for others, to make the disbelievers say, ‘Is it these men that God has favoured among us?’ Does God not know best who are the grateful ones
When those who believe in Our revelations come to you [Prophet], say, ‘Peace be upon you. Your Lord has taken it on Himself to be merciful: if any of you has foolishly done a bad deed, and afterwards repented and mended his ways, God is most forgiving and most merciful.’
In this way We explain the revelations, so that the way for sinners may be made clear
Say, ‘I am forbidden to worship those you call on other than God.’ Say, ‘I will not follow your vain desires, for if I did, I would stray from the path and cease to be rightly guided.’
Say, ‘I stand on clear proof from my Lord, though you deny it. What you seek to hasten is not within my power. Judgement is for God alone: He tells the truth, and He is the best of judges.’
Say, ‘If what you seek to hasten were within my power, the matter would be settled between you and me, but God knows best who does wrong.’
He has the keys to the unseen: no one knows them but Him. He knows all that is in the land and sea. No leaf falls without His knowledge, nor is there a single grain in the darkness of the earth, or anything, fresh or withered, that is not written in a clear Record
It is He who calls your souls back by night, knowing what you have done by day, then raises you up again in the daytime until your fixed term is fulfilled. It is to Him that you will return in the end, and He will tell you what you have done
He is the Supreme Master over His subjects. He sends out recorders to watch over you until, when death overtakes any of you, those sent by Us take his soul- they never fail in their duty
Then they will all be returned to God, their true Lord. The Judgement truly belongs to Him, and He is the swiftest of reckoners
Say [Prophet], ‘Who is it that saves you from the dark depths of land and sea when you humbly and secretly call to Him [and say], “If He rescues us from this, We shall truly be thankful”?’
Say, ‘God rescues you from this and every distress; yet still you worship others beside Him.’
Say, ‘He has power to send punishment on you from above or from under your very feet, or to divide you into discordant factions and make some taste the violence of others.’ See how We explain Our revelation in various ways, so that they may understand
yet your people still reject it even though it is the truth. Say, ‘I have not been put in charge of you
Every prophecy has its fixed time to be fulfilled: you will come to realize this.’
When you come across people who speak with scorn about Our revelations, turn away from them until they move on to another topic. If Satan should make you forget, then, when you have remembered, do not sit with those who are doing wrong
The righteous are not in any way held accountable for the wrongdoers; their only duty is to remind them, so that they may be mindful of God
Leave to themselves those who take their religion for a mere game and distraction and are deceived by the life of this world, but continue to remind them with the [Quran], lest any soul be damned by what it has done- it will have no one to protect it from God and no one to intercede; whatever ransom it may offer will not be accepted. Such are those who are damned by their own actions: they will have boil-ing water to drink and a painful punishment, because they used to defy [God]
Say, ‘Instead of God, are we to call on what neither profits nor harms us? [Are we to] turn on our heels after God has guided us, like someone bewildered, having been tempted by devils into a desert ravine, though his companions call him to guidance [saying], “Come to us”?’ Say, ‘God’s guidance is the true guidance. We are commanded to devote ourselves to the Lord of the Worlds
to establish regular prayers and be mindful of Him.’ It is to Him that you will all be gathered
It is He who created the heavens and the earth for a true purpose. On the Day when He says, ‘Be,’ it will be: His word is the truth. All control on the Day the Trumpet is blown belongs to Him. He knows the seen and the unseen: He is the All Wise, the All Aware
Remember when Abraham said to his father, Azar, ‘How can you take idols as gods? I see that you and your people have clearly gone astray.’
In this way We showed Abraham [God’s] mighty dominion over the heavens and the earth, so that he might be a firm believer
When the night grew dark over him he saw a star and said, ‘This is my Lord,’ but when it set, he said, ‘I do not like things that set.’
And when he saw the moon rising he said, ‘This is my Lord,’ but when it too set, he said, ‘If my Lord does not guide me, I shall be one of those who go astray.’
Then he saw the sun rising and cried, ‘This is my Lord! This is greater.’ But when the sun set, he said, ‘My people, I disown all that you worship beside God
I have turned my face as a true believer towards Him who created the heavens and the earth. I am not one of the polytheists.’
His people argued with him, and he said, ‘How can you argue with me about God when He has guided me? I do not fear anything you associate with Him: unless my Lord wills [nothing can happen]. My Lord encompasses everything in His knowledge. How can you not take heed
Why should I fear what you associate with Him? Why do you not fear to associate with Him things for which He has sent you no authority? Tell me, if you know the answer, which side has more right to feel secure
It is those who have faith, and do not mix their faith with idolatry, who will be secure, and it is they who are rightly guided.’
Such was the argument We gave to Abraham against his people- We raise in rank whoever We will- your Lord is all wise, all knowing
We gave him Isaac and Jacob, each of whom We guided, as We had guided Noah before, and among his descendants were David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron- in this way We reward those who do good
Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elijah- every one of them was righteous
Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot. We favoured each one of them over other people
and also some of their forefathers, their offspring, and their brothers: We chose them and guided them on a straight path
Such is God’s guidance, with which He guides whichever of His servants He will. If they had associated other gods with Him, all their deeds would have come to nothing
Those are the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood. Even if these people now disbelieve in them, We have entrusted them to others who do not disbelieve
Those were the people God guided, ‘[Prophet], follow the guidance they received.’ Say, ‘I ask no reward for it from you: it is a lesson for all people.’
They have no grasp of God’s true measure when they say, ‘God has sent nothing down to a mere mortal.’ Say, ‘Who was it who sent down the Scripture, which Moses brought as a light and a guide to people, which you made into separate sheets, showing some but hiding many? You were taught things that neither you nor your forefathers had known.’ Say, ‘God [sent it down],’ then leave them engrossed in their vain talk
This is a blessed Scripture that We have sent down to confirm what came before it and for you to warn the Mother of Cities and all around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in this Scripture, and do not neglect their prayers
Who could be more wicked than someone who invents a lie against God, or claims, ‘A revelation has come to me,’ when no revelation has been sent to him, or says, ‘I too can reveal something equal to God’s revelation’? If you could only see the wicked in their death agonies, as the angels stretch out their hands [to them], saying, ‘Give up your souls. Today you will be repaid with a humiliating punishment for saying false things about God and for arrogantly rejecting His revelations.’
[God will say], ‘Now you return to Us, alone, as We first created you: you have left behind everything We gave you, nor do We see those intercessors of yours that you claimed were partners of God. All the bonds between you have been severed, and those about whom you made such claims have deserted you.’
It is God who splits open the seed and the fruit stone: He brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the living- that is God- so how can you turn away from the truth
He makes the dawn break; He makes the night for rest; and He made the sun and the moon to a precise measure. That is the design of the Almighty, the All Knowing
It is He who made the stars, so that they can guide you when land and sea are dark: We have made the signs clear for those who have knowledge
It is He who first produced you from a single soul, then gave you a place to stay [in life] and a resting place [after death]. We have made Our revelations clear to those who understand
It is He who sends down water from the sky. With it We produce the shoots of each plant, then bring greenery from it, and from that We bring out grains, one riding on the other in close-packed rows. From the date palm come clusters of low-hanging dates, and there are gardens of vines, olives, and pomegranates, alike yet different. Watch their fruits as they grow and ripen! In all this there are signs for those who would believe
Yet they made the jinn partners with God, though He created them, and without any true knowledge they attribute sons and daughters to Him. Glory be to Him! He is far higher than what they ascribe to Him
the Creator of the heavens and earth! How could He have children when He has no spouse, when He created all things, and has full knowledge of all things
This is God, your Lord, there is no God but Him, the Creator of all things, so worship Him; He is in charge of everything
No vision can take Him in, but He takes in all vision. He is the All Subtle, the All Aware
Now clear proof has come to you from your Lord: if anyone sees it, that will be to his advantage; if anyone is blind to it, that will be to his loss- [Say], ‘I am not your guardian.’
This is how We explain Our revelations in various ways- though they will say, ‘You [Muhammad] have been studying’- to make them clear for those who know
Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord, there is no God but Him. Turn away from those who join other gods with Him
If it had been God’s will, they would not have done so, but We have not made you their guardian, nor are you their keeper
[Believers], do not revile those they call on beside God in case they, in their hostility and ignorance, revile God. To each community We make their own actions seem alluring, but in the end they will return to their Lord and He will inform them of all they did
They swear by God with their most solemn oaths that if a miraculous sign came to them they would believe in it. Say [Prophet], ‘Signs are in the power of God alone.’ What will make you [believers] realize that even if a sign came to them they still would not believe
We would make their hearts and their eyes turn away, just as they did not believe the first time, and leave them to flounder in their obstinacy
Even if We sent the angels down to them, and the dead spoke to them, and We gathered all things right in front of them, they still would not believe, unless God so willed, but most of them are ignorant [of this]
In the same way We assigned to each prophet an enemy, evil humans and evil jinn. They suggest alluring words to one another in order to deceive- if it had been your Lord’s will, [Prophet], they would not have done this: leave them to their inventions
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter may incline towards their deceit, be pleased with it, and so perpetrate whatever they perpetrate
[Say], ‘Shall I seek any judge other than God, when it is He who has sent down for you [people] the Scripture, clearly explained?’ Those to whom We gave the Scripture know that this [Quran] is revealed by your Lord [Prophet] with the truth, so do not be one of those who doubt
The word of your Lord is complete in its truth and justice. No one can change His words: He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing
If you obeyed most of those on earth, they would lead you away from the path of God. They follow nothing but speculation; they are merely guessing
Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and who is rightly guided
So [believers] eat any [animal] over which God’s name has been pronounced, if you believe in His revelations
Why should you not eat such animals when God has already fully explained what He has forbidden you, except when forced by hunger? But many lead others astray by their desires, without any true knowledge: your Lord knows best who oversteps the limit
Avoid committing sin, whether openly or in secret, for those who commit sin will be repaid for what they do
and do not eat anything over which God’s name has not been pronounced, for that is breaking the law. The evil ones incite their followers to argue with you: if you listen to them, you too will become idolaters
Is a dead person brought back to life by Us, and given light with which to walk among people, comparable to someone trapped in deep darkness who cannot escape? In this way the evil deeds of the disbelievers are made to seem alluring to them
And so We have put chief evildoers in every city to perpetrate their schemes there- but they scheme only against themselves, without realizing it
When a revelation is brought before them they say, ‘We shall not believe unless we ourselves are given a revelation as God’s messengers were.’ But God knows best where to place His messages: humiliation before God and severe torment will befall the evildoers for their scheming
When God wishes to guide someone, He opens their breast to islam; when He wishes to lead them astray, He closes and constricts their breast as if they were climbing up to the skies. That is how God makes the foulness of those who do not believe rebound against them
[Prophet], this is the path of your Lord, made perfectly straight. We have explained Our revelations to those who take heed
They shall have the Home of Peace with their Lord, and He will take care of them as a reward for their deeds
On the day He gathers everyone together [saying], ‘Company of jinn! You have seduced a great many humans,’ their adherents among mankind will say, ‘Lord, we have profited from one another, but now we have reached the appointed time You decreed for us.’ He will say, ‘Your home is the Fire, and there you shall remain’- unless God wills otherwise: [Prophet], your Lord is all wise, all knowing
In this way, We make some evildoers have power over others through their misdeeds
‘Company of jinn and mankind! Did messengers not come from among you to recite My revelations to you and warn that you would meet this Day?’ They will say, ‘We testify against ourselves.’ The life of this world seduced them, but they will testify against themselves that they rejected the truth
your Lord would not destroy towns for their wrongdoing if they had not been warned
Everyone is assigned a rank according to their deeds; your Lord is not unaware of anything they do
Your Lord is self-sufficient and full of mercy. If He pleased, He could remove you and put others in your place, just as He produced you from the offspring of other people
What you are promised is sure to come, and you cannot escape
[Prophet], say, ‘My people, you carry on as you are, and so will I: you will come to realize who will have a happy homecoming in the Hereafter.’ The evildoers will not prosper
They apportion to God a share of the produce and the livestock He created, saying, ‘This is for God’- so they claim!- ‘ and this is for our idols.’ Their idols’ share does not reach God, but God’s share does reach their idols: how badly they judge
In the same way, their idols have induced many of the pagans to kill their own children, bringing them ruin and confusion in their faith: if God had willed otherwise they would not have done this, so [Prophet] leave them to their own devices
They also say, ‘These cattle and crops are reserved, and only those we allow may eat them’- so they claim! There are some animals they exempt from labour and some over which they do not pronounce God’s name [during slaughter], falsely attributing these [regulations] to Him: He will repay them for the falsehoods they invent
They also say, ‘The contents of these animals’ wombs will be reserved solely for our men and forbidden to our women, though if the offspring is stillborn they may have a share of it.’ He will punish them for what they attribute to Him: He is all wise, all aware
Lost indeed are those who kill their own children out of folly, with no basis in knowledge, forbidding what God has provided for them, fabricating lies against Him: they have gone far astray and have heeded no guidance
It is He who produces both trellised and untrellised gardens, date palms, crops of diverse flavours, the olive, the pomegranate, alike yet different. So when they bear fruit, eat some of it, paying what is due on the day of harvest, but do not be wasteful: God does not like wasteful people
[He gave you] livestock, as beasts of burden and as food. So eat what God has provided for you and do not follow in Satan’s footsteps: he is your sworn enemy
[God gave you] eight animals, in [four] pairs: a pair of sheep and a pair of goats- ask them [Prophet], ‘Has He forbidden the two males, the two females, or the young in the wombs of the two females? Tell me based on knowledge if you are telling the truth.’
And a pair of camels and a pair of cattle- ask them [Prophet], ‘Has He forbidden the two males, the two females, or the young in the wombs of the two females? Were you present when God gave you these commands?’ So who is more wicked than he who fabricates lies against God with no basis in knowledge in order to lead people astray? God does not guide the evildoers
[Prophet], say, ‘In all that has been revealed to me, I find nothing forbidden for people to eat, except for carrion, flowing blood, pig’s meat- it is loathsome- or a sinful offering over which any name other than God’s has been invoked.’ But if someone is forced by hunger, rather than desire or excess, then God is most forgiving and most merciful
We forbade for the Jews every animal with claws, and the fat of cattle and sheep, except what is on their backs and in their intestines, or that which sticks to their bones. This is how We penalized them for their disobedience: We are true to Our word
If they [the disbelievers] accuse you [Prophet] of lying, say, ‘Your Lord has all-encompassing mercy, but His punishment cannot be diverted from the evildoers.’
The idolaters will say, ‘If God had willed, we would not have ascribed partners to Him- nor would our fathers- or have declared anything forbidden.’ In the same way, those before them continually denied [the truth] until they tasted Our punishment. Say, ‘Have you any knowledge that you can show us? You follow only supposition and tell only lies.’
Say, ‘The conclusive argument belongs to God alone. Had He so willed He would have guided you all.’
Say, ‘Bring your witnesses to testify that God has forbidden all this.’ If they do testify, do not bear witness with them. Do not follow the whims of those who have denied Our revelation, who do not believe in the Hereafter, and who set up equals with their Lord
Say, ‘Come! I will tell you what your Lord has really forbidden you. Do not ascribe anything as a partner to Him; be good to your parents; do not kill your children in fear of poverty’- We will provide for you and for them- ‘ stay well away from committing obscenities, whether openly or in secret; do not take the life God has made sacred, except by right. This is what He commands you to do: perhaps you will use your reason
Stay well away from the property of orphans, except with the best [intentions], until they come of age; give full measure and weight, according to justice’- We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear- ‘ when you speak, be just, even if it concerns a relative; keep any promises you make in God’s name. This is what He commands you to do, so that you may take heed’
this is My path, leading straight, so follow it, and do not follow other ways: they will lead you away from it- ‘ This is what He commands you to do, so that you may refrain from wrongdoing.’
Once again, We gave Moses the Scripture, perfecting [Our favour] for those who do good, explaining everything clearly, as guidance and mercy, so that they might believe in the meeting with their Lord
This, too, is a blessed Scripture which We have sent down- follow it and be conscious of your Lord, so that you may receive mercy
lest you say, ‘Scriptures were only sent down to two communities before us: we were not aware of what they studied,’
or ‘If only the Scripture had been sent down to us, we would have been better guided than them.’ Now clear evidence, guidance, and mercy have come to you from your Lord. Who could be more wrong than someone who rejects God’s revelations and turns away from them? We shall repay those who turn away with a painful punishment
Are they waiting for the very angels to come to them, or your Lord Himself, or maybe some of His signs? But on the Day some of your Lord’s signs come, no soul will profit from faith if it had none before, or has not already earned some good through its faith. Say, ‘Wait if you wish: we too are waiting.’
As for those who have divided their religion and broken up into factions, have nothing to do with them [Prophet]. Their case rests with God: in time He will tell them about their deeds
Whoever has done a good deed will have it ten times to his credit, but whoever has done a bad deed will be repaid only with its equivalent- they will not be wronged
Say, ‘My Lord has guided me to a straight path, an upright religion, the faith of Abraham, a man of pure faith. He was not a polytheist.’
Say, ‘My prayers and sacrifice, my life and death, are all for God, Lord of all the Worlds
He has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I am the first to devote myself to Him.’
Say, ‘Should I seek a Lord other than God, when He is the Lord of all things?’ Each soul is responsible for its own actions; no soul will bear the burden of another. You will all return to your Lord in the end, and He will tell you the truth about your differences
It is He who made you successors on the earth and raises some of you above others in rank, to test you through what He gives you. [Prophet], your Lord is swift in punishment, yet He is most forgiving and merciful
Alif Lam Mim Sad
This Book has been sent down to you [Prophet]––let there be no anxiety in your heart because of it––so that you may use it to give warning and to remind the believers
‘Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord; do not follow other masters beside Him. How seldom you take heed!’
How many towns We have destroyed! Our punishment came to them by night or while they slept in the afternoon
their only cry when Our punishment came to them was, ‘How wrong we were!’
We shall certainly question those to whom messengers were sent–– and We shall question the messengers themselves––
and, with full knowledge, for We were never far from them, We shall tell them what they did
On that Day the weighing of deeds will be true and just: those whose good deeds are heavy on the scales will be the ones to prosper
and those whose good deeds are light will be the ones who have lost their souls through their wrongful rejection of Our messages
We established you [people] on the earth and provided you with a means of livelihood there––small thanks you give
We created you, We gave you shape, and then We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ and they did. But not Iblis: he was not one of those who bowed down
God said, ‘What prevented you from bowing down as I commanded you?’ and he said, ‘I am better than him: You created me from fire and him from clay.’
God said, ‘Get down from here! This is no place for your arrogance. Get out! You are contemptible!’
but Iblis said, ‘Give me respite until the Day people are raised from the dead,’
and God replied, ‘You have respite.’
And then Iblis said, ‘Because You have put me in the wrong, I will lie in wait for them all on Your straight path
I will come at them- from their front and their back, from their right and their left- and You will find that most of them are ungrateful.’
God said, ‘Get out! You are disgraced and banished! I swear I shall fill Hell with you and all who follow you
But you and your wife, Adam, live in the Garden. Both of you eat whatever you like, but do not go near this tree or you will become wrongdoers.’
Satan whispered to them so as to expose their nakedness, which had been hidden from them: he said, ‘Your Lord only forbade you this tree to prevent you becoming angels or immortals,’
and he swore to them, ‘I am giving you sincere advice’
he lured them with lies. Their nakedness became exposed to them when they had eaten from the tree: they began to put together leaves from the Garden to cover themselves. Their Lord called to them, ‘Did I not forbid you to approach that tree? Did I not warn you that Satan was your sworn enemy?’
They replied, ‘Our Lord, we have wronged our souls: if You do not forgive us and have mercy, we shall be lost.’
He said, ‘All of you get out! You are each other’s enemies. On earth you will have a place to stay and livelihood- for a time.’
He said, ‘There you will live; there you will die; from there you will be brought out.’
Children of Adam, We have given you garments to cover your nakedness and as adornment for you; the garment of God-consciousness is the best of all garments- this is one of God’s signs, so that people may take heed
Children of Adam, do not let Satan seduce you, as he did your parents, causing them to leave the Garden, stripping them of their garments to expose their nakedness to them: he and his forces can see you from where you cannot see them: We have made evil ones allies to those who do not believe
Yet when [these people] do something disgraceful, they say, ‘We found our forefathers doing this,’ and, ‘God has commanded us to do this.’ Say [Prophet], ‘God does not command disgraceful deeds. How can you say about God things that you do not know [to be true]?’
Say, ‘My Lord commands righteousness. Direct your worship straight to Him wherever you pray; call on Him; devote your religion entirely to Him. Just as He first created you, so you will come back [to life] again.’
Some He has guided and some are doomed to stray: they have taken evil ones rather than God as their masters, thinking that they are rightly guided
Children of Adam, dress well whenever you are at worship, and eat and drink [as We have permitted] but do not be extravagant: God does not like extravagant people
Say [Prophet], ‘Who has forbidden the adornment and the nourishment God has provided for His servants?’ Say, ‘They are [allowed] for those who believe during the life of this world: they will be theirs alone on the Day of Resurrection.’ This is how We make Our revelation clear for those who understand
Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord only forbids disgraceful deeds- whether they be open or hidden- and sin and unjustified aggression, and that you, without His sanction, associate things with Him, and that you say things about Him without knowledge.’
There is a time set for every people: they cannot hasten it, nor, when it comes, will they be able to delay it for a single moment
Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among yourselves, reciting My revelations to you, for those who are conscious of God and live righteously, there will be no fear, nor will they grieve
But those who reject Our revelations and arrogantly scorn them are the people of the Fire and there they will remain
Who is more wrong than the person who invents lies against God or rejects His revelations? Such people will have their preordained share [in this world], but then, when Our angels arrive to take them back, saying, ‘Where are those you used to call on beside God?’ they will say, ‘They have deserted us.’ They will confess that they were disbelievers and
God will say, ‘Join the crowds of jinn and humans who have gone before you into the Fire.’ Every crowd curses its fellow crowd as it enters, then, when they are all gathered inside, the last of them will say of the first, ‘Our Lord, it was they who led us astray: give them double punishment in the Fire’- God says, ‘Every one of you will have double punishment, though you do not know it’
and the first of them will say to the last, ‘You were no better than us: taste the punishment you have earned.’
The gates of Heaven will not be open to those who rejected Our revelations and arrogantly spurned them; even if a thick rope were to pass through the eye of a needle they would not enter the Garden. This is how We punish the guilty
Hell will be their resting place and their covering, layer upon layer- this is how We punish those who do evil
But those who believe and do good deeds- and We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear- are the people of the Garden and there they will remain
We shall have removed all ill feeling from their hearts; streams will flow at their feet. They will say, ‘Praise be to God, who guided us to this: had God not guided us, We would never have found the way. The messengers of our Lord brought the Truth.’ A voice will call out to them, ‘This is the Garden you have been given as your own on account of your deeds.’
The people of the Garden will cry out to the people of the Fire, ‘We have found what our Lord promised us to be true. Have you found what your Lord promised you to be true?’ and they will answer, ‘Yes’. A voice will proclaim from their midst, ‘God’s rejection [hangs] over the evildoers
those who turned others away from God’s path and tried to make it crooked, those who denied the Hereafter.’
A barrier divides the two groups with men on its heights recognizing each group by their marks: they will call out to the people of the Garden, ‘Peace be with you!’- they will not have entered, but they will be hoping
and when their glance falls upon the people of the Fire, they will say, ‘Our Lord, do not let us join the evildoers!’
and the people of the heights will call out to certain men they recognize by their marks, ‘What use were your great numbers and your false pride
And are these the people you swore God would never bless? [Now these people are being told], “Enter the Garden! No fear for you, nor shall you grieve.”’
The people of the Fire will call to the people of Paradise, ‘Give us some water, or any of the sustenance God has granted you!’ and they will reply, ‘God has forbidden both to the disbelievers
those who took their religion for distraction, a mere game, and were deluded by worldly life.’ Today We shall ignore them, just as they have ignored their meeting with this Day and denied Our Revelations
We have brought people a Scripture- We have explained it on the basis of true knowledge- as guidance and mercy for those who believe
What are they waiting for but the fulfilment of its [final prophecy]? On the Day it is fulfilled, those who had ignored it will say, ‘Our Lord’s messenger spoke the truth. Is there anyone to intercede for us now? Or can we be sent back to behave differently from the way we behaved before?’ They will really have squandered their souls, and all [the idols] they invented will have deserted them
Your Lord is God, who created the heavens and earth in six Days, then established Himself on the throne; He makes the night cover the day in swift pursuit; He created the sun, moon, and stars to be subservient to His command; all creation and command belong to Him. Exalted be God, Lord of all the worlds
Call on your Lord humbly and privately- He does not like those who transgress His bounds
do not corrupt the earth after it has been set right- call on Him fearing and hoping. The mercy of God is close to those who do good
It is God who sends the winds, bearing good news of His coming grace, and when they have gathered up the heavy clouds, We drive them to a dead land where We cause rain to fall, bringing out all kinds of crops, just as We shall bring out the dead. Will you not reflect
Vegetation comes out of good land in abundance, by the will of its Lord, but out of bad land only scantily: We explain Our Revelations in various ways to those who give thanks
We sent Noah to his people. He said, ‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. I fear for you the punishment of a fearsome Day!’
but the prominent leaders of his people said, ‘We believe you are far astray.’
He replied, ‘My people, there is nothing astray about me! On the contrary, I am a messenger from the Lord of all the Worlds
I am delivering my Lord’s messages to you and giving you sincere advice. I know things from God that you do not
Do you find it so strange that a message should come from your Lord- through a man in your midst- to warn you and make you aware of God so that you may be given mercy?’
but they called him a liar. We saved him, and those who were with him, on the Ark and We drowned those who rejected Our revelations- they were wilfully blind
To the people of 'Ad We sent their brother, Hud. He said, ‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. Will you not take heed?’
but the disbelieving leaders of his people said, ‘We believe you are a fool,’ and ‘We think you are a liar.’
He said, ‘My people, there is nothing foolish about me! On the contrary, I am a messenger from the Lord of all the Worlds
I am delivering my Lord’s messages to you. I am your sincere and honest adviser
Do you find it so strange that a message should come from your Lord, through a man in your midst, to warn you? Remember how He made you heirs after Noah’s people, and increased your stature: remember God’s bounties, so that you may prosper.’
They said, ‘Have you really come to tell us to serve God alone and to forsake what our forefathers served? If what you say is true, bring us the punishment you threaten.’
He said, ‘You are already set to receive your Lord’s loathing and anger. Are you arguing with me about mere names you and your forefathers invented, names for which God has given no sanction? Just wait; I too am waiting.’
We saved him, and those who were with him, through Our mercy; We destroyed those who denied Our revelations and would not believe
To the people of Thamud We sent their brother, Salih. He said, ‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. A clear sign has come to you now from your Lord: this is God’s she-camel- a sign for you- so let her graze in God’s land and do not harm her in any way, or you will be struck by a painful torment
Remember how He made you heirs after 'Ad and settled you in the land to build yourselves castles on its plains and carve houses out of the mountains: remember God’s blessings and do not spread corruption in the land,’
but the arrogant leaders among his people said to the believers they thought to be of no account, ‘Do you honestly think that Salih is a messenger from his Lord?’ They said, ‘Yes. We believe in the message sent through him,’
but the arrogant leaders said, ‘We reject what you believe in,’
and then they hamstrung the camel. They defied their Lord’s commandment and said, ‘Salih, bring down the punishment you threaten, if you really are a messenger!’
An earthquake seized them: by the next morning they were lying dead in their homes
So he turned away from them, saying, ‘My people, I delivered my Lord’s messages to you and gave you sincere advice, but you did not like those who gave sincere advice.’
We sent Lot and he said to his people, ‘How can you practise this outrage? No one in the world has outdone you in this
You lust after men rather than women! You transgress all bounds!’
The only response his people gave was to say [to one another], ‘Drive them out of your town! These men want to keep themselves chaste!’
We saved him and his kinsfolk- apart from his wife who stayed behind
and We showered upon [the rest of] them a rain [of destruction]. See the fate of the evildoers
To the people of Midian We sent their brother, Shuayb. He said, ‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. A clear sign has come to you from your Lord. Give full measure and weight and do not undervalue people’s goods; do not cause corruption in the land after it has been set in order: this is better for you, if you are believers
Do not sit in every pathway, threatening and barring those who believe in God from His way, trying to make it crooked. Remember how you used to be few and He made you multiply. Think about the fate of those who used to spread corruption
If some of you believe the message I bring and others do not, then be patient till God judges between us. He is the best of all judges.’
His people’s arrogant leaders said, ‘Shuayb, we will expel you and your fellow believers from our town unless you return to our religion.’ He said, ‘What! Even if we detest it
If we were to return to your religion after God has saved us from it, we would be inventing lies about Him: there is no way we could return to it- unless by the will of God our Lord: in His knowledge He comprehends everything. We put our trust in God. Our Lord, expose the truth [and judge] between us and our people, for You are the best judge.’
The disbelieving leaders among his people said, ‘You will certainly be losers if you follow Shuayb’
an earthquake seized them: by the next morning they were lying dead in their homes
it was as if those who had rejected Shuayb had never lived there; it was those who had rejected Shuayb who were the losers
so he turned away from them, saying, ‘My people, I delivered my Lord’s messages to you and gave you sincere advice, so why should I grieve for people who refused to believe?’
Whenever We sent a prophet to a town, We afflicted its [disbelieving] people with suffering and hardships, so that they might humble themselves [before God]
and then We changed their hardship into prosperity, until they multiplied. But then they said, ‘Hardship and affluence also befell our forefathers,’ and so We took them suddenly, unawares
If the people of those towns had believed and been mindful of God, We would have showered them with blessings from the heavens and earth, but they rejected the truth and so We punished them for their misdeeds
Do the people of these towns feel secure that Our punishment will not come upon them by night, while they are asleep
Do the people of these towns feel secure that Our punishment will not come upon them by day, while they are at play
Do they feel secure against God’s plan? Only the losers feel secure against God’s plan
Is it not clear to those who inherit the land from former generations that We can punish them too for their sins if We will? And seal up their hearts so that they cannot hear
We have told you [Prophet] the stories of those towns: messengers came to them, and clear signs, but they would not believe in what they had already rejected- in this way God seals the hearts of disbelievers
We found that most of them did not honour their commitments; We found that most of them were defiant
After these, We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his leading supporters with Our signs, but they rejected them. See the fate of those who used to spread corruption
Moses said, ‘Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of all the Worlds
duty-bound to say nothing about God but the truth, and I have brought you a clear sign from your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with me.’
He said, ‘Produce this sign you have brought, if you are telling the truth.’
So Moses threw his staff and- lo and behold!- it was a snake, clear to all
and then he pulled out his hand and- lo and behold!- it was white for all to see
The leaders among Pharaoh’s people said, ‘This man is a learned sorcerer
He means to drive you out of your land!’ Pharaoh said, ‘What do you suggest?’
They said, ‘Delay him and his brother for a while, and send messengers to all the cities
to summon every learned sorcerer to you.’
The sorcerers came to Pharaoh and said, ‘Shall we be rewarded if we win?’
and he replied, ‘Yes, and you will join my inner court.’
So they said, ‘Moses, will you throw first or shall we?’
He said, ‘You throw,’ and they did, casting a spell on people’s eyes, striking fear into them, and bringing about great sorcery
Then We inspired Moses, ‘Throw your staff,’ and- lo and behold!––it devoured their fakery
The truth was confirmed and what they had produced came to nothing
they were defeated there and utterly humiliated
The sorcerers fell to their knees
and said, ‘We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
the Lord of Moses and Aaron!’
but Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in Him before I have given you permission? This is a plot you have hatched to drive the people out of this city! Soon you will see
I will cut off your alternate hands and feet and then crucify you all!’
They said, ‘And so we shall return to our Lord
Your only grievance against us is that we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came to us. Our Lord, pour steadfastness upon us and let us die in devotion to You.’
The leaders among Pharaoh’s people said to him, ‘But are you going to leave Moses and his people to spread corruption in the land and forsake you and your gods?’ He replied, ‘We shall kill their male children, sparing only the females: We have complete power over them.’
Moses said to his people, ‘Turn to God for help and be steadfast: the earth belongs to God- He gives it as their own to whichever of His servants He chooses- and the happy future belongs to those who are mindful of Him,’
and they replied, ‘We were being persecuted long before you came to us, and since then too.’ He said, ‘Your Lord may well destroy your enemy and make you successors to the land to see how you behave.’
We inflicted years of drought and crop failure on Pharaoh’s people, so that they might take heed
then, when something good came their way, they said, ‘This is our due!’. When something bad came, they ascribed it to the evil omen of Moses and those with him, but their ‘evil omen’ was really from God, though most of them did not realize it
They said, ‘We will not believe in you, no matter what signs you produce to cast a spell on us,’
and so We let loose on them the flood, locusts, lice, frogs, blood- all clear signs. They were arrogant, wicked people
They would say, whenever a plague struck them, ‘Moses, pray to your Lord for us by virtue of the promise He has made to you: if you relieve us of the plague, we will believe you and let the Children of Israel go with you,’
but when We relieved them of the plague and gave them a fixed period [in which to fulfil their promise]- lo and behold!- they broke it
And so, because they rejected Our signs and paid them no heed, We exacted retribution from them: We drowned them in the sea
and We made those who had been oppressed succeed to both the east and the west of the land that We had blessed. Your Lord’s good promise to the Children of Israel was fulfilled, because of their patience, and We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were making and what they were building
We took the Children of Israel across the sea, but when they came upon a people who worshipped idols, they said, ‘Moses, make a god for us like theirs.’ He said, ‘You really are foolish people
[the cult] these people practise is doomed to destruction, and what they have been doing is useless
Why should I seek any god other than God for you, when He has favoured you over all other people?’
Remember how We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who were subjecting you to the worst of sufferings, killing your male children, sparing only your females- that was a mighty ordeal from your Lord
We appointed thirty nights for Moses, then added ten more: the term set by his Lord was completed in forty nights. Moses said to his brother Aaron, ‘Take my place among my people: act rightly and do not follow the way of those who spread corruption.’
When Moses came for the appointment, and his Lord spoke to him, he said, ‘My Lord, show Yourself to me: let me see You!’ He said, ‘You will never see Me, but look at that mountain: if it remains standing firm, you will see Me,’ and when his Lord revealed Himself to the mountain, He made it crumble: Moses fell down unconscious. When he recovered, he said, ‘Glory be to You! To You I turn in repentance! I am the first to believe!’
He said, ‘Moses, I have raised you above other people by [giving you] My messages and speaking to you: hold on to what I have given you; be one of those who give thanks.’
We inscribed everything for him in the Tablets which taught and explained everything, saying, ‘Hold on to them firmly and urge your people to hold fast to their excellent teachings. I will show you the end of those who rebel
I will keep distracted from My signs those who behave arrogantly on Earth without any right, and who, even if they see every sign, will not believe in them; they will not take the way of right guidance if they see it, but will take the way of error if they see that. This is because they denied Our signs and paid them no heed
the deeds of those who denied Our signs and the Meeting of the Hereafter will come to nothing- why should they be repaid for anything other than what they have done?’
In his absence, Moses’ people took to worshipping a mere shape that made sounds like a cow- a calf made from their jewellery. Could they not see that it did not speak to them or guide them in any way? Yet they took it for worship: they were evildoers
When, with much wringing of hands, they perceived that they were doing wrong, they said, ‘If our Lord does not have mercy and forgive us, we shall be the losers.’
On his return to his people, angry and aggrieved, Moses said, ‘How foul and evil is what you have done in my absence! Were you so keen to bring your Lord’s judgement forward?’ He threw the tablets down and seized his brother by the hair, pulling him towards him. Aaron said, ‘Son of my mother, these people overpowered me! They almost killed me! Do not give my enemies reason to rejoice! Do not include me with these evildoers!’
Moses said, ‘My Lord, forgive me and my brother; accept us into Your mercy: You are the Most Merciful of all who show mercy
Those who took to worshipping the calf will be afflicted by their Lord’s wrath, and by disgrace in this life.’ This is the way We repay those who invent such falsehoods
but your Lord is most forgiving and most merciful towards those who do wrong, then repent afterwards and truly believe
When Moses’ anger abated, he picked up the Tablets, on which were inscribed guidance and mercy for those who stood in awe of their Lord
Moses chose from his people seventy men for Our appointment, and when they were seized by trembling, he prayed, ‘My Lord, if You had chosen to do so, You could have destroyed them long before this, and me too, so will You now destroy us for what the foolish among us have done? This is only a trial from You- through it, You cause whoever You will to stray and guide whoever You will- and You are our Protector, so forgive us and have mercy on us. You are the best of those who forgive
Grant us good things in this world and in the life to come. We turn to You.’ God said, ‘I bring My punishment on whoever I will, but My mercy encompasses all things. ‘I shall ordain My mercy for those who are conscious of God and pay the prescribed alms; who believe in Our Revelations
who follow the Messenger- the unlettered prophet they find described in the Torah that is with them, and in the Gospel- who commands them to do right and forbids them to do wrong, who makes good things lawful to them and bad things unlawful, and relieves them of their burdens, and the iron collars that were on them. So it is those who believe him, honour and help him, and who follow the light which has been sent down with him, who will succeed.’
Say [Muhammad], ‘People, I am the Messenger of God to you all, from Him who has control over the heavens and the earth. There is no God but Him; He gives life and death, so believe in God and His Messenger, the unlettered prophet who believes in God and His words, and follow him so that you may find guidance.’
There is a group among the people of Moses who guide with truth, and who act justly according to it
We divided them into twelve tribes [as distinct] communities, and, when his people asked him for water, inspired Moses to strike the rock with his staff [so that] twelve springs gushed out. Each tribe knew its own drinking place; We gave them the shade of clouds and sent down to them manna and quails [saying], ‘Eat the good things We have provided for you.’ They did not wrong Us; it was themselves they wronged
When they were told, ‘Enter this town and eat freely there as you will, but say, “Relieve us!” and enter its gate humbly: then We shall forgive you your sins, and increase the reward of those who do good,’
the wrongdoers among them substituted another saying for that which had been given them, so We sent them a punishment from heaven for their wrongdoing
[Prophet], ask them about the town by the sea; how its people broke the Sabbath when their fish surfaced for them only on that day, never on weekdays- We tested them in this way: because of their disobedience
how, when some of them asked [their preachers], ‘Why do you bother preaching to people God will destroy, or at least punish severely?’ [the preachers] answered, ‘In order to be free from your Lord’s blame, and so that they may perhaps take heed.’
When they ignored [the warning] they were given, We saved those who forbade evil, and punished the wrongdoers severely because of their disobedience
When, in their arrogance, they persisted in doing what they had been forbidden to do, We said to them, ‘Be like apes! Be outcasts!’
And then your Lord declared that, until the Day of Resurrection, He would send people against them to inflict terrible suffering on them. Your Lord is swift in punishment but He is most forgiving and merciful
We dispersed them over the earth in separate communities- some are righteous and some less so: We tested them with blessings and misfortunes, so that they might all return [to righteousness]
and they were succeeded by generations who, although they inherited the Scripture, took the fleeting gains of this lower world, saying, ‘We shall be forgiven,’ and indeed taking them again if other such gains came their way. Was a pledge not taken from them, writ-ten in the Scripture, to say nothing but the truth about God? And they have studied its contents well. For those who are mindful of God, the Hereafter is better. ‘Why do you not use your reason?’
But as for those who hold fast to the Scripture and keep up the prayer, We do not deny righteous people their rewards
When We made the mountain loom high above them like a shadow, and they thought it would fall on them, We said, ‘Hold fast to what We have given you, and remember what it contains, so that you may remain conscious of God.’
[Prophet], when your Lord took out the offspring from the loins of the Children of Adam and made them bear witness about themselves, He said, ‘Am I not your Lord?’ and they replied, ‘Yes, we bear witness.’ So you cannot say on the Day of Resurrection, ‘We were not aware of this,’
or, ‘It was our forefathers who, before us, ascribed partners to God, and we are only the descendants who came after them: will you destroy us because of falsehoods they invented?’
In this way We explain the messages, so that they may turn [to the right path]
[Prophet], tell them the story of the man to whom We gave Our messages: he sloughed them off, so Satan took him as his follower and he went astray
if it had been Our will, We could have used these signs to raise him high, but instead he clung to the earth and followed his own desires- he was like a dog that pants with a lolling tongue whether you drive it away or leave it alone. Such is the image of those who reject Our signs. Tell them the story so that they may reflect
How foul is the image of those who reject Our signs! It is themselves they wrong
whoever God guides is truly guided, and whoever God allows to stray is a loser
We have created many jinn and people who are destined for Hell, with hearts they do not use for comprehension, eyes they do not use for sight, ears they do not use for hearing. They are like cattle, no, even further astray: these are the ones who are entirely heedless
The Most Excellent Names belong to God: use them to call on Him, and keep away from those who abuse them- they will be requited for what they do
Among those We created are a group of people who guide with truth and act justly according to it
But We lead on those who reject Our messages, step by step, without them realizing it
I will give them respite, but My plan is sure
Has it not occurred to them that their companion is not mad but is giving clear warning
Have they not contemplated the realm of the heavens and earth and all that God created, and that the end of their time might be near? What [other revelation] will they believe in if they do not believe in this
No one can guide those God allows to stray: He leaves them blundering about in their insolence
They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour, ‘When will it happen?’ Say, ‘My Lord alone has knowledge of it: He alone will reveal when its time will come, a time that is momentous in both the heavens and earth. All too suddenly it will come upon you.’ They ask you about it as if you were eager [to find out]. Say, ‘God alone has knowledge of [when it will come], though most people do not realize it.’
Say [Prophet], ‘I have no control over benefit or harm, [even] to myself, except as God may please: if I had knowledge of what is hidden, I would have abundant good things and no harm could touch me. I am no more than a bearer of warning, and good news to those who believe.’
It is He who created you all from one soul, and from it made its mate so that he might find comfort in her: when one [of them] lies with his wife and she conceives a light burden, going about freely, then grows heavy, they both pray to God, their Lord, ‘If You give us a good child we shall certainly be grateful,’
and yet when He gives them a good child they ascribe some of what He has granted them to others
God is far above the partners they set up alongside Him! How can they set up with Him these partners that create nothing and are themselves created
that cannot help them at all, or even help themselves
If you [believers] call such people to guidance, they do not fol-low you: it makes no difference whether you call them or remain silent
Those you [idolaters] call upon instead of God are created beings like you. Call upon them, then, and let them respond to you if what you say is true
Do they have feet to walk, hands to strike, eyes to see, or ears to hear? Say [Prophet], ‘Call on your “partners”! Scheme against me! Do not spare me
My protector is God: He has revealed the Scripture, and it is He who protects the righteous
but those you call on instead of Him cannot help you or even help themselves.’
If you [believers] call such people to guidance, they do not hear. You [Prophet] may observe them looking at you, but they can-not see
Be tolerant and command what is right: pay no attention to foolish people
If Satan should prompt you to do something, seek refuge with God- He is all hearing, all knowing
those who are aware of God think of Him when Satan prompts them to do something and immediately they can see [straight]
the followers of devils are led relentlessly into error by them and cannot stop
When you do not bring them a fresh revelation, they say, ‘But can you not just ask for one?’ Say, ‘I merely repeat what is revealed to me from my Lord: this revelation brings you insights from your Lord, and guidance and mercy for those who believe
so pay attention and listen quietly when the Quran is recited, so that you may be given mercy.’
[Prophet], remember your Lord inwardly, in all humility and awe, without raising your voice, in the mornings and in the evenings- do not be one of the heedless
[even] those who live in the presence of your Lord are not too proud to worship Him: they glorify Him and bow down before Him
They ask you [Prophet] about [distributing] the battle gains. Say, ‘That is a matter for God and His Messenger, so be mindful of God and make things right between you. Obey God and His Messenger if you are true believers
true believers are those whose hearts tremble with awe when God is mentioned, whose faith increases when His revelations are recited to them, who put their trust in their Lord
who keep up the prayer and give to others out of what We provide for them
Those are the ones who truly believe. They have high standing with their Lord, forgiveness, and generous provision.’
For it was your Lord who made you [Prophet] venture from your home for a true purpose––though a group of the believers disliked it
and argued with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as if they were being driven towards a death they could see with their own eyes
Remember how God promised you [believers] that one of the two enemy groups would fall to you: you wanted the unarmed group to be yours, but it was God’s will to establish the truth according to His Word and to finish off the disbelievers––
to prove the Truth to be true, and the false to be false, much as the guilty might dislike it
When you begged your Lord for help, He answered you, ‘I will reinforce you with a thousand angels in succession.’
God made this a message of hope to reassure your hearts: help comes only from God, He is mighty and wise
Remember when He gave you sleep as a reassurance from Him, and sent down water from the sky to cleanse you, to remove Satan’s pollution from you, to make your hearts strong and your feet firm
Your Lord revealed to the angels: ‘I am with you: give the believers firmness; I shall put terror into the hearts of the disbelievers- strike above their necks and strike all their fingertips.’
That was because they opposed God and His Messenger, and if anyone opposes God and His Messenger, God punishes them severely
‘That is what you get! Taste that!’––and the torment of the Fire awaits the disbelievers
Believers, when you meet the disbelievers in battle, never turn your backs on them
if anyone does so on such a day- unless maneuvring to fight or to join a fighting group- he incurs the wrath of God, and Hell will be his home, a wretched destination
It was not you who killed them but God, and when you [Prophet] threw [sand at them] it was not your throw [that defeated them] but God’s, to do the believers a favour: God is all seeing and all knowing
‘That is what you get!’––and God will weaken the disbelievers’ designs
[Disbelievers], if you were seeking a decision, now you have witnessed one: if you stop here, it will be better for you. If you return, so shall We, and your forces, though greater in number, will be of no use to you. God is with the believers
Believers, obey God and His Messenger: do not turn away when you are listening to him
do not be like those who say, ‘We heard,’ though in fact they were not listening
the worst creatures in God’s eyes are those who are [wilfully] deaf and dumb, who do not reason
If God had known there was any good in them, He would have made them hear, but even if He had, they would still have turned away and taken no notice
Believers, respond to God and His Messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life. Know that God comes between a man and his heart, and that you will be gathered to Him
Beware of discord that harms not only the wrongdoers among you: know that God is severe in His punishment
Remember when you were few, victimized in the land, afraid that people might catch you, but God sheltered you and strengthened you with His help, and provided you with good things so that you might be grateful
Believers, do not betray God and the Messenger, or knowingly betray [other people’s] trust in you
Be aware that your possessions and your children are only a test, and that there is a tremendous reward with God
Believers, if you remain mindful of God, He will give you a criterion [to tell right from wrong] and wipe out your bad deeds, and forgive you: God’s favour is great indeed
Remember [Prophet] when the disbelievers plotted to take you captive, kill, or expel you. They schemed and so did God: He is the best of schemers
Whenever Our Revelation is recited to them they say, ‘We have heard all this before- we could say something like this if we wanted- this is nothing but ancient fables.’
They also said, ‘God, if this really is the truth from You, then rain stones on us from the heavens, or send us some other painful punishment.’
But God would not send them punishment while you [Prophet] are in their midst, nor would He punish them if they sought forgiveness
yet why should God not punish them when they debar people from the Sacred Mosque, although they are not its [rightful] guardians? Only those mindful of God are its rightful guardians, but most of the disbelievers do not realize this
Their prayers before the House are nothing but whistling and clapping. ‘So taste the punishment for your disbelief.’
They use their wealth to bar people from the path of God, and they will go on doing so. In the end this will be a source of intense regret for them: they will be overcome and herded towards Hell
God will separate the bad from the good, place the bad on top of one another- heaping them all up together- and put them in Hell. They will be the losers
[Prophet], tell the disbelievers that if they desist their past will be forgiven, but if they persist, they have an example in the fate of those who went before
[Believers], fight them until there is no more persecution, and all worship is devoted to God alone: if they desist, then God sees all that they do
but if they pay no heed, be sure that God is your protector, the best protector and the best helper
Know that one-fifth of your battle gains belongs to God and the Messenger, to close relatives and orphans, to the needy and travellers, if you believe in God and the revelation We sent down to Our servant on the day of the decision, the day when the two forces met in battle. God has power over all things
Remember when you were on the near side of the valley, and they were on the far side and the caravan was below you. If you had made an appointment to fight, you would have failed to keep it [but the battle took place] so that God might bring about something already ordained, so that those who were to die might die after seeing a clear proof, and so that those who were to live might live after seeing a clear proof- God is all hearing and all seeing
[Prophet], remember when God made you see them in your sleep as few: if He had shown them to you [believers] as many, you would certainly have lost heart and argued about it, but God saved you. He knows the secrets of the heart
When you met He showed them to you as few, and He made you few in their eyes, so that He might bring about what has been ordained: everything goes back to God
Believers, when you meet a force in battle, stand firm and keep God firmly in mind, so that you may prosper
Obey God and His Messenger, and do not quarrel with one another, or you may lose heart and your spirit may desert you. Be steadfast: God is with the steadfast
Do not be like those who came out of their homes full of conceit, showing off to people, and barring others from the way of God- God has full knowledge of all that they do
Satan made their foul deeds seem fair to them, and said, ‘No one will conquer you today, for I will be right beside you,’ but when the armies came within sight of one another he turned on his heels, saying, ‘This is where I leave you: I see what you do not, and I fear God- God is severe in His punishment.’
The hypocrites and those who have sickness in their hearts said, ‘These people [the believers] must be deluded by their religion,’ but if anyone puts his trust in God, God is mighty and wise
If only you [Prophet] could see, when the angels take the souls of the disbelievers, how they strike their faces and backs: it will be said, ‘Taste the punishment of the Fire
This is caused by what your own hands have stored up for you: God is never unjust to His creatures.’
They are like Pharaoh’s people and those before them who ignored God’s signs, so God punished them for their sins: God is strong and severe in His punishment
[He did] this because God would never change a favour He had conferred on a people unless they changed what was within themselves. God is all hearing, all knowing
They are indeed like Pharaoh’s people and those before them, who denied the signs of their Lord: We destroyed them for their sins, and We drowned Pharaoh’s people- they were all evildoers
The worst creatures in the sight of God are those who reject Him and will not believe
who, whenever you [Prophet] make a treaty with them, break it, for they have no fear of God
If you meet them in battle, make a fearsome example of them to those who come after them, so that they may take heed
And if you learn of treachery on the part of any people, throw their treaty back at them, for God does not love the treacherous
The disbelievers should not think they have won; they cannot escape
Prepare whatever forces you [believers] can muster, including warhorses, to frighten off God’s enemies and yours, and warn others unknown to you but known to God. Whatever you give in God’s cause will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged
But if they incline towards peace, you [Prophet] must also incline towards it, and put your trust in God: He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing
If they intend to deceive you, God is enough for you: it was He who strengthened you with His help
and with the believers, and brought their hearts together. Even if you had given away everything in the earth you could not have done this, but God brought them together: God is mighty and wise
Prophet, God is enough for you, and for the believers who follow you
Prophet, urge the believers to fight: if there are twenty of you who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred, and a hundred of you, if steadfast, will overcome a thousand of the disbelievers, for they are people who do not understand
But God has lightened your burden for now, knowing that there is weakness in you––a steadfast hundred of you will defeat two hundred and a steadfast thousand of you will defeat two thousand, by God’s permission: God is with the steadfast
It is not right for a prophet to take captives before he has conquered the battlefield. You [people] desire the transient goods of this world, but God desires the Hereafter [for you]- God is mighty and wise
and had it not been preordained by God, a severe punishment would have come upon you for what you have taken
So enjoy in a good and lawful manner the things you have gained in war and be mindful of God: He is forgiving and merciful
Prophet, tell those you have taken captive, ‘If God knows of any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you: God is forgiving and merciful.’
But if they mean to betray you, they have betrayed God before, and He has given you mastery over them: He is all knowing, all wise
Those who believed and emigrated [to Medina] and struggled for God’s cause with their possessions and persons, and those who gave refuge and help, are all allies of one another. As for those who believed but did not emigrate, you are not responsible for their protection until they have done so. But if they seek help from you against persecution, it is your duty to assist them, except against people with whom you have a treaty: God sees all that you do
The disbelievers support one another. If you do not do the same, there will be persecution in the land and great corruption
Those who believed and emigrated, and struggled for God’s cause, and those who gave refuge and help- they are the true believers and they will have forgiveness and generous provision
And those who came to believe afterwards, and emigrated and struggled alongside you, they are part of you, but relatives still have prior claim over one another in God’s Scripture: God has full knowledge of all things
A release by God and His Messenger from the treaty you [believers] made with the idolaters [is announced]––
you [idolaters] may move freely about the land for four months, but you should bear in mind both that you will not escape God, and that God will disgrace those who defy [Him]
On the Day of the Great Pilgrimage [there will be] a proclamation from God and His Messenger to all people: ‘God and His Messenger are released from [treaty] obligations to the idolaters. It will be better for you [idolaters] if you repent; know that you cannot escape God if you turn away.’ [Prophet], warn those who ignore [God] that they will have a painful punishment
As for those who have honoured the treaty you made with them and who have not supported anyone against you: fulfil your agreement with them to the end of their term. God loves those who are mindful of Him
When the [four] forbidden months are over, wherever you encounter the idolaters, kill them, seize them, besiege them, wait for them at every lookout post; but if they turn [to God], maintain the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, let them go on their way, for God is most forgiving and merciful
If any one of the idolaters should seek your protection [Prophet], grant it to him so that he may hear the word of God, then take him to a place safe for him, for they are people with no knowledge [of it]
How could there be a treaty with God and His Messenger for such idolaters? But as for those with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Mosque, so long as they remain true to you, be true to them; God loves those who are mindful of Him
[How,] when, if they were to get the upper hand over you, they would not respect any tie with you, of kinship or of treaty? They please you with their tongues, but their hearts are against you and most of them are lawbreakers
They have sold God’s message for a trifling gain, and barred others from His path. How evil their actions are
Where believers are concerned, they respect no tie of kinship or treaty. They are the ones who are committing aggression
If they turn to God, keep up the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, then they are your brothers in faith: We make the messages clear for people who are willing to learn
But if they break their oath after having made an agreement with you, if they revile your religion, then fight the leaders of disbelief- oaths mean nothing to them- so that they may stop
How could you not fight a people who have broken their oaths, who tried to drive the Messenger out, who attacked you first? Do you fear them? It is God you should fear if you are true believers
Fight them: God will punish them at your hands, He will disgrace them, He will help you to conquer them, He will heal the believers’ feelings
and remove the rage from their hearts. God turns to whoever He will in His mercy; God is all knowing and wise
Do you think that you will be left untestedwithout God identifying which of you will strive for His cause and take no supporters apart from God, His Messenger, and other believers? God is fully aware of all your actions
It is not right for the idolaters to tend God’s places of worship while testifying to their own disbelief: the deeds of such people will come to nothing and they will abide in Hell
The only ones who should tend God’s places of worship are those who believe in God and the Last Day, who keep up the prayer, who pay the prescribed alms, and who fear no one but God: such people may hope to be among the rightly guided
Do you consider giving water to pilgrims and tending the Sacred Mosque to be equal to the deeds of those who believe in God and the Last Day and who strive in God’s path? They are not equal in God’s eyes. God does not guide such benighted people
Those who believe, who migrated and strove hard in God’s way with their possessions and their persons, are in God’s eyes much higher in rank; it is they who will triumph
and their Lord gives them the good news of His mercy and pleasure, Gardens where they will have lasting bliss
and where they will remain for ever: truly, there is a tremendous reward with God
Believers, do not take your fathers and brothers as allies if they prefer disbelief to faith: those of you who do so are doing wrong
Say [Prophet], ‘If your fathers, sons, brothers, wives, tribes, the wealth you have acquired, the trade which you fear will decline, and the dwellings you love are dearer to you than God and His Messenger and the struggle in His cause, then wait until God brings about His punishment.’ God does not guide those who break away
God has helped you [believers] on many battlefields, even on the day of the Battle of Hunayn. You were well pleased with your large numbers, but they were of no use to you: the earth seemed to close in on you despite its spaciousness, and you turned tail and fled
Then God sent His calm down to His Messenger and the believers, and He sent down invisible forces. He punished the disbelievers- this is what the disbelievers deserve
but God turns in His mercy to whoever He will. God is most forgiving and merciful
Believers, those who ascribe partners to God are truly unclean: do not let them come near the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you are afraid you may become poor, [bear in mind that] God will enrich you out of His bounty if He pleases: God is all knowing and wise
Fight those of the People of the Book who do not [truly] believe in God and the Last Day, who do not forbid what God and His Messenger have forbidden, who do not obey the rule of justice,until they pay the tax and agree to submit
The Jews said, ‘Ezra is the son of God,’ and the Christians said, ‘The Messiah is the son of God’: they said this with their own mouths, repeating what earlier disbelievers had said. May God confound them! How far astray they have been led
They take their rabbis and their monks as lords, as well as Christ, the son of Mary. But they were commanded to serve only one God: there is no god but Him; He is far above whatever they set up as His partners
They try to extinguish God’s light with their mouths, but God insists on bringing His light to its fullness, even if the disbelievers hate it
It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, to show that it is above all [other] religions, however much the idolaters may hate this
Believers, many rabbis and monks wrongfully consume people’s possessions and turn people away from God’s path. [Prophet], tell those who hoard gold and silver instead of giving in God’s cause that they will have a grievous punishment
on the Day it is heated up in Hell’s Fire and used to brand their foreheads, sides, and backs, they will be told, ‘This is what you hoarded up for yourselves! Now feel the pain of what you hoarded!’
God decrees that there are twelve months- ordained in God’s Book on the Day when He created the heavens and earth- four months of which are sacred: this is the correct calculation. Do not wrong your souls in these months- though you may fight the idolaters at any time, if they first fight you- remember that God is with those who are mindful of Him
Postponing sacred months is another act of disobedience by which those who disregard [God] are led astray: they will allow it one year and forbid it in another in order outwardly to conform with the number of God’s sacred months, but in doing so they permit what God has forbidden. Their evil deeds are made alluring to them: God does not guide those who disregard [Him]
Believers, why, when it is said to you, ‘Go and fight in God’s way,’ do you feel weighed down to the ground? Do you prefer this world to the life to come? How small the enjoyment of this world is, compared with the life to come
If you do not go out and fight, God will punish you severely and put others in your place, but you cannot harm Him in any way: God has power over all things
Even if you do not help the Prophet, God helped him when the disbelievers drove him out: when the two of them were in the cave, he [Muhammad] said to his companion, ‘Do not worry, God is with us,’ and God sent His calm down to him, aided him with forces invisible to you, and brought down the disbelievers’ plan. God’s plan is higher: God is almighty and wise
So go out, no matter whether you are lightly or heavily armed, and struggle in God’s way with your possessions and your persons: this is better for you, if you only knew
They would certainly have followed you [Prophet] if the benefit was within sight and the journey short, but the distance seemed too great for them. They will swear by God, ‘If we could, we certainly would go out [to battle] with you,’ but they ruin themselves, for God knows that they are lying
God forgive you [Prophet]! Why did you give them permission to stay at home before it had become clear to you which of them spoke the truth and which were liars
Those who have faith in God and the Last Day do not ask you for exemption from struggle with their possessions and their persons- God knows exactly who is mindful of Him
only those who do not have faith in God and the Last Day ask your permission to stay at home: they have doubt in their hearts and so they waver
If they had really wanted to go out [to battle] with you, they would have made preparations, but God was loath to let them rise up and made them hold back. It was said, ‘Stay with those who stay behind.’
They would only have given you trouble if they had gone out [to battle] with you: they would have scurried around, trying to sow discord among you, and some of you would willingly have listened to them- God knows exactly who does evil
Indeed, they had tried before that to stir up discord: they devised plots against you [Prophet] until the truth was exposed and God’s will triumphed, much to their disgust
Some of them said, ‘Give me permission to stay at home: do not trouble me.’ They are already in trouble: Hell will engulf the disbelievers
If you [Prophet] have good fortune, it will grieve them, but if misfortune comes your way, they will say to themselves, ‘We took precautions for this,’ and go away rejoicing
Say, ‘Only what God has decreed will happen to us. He is our Master: let the believers put their trust in God.’
Say, ‘Do you expect something other than one of the two best things to happen to us? Well, we expect God to inflict punishment on you, either from Himself or at our hands. So wait; we too are waiting.’
Say, ‘Whether you give willingly or unwillingly, what you give will not be accepted, for you are disobedient people.’
The only thing that prevents what they give from being accepted is the fact that they defy God and His Messenger, perform the prayer only lazily, and give only grudgingly
So [Prophet] do not let their possessions or their children impress you: through these God intends to punish them in this world and for their souls to depart while they disbelieve
They swear by God that they belong with you [believers], but they do not. They are cowardly
if they could find a place of refuge, or a cave, or somewhere to crawl into, they would run there with great haste
Some of them find fault with you [Prophet] regarding the distribution of alms: they are content if they are given a share, but angry if not
If only they would be content with what God and His Messenger have given them, and say, ‘God is enough for us- He will give us some of His bounty and so will His Messenger- to God alone we turn in hope.’
Alms are meant only for the poor, the needy, those who administer them, those whose hearts need winning over, to free slaves and help those in debt, for God’s cause, and for travellers in need. This is ordained by God; God is all knowing and wise
There are others who insult the Prophet by saying, ‘He will listen to anything.’ Say, ‘He listens for your own good: he believes in God, trusts the believers, and is a mercy for those of you who believe.’ An agonizing torment awaits those who insult God’s Messenger
They swear by God in order to please you [believers]: if they were true believers it would be more fitting for them to please God and His Messenger
Do they not know that whoever opposes God and His Messenger will go to the Fire of Hell and stay there? That is the supreme disgrace
The hypocrites fear that a sura will be revealed exposing what is in their hearts- say, ‘Carry on with your jokes: God will bring about what you fear!’
yet if you were to question them, they would be sure to say, ‘We were just chatting, just amusing ourselves.’ Say, ‘Were you making jokes about God, His Revelations, and His Mes-senger
Do not try to justify yourselves; you have gone from belief to disbelief.’ We may forgive some of you, but We will punish others: they are evildoers
The hypocrites, both men and women, are all the same: they order what is wrong and forbid what is right; they are tight-fisted. They have ignored God, so He has ignored them. The hypocrites are the disobedient ones
God promises the Fire of Hell as a permanent home for the hypocrites, both men and women, and the disbelievers: this is enough for them. God rejects them and a lasting punishment awaits them
‘You are like those who lived before you: they were even stronger than you, with more wealth and children; they enjoyed their share in this life as you have enjoyed yours; like them, you have indulged in idle talk.’ Their deeds go to waste in this world and the next; it is they who will lose all in the life to come
Have they never heard the stories about their predecessors, the peoples of Noah, Ad, Thamud, Abraham, Midian, and the ruined cities? Their messengers came to them with clear evidence of the truth: God would not deceive them; they deceived themselves
The believers, both men and women, support each other; they order what is right and forbid what is wrong; they keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms; they obey God and His Messenger. God will give His mercy to such people: God is almighty and wise
God has promised the believers, both men and women, Gardens graced with flowing streams where they will remain; good, peaceful homes in Gardens of lasting bliss; and- greatest of all- God’s good pleasure. That is the supreme triumph
Prophet, strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be tough with them. Hell is their final home- an evil destin-ation
They swear by God that they did not, but they certainly did speak words of defiance and became defiant after having submitted; they tried to do something, though they did not achieve it, ––being spiteful was their only response to God and His Messenger enriching them out of His bounty. They would be better off turning back [to God]: if they turn away, God will punish them in this world and the Hereafter, and there will be no one on earth to protect or help them
There are some among them who pledged themselves to God, saying, ‘If God gives us some of His bounty, we shall certainly give alms and be righteous,’
yet when He did give them some of His bounty, they became mean and turned obstinately away
Because they broke their promise to God, because of all the lies they told, He made hypocrisy settle in their hearts until the Day they meet Him
Do they not realize that God knows their secrets and their private discussions? That God knows all that is hidden
It is they who criticize the believers who give freely and those who can only give a little with great effort: they scoff at such people, but it is God who scoffs at them- a painful punishment awaits them
It makes no difference [Prophet] whether you ask forgiveness for them or not: God will not forgive them even if you ask seventy times, because they reject God and His Messenger. God does not guide those who rebel against Him
Those who were left behind were happy to stay behind when God’s Messenger set out; they hated the thought of striving in God’s way with their possessions and their persons. They said to one another, ‘Do not go [to war] in this heat.’ Say, ‘Hellfire is hotter.’ If only they understood
Let them laugh a little; they will weep a lot in return for what they have done
So [Prophet], if God brings you back to a group of them, who ask you for permission to go out [to battle], say, ‘You will never go out and fight an enemy with me: you chose to sit at home the first time, so remain with those who stay behind now.’
Do not hold prayers for any of them if they die, and do not stand by their graves: they disbelieved in God and His Messenger and died rebellious
Do not let their possessions and their children impress you: God means to punish them through these in this world, and that their souls should depart while they disbelieve
When a sura is revealed [saying], ‘Believe in God and strive hard alongside His Messenger,’ their wealthy ask your permission [to be exempt], saying, ‘Allow us to stay behind with the others’
they prefer to be with those who stay behind. Their hearts have been sealed: they do not comprehend
But the Messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their possessions and their persons. The best things belong to them; it is they who will prosper
God has prepared Gardens graced with flowing streams for them and there they will stay. That is the supreme triumph
Some of the desert Arabs, too, came to make excuses, asking to be granted exemption. Those who lied to God and His Messenger stayed behind at home. A painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved
but there is no blame attached to the weak, the sick, and those who have no means to spend, provided they are true to God and His Messenger- there is no reason to reproach those who do good: God is most forgiving and merciful
And there is no blame attached to those who came to you [Prophet] for riding animals and to whom you said, ‘I cannot find a mount for you’: they turned away with their eyes overflowing with tears of grief that they had nothing they could contribute
The ones open to blame are those who asked you for exemption despite their wealth, and who preferred to be with those who stay behind. God has sealed their hearts: they do not understand
When you return from the expedition they will carry on coming to you [believers] with excuses. Say, ‘Do not make excuses. We do not believe you: God has told us about you. God and His Messenger will watch your actions now, and in the end you will be returned to the One who knows the seen and the unseen. He will confront you with what you have done.’
When you return to them, they will swear to you by God in order to make you leave them alone- so leave them alone: they are loathsome, and Hell will be their home as a reward for their actions
they will swear to you in order to make you accept them, but even if you do accept them, God will not accept people who rebel against Him
The desert Arabs are the most stubborn of all peoples in their disbelief and hypocrisy. They are the least likely to recognize the limits that God has sent down to His Messenger. God is all knowing and all wise
Some of the desert Arabs consider what they give to be an imposition; they are waiting for fortune to turn against you, but fortune will turn against them. God is all hearing and all knowing
But there are also some desert Arabs who believe in God and the Last Day and consider their contributions as bringing them nearer to God and the prayers of the Messenger: they will indeed bring them nearer and God will admit them to His mercy. God is most forgiving and merciful
God will be well pleased with the first emigrants and helpersand those who followed them in good deeds, and they will be well pleased with Him: He has prepared Gardens graced with flowing streams for them, there to remain for ever. That is the supreme triumph
Some of the desert Arabs around you are hypocrites, as are some of the people of Medina- they are obstinate in their hypocrisy. You [Prophet] do not know them, but We know them well: We shall punish them twice and then they will be returned to [face] a painful punishment [in the Hereafter]
And there are others who have confessed their wrongdoing, who have done some righteous deeds and some bad ones: God may well accept their repentance, for God is most forgiving and merciful
In order to cleanse and purify them [Prophet], accept a gift out of their property [to make amends] and pray for them- your prayer will be a comfort to them. God is all hearing, all knowing
Do they not know that it is God Himself who accepts repentance from His servants and receives what is given freely for His sake? He is always ready to accept repentance, most merciful
Say [Prophet], ‘Take action! God will see your actions- as will His Messenger and the believers- and then you will be returned to Him who knows what is seen and unseen, and He will tell you what you have been doing
And there are others who are waiting for God’s decree, either to punish them or to show them mercy. God is all knowing and wise
Then there are those who built a mosque––in an attempt to cause harm, disbelief, and disunity among the believers––as an outpost for those who fought God and His Messenger before: they swear, ‘Our intentions were nothing but good,’ but God bears witness that they are liars
[Prophet], never pray in that mosque. You should rather pray in a mosque founded from its first day on consciousness of God: in this mosque there are men who desire to grow in purity- God loves those who seek to purify themselves
Which is better, the person who founds his building on consciousness of God and desire for His good pleasure, or the person who founds his building on the brink of a crumbling precipice that will tumble down into the Fire of Hell, taking him with it? God does not guide the evildoers
the building they have founded will always be a source of doubt within their hearts, until their hearts are cut to pieces. God is all knowing and wise
God has purchased the persons and possessions of the believers in return for the Garden- they fight in God’s way: they kill and are killed- this is a true promise given by Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Quran. Who could be more faithful to his promise than God? So be happy with the bargain you have made: that is the supreme triumph
[The believers are] those who turn to God in repentance; who worship and praise Him; who bow down and pros-trate themselves; who order what is good and forbid what is wrong and who observe God’s limits. Give glad news to such believers
It is not fitting for the Prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for the idolaters- even if they are related to them- after having been shown that they are the inhabitants of the Blaze
Abraham asked forgiveness for his father because he had made a promise to him, but once he realized that his father was an enemy of God, he washed his hands of him. Abraham was tender-hearted and forbearing
God would not condemn for going astray those He has already guided [to the faith] before making entirely clear to them what they should avoid. God has knowledge of everything
control of the heavens and earth belongs to God; He alone gives life and death; you have no ally or helper other than Him
In His mercy God has turned to the Prophet, and the emigrants and helpers who followed him in the hour of adversity when some hearts almost wavered: He has turned to them; He is most kind and merciful to them
And to the three men who stayed behind: when the earth, for all its spaciousness, closed in around them, when their very souls closed in around them, when they realized that the only refuge from God was with Him, He turned to them in mercy in order for them to return [to Him]. God is the Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful
You who believe, be mindful of God: stand with those who are true
The people of Medina and their neighbouring desert Arabs should not have held back from following God’s Messenger, nor should they have cared about themselves more than him: if ever they suffer any thirst, weariness, or hunger in God’s cause, take any step that angers the disbelievers, or cause any harm to an enemy, a good deed is recorded in their favour on account of it- God never wastes the reward of those who do good
if they spend a little or a lot for God’s cause, if they traverse a mountain pass, all this is recorded to their credit so that God can reward them in accordance with the best of their deeds
Yet it is not right for all the believers to go out [to battle] together: out of each community, a group should go out to gain understanding of the religion, so that they can teach their people when they return and so that they can guard themselves against evil
You who believe, fight the disbelievers near you and let them find you standing firm: be aware that God is with those who are mindful of Him
When a sura is revealed, some [hypocrites] say, ‘Have any of you been strengthened in faith by it?’ It certainly does strengthen the faith of those who believe and they rejoice
but, as for the perverse at heart, each new sura adds further to their perversity. They die disbelieving
Can they not see that they are afflicted once or twice a year? Yet they neither repent nor take heed
Whenever a sura is revealed, they look at each other and say, ‘Is anyone watching you?’ and then they turn away- God has turned their hearts away because they are people who do not use their reason
A Messenger has come to you from among yourselves. Your suffering distresses him: he is deeply concerned for you and full of kindness and mercy towards the believers
If they turn away, [Prophet], say ,‘God is enough for me: there is no god but Him; I put my trust in Him; He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.’
Alif Lam Ra These are the verses of the wise Book
Is it so surprising to people that We have revealed to a man from among them that he should warn people, and give glad news to those who believe, that they are on a sure footing with their Lord? [Yet] those who disbelieve say, ‘This man is clearly a sorcerer.’
Your Lord is God who created the heavens and earth in six Days, then established Himself on the Throne, governing everything; there is no one that can intercede with Him, unless He has first given permission: this is God your Lord so worship Him. How can you not take heed
It is to Him you shall all return––that is a true promise from God. It was He who created [you] in the first place, and He will do so again, so that He may justly reward those who believe and do good deeds. But the disbelievers will have a drink of scalding water, and agonizing torment, because they persistently disbelieved
It is He who made the sun a shining radiance and the moon a light, determining phases for it so that you might know the number of years and how to calculate time. God did not create all these without a true purpose; He explains His signs to those who understand
In the succession of night and day, and in what God created in the heavens and earth, there truly are signs for those who are aware of Him
Those who do not expect to meet Us and are pleased with the life of this world, contenting themselves with it and paying no heed to Our signs
shall have the Fire for their home because of what they used to do
But as for those who believe and do good deeds, their Lord will guide them because of their faith. Streams will flow at their feet in the Gardens of Bliss
Their prayer in them will be, ‘Glory be to You, God!’ their greeting, ‘Peace,’ and the last part of their prayer, ‘Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds.’
If God were to hasten on for people the harm [they have earned] as they wish to hasten on the good, their time would already be up. But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us to wander blindly in their excesses
When trouble befalls man he cries out to Us, whether lying on his side, sitting, or standing, but as soon as We relieve him of his trouble he goes on his way as if he had never cried out to Us to remove his trouble. In this way the deeds of such heedless people are made attractive to them
Before you people, We destroyed whole generations when they did evil- their messengers brought them clear signs but they refused to believe. This is how We repay the guilty
Later We made you their successors in the land, to see how you would behave
When Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who do not expect to meet with Us say, ‘Bring [us] a different Quran, or change it.’ [Prophet], say, ‘It is not for me to change it of my own accord; I only follow what is revealed to me, for I fear the torment of an awesome Day, if I were to disobey my Lord.’
Say, ‘If God had so willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I lived a whole lifetime among you before it came to me. How can you not use your reason?’
Who could be more wicked than someone who invents lies against God or denies His revelations? The guilty will never prosper
They worship alongside God things that can neither harm nor benefit them, and say, ‘These are our intercessors with God.’ Say, ‘Do you think you can tell God about something He knows not to exist in the heavens or earth? Glory be to Him! He is far above the partner-gods they associate with Him
All people were originally one single community, but later they differed. If it had not been for a word from your Lord, the preordained judgement would already have been passed between them regarding their differences
They say, ‘Why has no miraculous sign been sent down to him from his Lord?’ Say [Prophet], ‘Only God knows the unseen, so wait- I too am waiting.’
No sooner do We let people taste some mercy after some hardship has afflicted them, than they begin to scheme against Our revelations. Say, ‘God schemes even faster.’ Our messengersrecord all your scheming
It is He who enables you to travel on land and sea until, when you are sailing on ships and rejoicing in the favouring wind, a storm arrives: waves come at those on board from all sides and they feel there is no escape. Then they pray to God, professing sincere devotion to Him, ‘If You save us from this we shall be truly thankful.’
Yet no sooner does He save them than, back on land, they behave outrageously against all that is right. People! Your outrageous behaviour only works against yourselves. Take your little enjoyment in this present life; in the end you will return to Us and We shall confront you with everything you have done
The life of this world is like this: rain that We send down from the sky is absorbed by the plants of the earth, from which humans and animals eat. But when the earth has taken on its finest appearance, and adorns itself, and its people think they have power over it, then the fate We commanded comes to it, by night or by day, and We reduce it to stubble, as if it had not flourished just the day before. This is the way We explain the revelations for those who reflect
But God invites [everyone] to the Home of Peace, and guides whoever He will to a straight path
Those who did well will have the best reward and more besides. Neither darkness nor shame will cover their faces: these are the companions in Paradise, and there they will remain
As for those who did evil, each evil deed will be requited by its equal and humiliation will cover them- no one will protect them against God- as though their faces were covered with veils cut from the darkness of the night. These are the inmates of the Fire, and there they shall remain
On the Day We gather them all together, We shall say to those who associate partners with God, ‘Stay in your place, you and your partner-gods.’ Then We shall separate them, and their partner-gods will say, ‘It was not us you worshipped
God is witness enough between us and you- we had no idea that you worshipped us.’
Every soul will realize, then and there, what it did in the past. They will be returned to God, their rightful Lord, and their invented [gods] will desert them
Say [Prophet], ‘Who provides for you from the sky and the earth? Who controls hearing and sight? Who brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living, and who governs everything?’ They are sure to say, ‘God.’ Then say, ‘So why do you not take heed of Him
That is God, your Lord, the Truth. Apart from the Truth, what is there except error? So how is it that you are dissuaded?’
In this way, your Lord’s word about those who defy [the Truth] has been proved- they do not believe
Ask them, ‘Can any of your partner-gods originate creation, then bring it back to life again in the end?’ Say, ‘It is God that originates creation, and then brings it back to life, so how can you be misled?’
Say, ‘Can any of your partner-gods show the way to the Truth?’ Say, ‘God shows the way to the Truth. Is someone who shows the way to the Truth more worthy to be followed, or someone who cannot find the way unless he himself is shown? What is the matter with you? How do you judge?’
Most of them follow nothing but assumptions, but assumptions can be of no value at all against the Truth: God is well aware of what they do
Nor could this Quran have been devised by anyone other than God. It is a confirmation of what was revealed before it and an explanation of the Scripture- let there be no doubt about it- it is from the Lord of the Worlds
Or do they say, ‘He has devised it’? Say, ‘Then produce a sura like it, and call on anyone you can beside God if you are telling the truth.’
But they are denying what they cannot comprehend- its prophecy has yet to be fulfilled for them. In the same way, those before them refused to believe- see what was the end of those evildoers
Some of them believe in it, and some do not: your Lord knows best those who cause corruption
If they do not believe you, [Prophet], say, ‘I act for myself, and you for yourselves. You are not responsible for my actions nor am I responsible for yours.’
Some of them do listen to you: but can you make the deaf hear if they will not use their minds
Some of them look at you: but can you guide the blind if they will not see
God does not wrong people at all- it is they who wrong themselves
On the Day He gathers them together, it will be as if they have stayed [in the world] no longer than a single hour, and they will recognize one another. Those who denied the meeting with God will be the losers, for they did not follow the right guidance
Whether We let you [Prophet] see some of the punishment We have threatened them with, or cause you to die [first], they will return to Us: God is witness to what they do
Every community is sent a mes-senger, and when their messenger comes, they will be judged justly; they will not be wronged
They ask, ‘When will this promise be fulfilled, if what you say is true?’
Say [Prophet], ‘I cannot control any harm or benefit that comes to me, except as God wills. There is an appointed term for every community, and when it is reached they can neither delay nor hasten it, even for a moment.’
Say, ‘Think: if His punishment were to come to you, during the night or day, what part of it would the guilty wish to hasten
Will you believe in it, when it actually happens?’ It will be said, ‘Now [you believe], when [before] you sought to hasten it?’
It will be said to the evildoers, ‘Taste lasting punishment. Why should you be rewarded for anything but what you did?’
They ask you [Prophet], ‘Is it true?’ Say, ‘Yes, by my Lord, it is true, and you cannot escape it.’
Every soul that has done evil, if it possessed all that is on the earth, would gladly offer it as ransom. When they see the punishment, they will repent in secret, but they will be judged with justice and will not be wronged
It is to God that everything in the heavens and the earth truly belongs: God’s promise is true, but most people do not realize it
It is He who gives life and takes it, and you will all be returned to Him
People, a teaching from your Lord has come to you, a healing for what is in [your] hearts, and guidance and mercy for the believers
Say [Prophet], ‘In God’s grace and mercy let them rejoice: these are better than all they accumulate.’
Say, ‘Think about the provision God has sent down for you, some of which you have made unlawful and some lawful.’ Say, ‘Has God given you permission [to do this], or are you inventing lies about God?’
What will those people who invent lies about Him think on the Day of Resurrection? God is bountiful towards people, but most of them do not give thanks
In whatever matter you [Prophet] may be engaged and whatever part of the Quran you are reciting, whatever work you [people] are doing, We witness you when you are engaged in it. Not even the weight of a speck of dust in the earth or sky escapes your Lord, nor anything lesser or greater: it is all written in a clear record
But for those who are on God’s side there is no fear, nor shall they grieve
For those who believe and are conscious of God
for them there is good news in this life and in the Hereafter- there is no changing the promises of God- that is truly the supreme triumph
Do not let their words grieve you [Prophet]. Power belongs entirely to God; He hears all and knows all
indeed, all who are in the heavens and on the earth belong to Him. Those who call upon others beside God are not really following partner-gods; they are only following assumptions and telling lies
It is He who made the night so that you can rest in it and the daylight so that you can see- there truly are signs in this for those who hear
They say, ‘God has children!’ May He be exalted! He is the Self-Sufficient One; everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. You have no authority to say this. How dare you say things about God without any knowledge
Say [Prophet], ‘Those who invent lies about God will not prosper.’
They may have a little enjoyment in this world, but then they will return to Us. Then We shall make them taste severe punishment for persisting in blasphemy
Tell them the story of Noah. He said to his people, ‘My people, if my presence among you and my reminding you of God’s signs is too much for you, then I put my trust in God. Agree on your course of action, you and your partner-gods- do not be hesitant or secretive about it- then carry out your decision on me and give me no respite
But if you turn away, I have asked no reward from you; my reward is with God alone, and I am commanded to be one of those who devote themselves to Him.’
But they rejected him. We saved him and those with him on the Ark and let them survive; and We drowned those who denied Our revelations- see what was the end of those who were forewarned
Then, after him, We sent messengers to their peoples bringing them clear signs. But they would not believe in anything they had already rejected: in this way We seal the hearts of those who are full of hostility
After them We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs to Pharaoh and his leading supporters, but they acted arrogantly- they were wicked people
When the truth came to them from Us, they said, ‘This is blatant sorcery.’
Moses said, ‘Is this what you say about the Truth when it comes to you? Is this sorcery? Sorcerers never prosper.’
They said, ‘Have you come to turn us away from the faith we found our fathers following, so that you and your brother can gain greatness in this land? We will never believe in you.’
And Pharaoh said, ‘Bring me every learned sorcerer.’
When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them, ‘Throw down whatever you have.’
When they did so, Moses said, ‘Everything you have brought is sorcery and God will show it to be false. God does not make the work of mischief-makers right
He will uphold the Truth with His words, even if the evildoers hate it.’
But no one believed in Moses except a few of his own people, for fear that Pharaoh and their leaders would persecute them: Pharaoh was domineering in the land and prone to excess
Moses said, ‘My people, if you have faith in God and are devoted to Him, put your trust in Him.’
They said, ‘We have put our trust in God. Lord! Do not make us an object of persecution for the oppressors
Save us, in Your mercy, from those who reject [Your message].’
We revealed to Moses and his brother: ‘House your people in Egypt and make these houses places of worship; keep up the prayer; give good news to the believers!’
And Moses said, ‘Our Lord, You have given Pharaoh and his chiefs splendour and wealth in this present life and here they are, Lord, leading others astray from Your path. Our Lord, obliterate their wealth and harden their hearts so that they do not believe until they see the agonizing torment.’
God said, ‘Your prayers are answered, so stay on the right course, and do not follow the path of those who do not know.’
We took the Children of Israel across the sea. Pharaoh and his troops pursued them in arrogance and aggression. But as he was drowning he cried, ‘I believe there is no God except the one the Children of Israel believe in. I submit to Him.’
‘Now? When you had always been a rebel, and a troublemaker
Today We shall save only your corpse as a sign to all posterity. A great many people fail to heed Our signs.’
We settled the Children of Israel in a good place and provided good things as sustenance for them. It was only after knowledge had come to them that they began to differ among themselves. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their differences
So if you [Prophet] are in doubt about what We have revealed to you, ask those who have been reading the scriptures before you. The Truth has come to you from your Lord, so be in no doubt and do not deny God’s signs
then you would become one of the losers
Those against whom your Lord’s sentence is passed will not believe
even if every sign comes to them, until they see the agonizing torment
If only a single town had believed and benefited from its belief! Only Jonah’s people did so, and when they believed, We relieved them of the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world, and let them enjoy life for a time
Had your Lord willed, all the people on earth would have believed. So can you [Prophet] compel people to believe
No soul can believe except by God’s will, and He brings disgrace on those who do not use their reason
Say, ‘Look at what is in the heavens and on the earth.’ But what use are signs and warnings to people who will not believe
What are they waiting for but the punishment that came to those before them? Say, ‘Wait then, I am waiting too.’
In the end We shall save Our messengers and the believers. We take it upon Ourself to save the believers
[Prophet] say, ‘People, even if you are in doubt about my religion, I do not worship those you worship other than God, but I worship God who will cause you to die, and I am commanded to be a believer.’
[Prophet], set your face towards religion as a man of pure faith. Do not be one of those who join partners with God
do not pray to any other [god] that can neither benefit nor harm you: if you do, you will be one of the evildoers
If God inflicts harm on you, no one can remove it but Him, and if He intends good for you, no one can turn His bounty away; He grants His bounty to any of His servants He will. He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful
Say, ‘People, the Truth has come to you from your Lord. Whoever follows the right path follows it for his own good, and whoever strays does so to his own loss: I am not your guardian.’
[Prophet], follow what is being revealed to you, and be steadfast until God gives His judgement, for He is the Best of Judges
Alif Lam Ra [This is] a Scripture whose verses are perfected, then set out clearly, from One who is all wise, all aware
[Say, Prophet], ‘Worship no one but God. I am sent to you from Him to warn and to give good news
Ask your Lord for forgiveness, then turn back to Him. He will grant you wholesome enjoyment until an appointed time, and give His grace to everyone who has merit. But if you turn away, I fear you will have torment on a terrible Day
it is to God that you will all return, and He has power over everything.’
See how they [the disbelievers] wrap themselves up, to hide their feelings from Him. But even when they cover themselves with their clothes, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal: He knows well the innermost secrets of the heart
There is not a creature that moves on earth whose provision is not His concern. He knows where it lives and its [final] resting place: it is all [there] in a clear record
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six Days––His rule extends over the waters too––so as to test which of you does best. Yet [Prophet], if you say to them, ‘You will be resurrected after death,’ the disbelievers are sure to answer, ‘This is clearly nothing but sorcery.’
If We defer their punishment for a determined time, they are sure to say, ‘What is holding it back?’ But on the Day it comes upon them, nothing will divert it from them; what they mocked will be all around them
How desperate and ungrateful man becomes when We let him taste Our mercy and then withhold it
And if We let him taste mercy after some harm has touched him, he is sure to say, ‘Misfortune has gone away from me.’ He becomes exultant and boastful
Not so those who are steadfast and do good deeds: they will have forgiveness and a great reward
So [Prophet] are you going to abandon some part of what is revealed to you, and let your heart be oppressed by it, because they say, ‘Why is no treasure sent down to him? Why has no angel come with him?’? You are only there to warn; it is God who is in charge of everything
If they say, ‘He has invented it himself,’ say, ‘Then produce ten invented suras like it, and call in whoever you can beside God, if you are truthful.’
If they do not answer you, then you will all know that it is sent down containing knowledge from God, and that there is no god but Him. Then will you submit to Him
If any desire [only] the life of this world with all its finery, We shall repay them in full in this life for their deeds- they will be given no less
but such people will have nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire: their work here will be fruitless and their deeds futile
Can they be compared to those who have clear proof from their Lord, recited by a witness from Him, and before it the Book of Moses, as a guide and mercy? These people believe in it, whereas those groups that deny its truth are promised the Fire. So have no doubt about it [Prophet]: it is the Truth from your Lord, though most people do not believe so
Who could do more wrong than someone who invents lies about God? Such people will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, ‘These are the ones that lied about their Lord.’ God’s rejection is the due of those who do such wrong
who hinder others from God’s path, trying to make it crooked, and deny the life to come
They will not escape on earth, and there will be no one other than God to protect them. Their punishment will be doubled. They could not hear, and they did not see
It is they who will have lost their souls, and what they invented will have deserted them
There is no doubt they will be the ones to lose most in the life to come
But those who believed, did good deeds, and humbled themselves before their Lord will be companions in Paradise and there they will stay
These two groups are like the blind and the deaf as compared with those who can see and hear well: can they be alike? How can you not take heed
We sent Noah to his people to say, ‘I have come to you to give a clear warning
worship no one but God. I fear you will have torment on a painful Day.’
But the prominent disbelievers among his people said, ‘We can see that you are nothing but a mortal like ourselves, and it is clear to see that only the vilest among us follow you. We cannot see how you are any better than we are. In fact, we think you are a liar.’
He said, ‘My people, think: if I did have a clear sign from my Lord, and He had given me grace of His own, though it was hidden from you, could we force you to accept it against your will
My people, I ask no reward for it from you; my reward comes only from God. I will not drive away the faithful: they are sure to meet their Lord. I can see you are foolish
My people, who could help me against God if I drove the faithful away? Will you not take heed
I am not telling you that I hold God’s treasures, or have any knowledge of what is hidden, or that I am an angel. Nor do I say that God will not grant any good to those who are despised in your eyes: God Himself knows best what is in their souls. If I did this I would be one of the wrongdoers.’
They said, ‘Noah! You have argued with us for too long. Bring down on us the punishment you threaten us with, if you are telling the truth.’
He said, ‘It is God who will bring it down, if He wishes, and you will not be able to escape
My advice will be no use to you if God wishes to leave you to your delusions: He is your Lord and to Him you will be returned.’
If [these disbelievers] say, ‘He has made this up,’ say [Muhammad], ‘If I have made this up, I am responsible for my own crime, but I am innocent of the crimes you commit.’
It was revealed to Noah, ‘None of your people will believe, other than those who have already done so, so do not be distressed by, what they do
Build the Ark under Our [watchful] eyes and with Our inspiration. Do not plead with Me for those who have done evil- they will be drowned.’
So he began to build the Ark, and whenever leaders of his people passed by, they laughed at him. He said, ‘You may scorn us now, but we will come to scorn you
you will find out who will receive a humiliating punishment, and on whom a lasting suffering will descend.’
When Our command came, and water gushed up out of the earth, We said, ‘Place on board this Ark a pair of each species, and your own family- except those against whom the sentence has already been passed- and those who have believed,’ though only a few believed with him
He said, ‘Board the Ark. In the name of God it shall sail and anchor. My God is most forgiving and merciful.’
It sailed with them on waves like mountains, and Noah called out to his son, who stayed behind, ‘Come aboard with us, my son, do not stay with the disbelievers.’
But he replied, ‘I will seek refuge on a mountain to save me from the water.’ Noah said, ‘Today there is no refuge from God’s command, except for those on whom He has mercy.’ The waves cut them off from each other and he was among the drowned
Then it was said, ‘Earth, swallow up your water, and sky, hold back,’ and the water subsided, the command was fulfilled. The Ark settled on Mount Judi, and it was said, ‘Gone are those evildoing people!’
Noah called out to his Lord, saying, ‘My Lord, my son was one of my family, though Your promise is true, and You are the most just of all judges.’
God said, ‘Noah, he was not one of your family. What he did was not right. Do not ask Me for things you know nothing about. I am warning you not to be foolish.’
He said, ‘My Lord, I take refuge with You from asking for things I know nothing about. If You do not forgive me, and have mercy on me, I shall be one of the losers.’
And it was said, ‘Noah, descend in peace from Us, with blessings on you and on some of the communities that will spring from those who are with you. There will be others We will allow to enjoy life for a time, but then a painful punishment from Us will afflict them.’
These accounts are part of what was beyond your knowledge [Muhammad]. We revealed them to you. Neither you nor your people knew them before now, so be patient: the future belongs to those who are aware of God
To the Ad, We sent their brother, Hud. He said, ‘My people, worship God. You have no god other than Him; you are only making up lies
I ask no reward from you, my people; my reward comes only from Him who created me. Why do you not use your reason
My people, ask forgiveness from your Lord, and return to Him. He will send down for you rain in abundance from the sky, and give you extra strength. Do not turn away and be lost in your sins.’
They replied, ‘Hud, you have not brought us any clear evidence. We will not forsake our gods on the strength of your word alone, nor will we believe in you
All we can say is that one of our gods may have inflicted some harm on you.’ He said, ‘I call God to witness, and you too are my witnesses, that I disown those you set up as partners with God
So plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite
I put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is no moving creature which He does not control. My Lord’s way is straight
But if you turn away, then I have conveyed the message with which I was sent to you, and my Lord will bring along another people in your place. You cannot do Him any harm: it is my Lord who protects everything.’
And so, when Our judgement came to pass, by Our grace We saved Hud and his fellow believers. We saved them from a severe punishment
These were the Ad: they rejected their Lord’s signs, disobeyed His messengers, and followed the command of every obstinate tyrant
They were rejected in this life and so they shall be on the Day of Judgement. Yes, the 'Ad denied their Lord- so away with the Ad, the people of Hud
To the Thamud, We sent their brother, Salih. He said, ‘My people, worship God. You have no god other than Him. It was He who brought you into being from the earth and made you inhabit it, so ask forgiveness from Him, and turn back to Him: my Lord is near, and ready to answer.’
They said, ‘Salih, We used to have such great hope in you. Will you forbid us to worship what our fathers worshipped? We are in grave doubt about what you are asking us to do.’
He said, ‘My people, just think: if I did have clear proof from my Lord, and if He had given me mercy of His own, who could protect me from God if I disobeyed Him? You would only make my loss greater
My people, this camel belongs to God, a sign for you, so leave it to pasture on God’s earth and do not harm it, or you will soon be punished.’
But they hamstrung it, so he said, ‘Enjoy life for another three days
this warning will not prove false.’ And so, when Our command was fulfilled, by Our mercy We saved Salih and his fellow believers from the disgrace of that day. [Prophet], it is your Lord who is the Strong, the Mighty One
The blast struck the evildoers and they lay dead in their homes
as though they had never lived and flourished there. Yes, the Thamud denied their Lord- so away with the Thamud
To Abraham Our messengers brought good news. They said, ‘Peace.’ He answered, ‘Peace,’ and without delay he brought in a roasted calf
When he saw that their hands did not reach towards the meal, he found this strange and became afraid of them. But they said, ‘Do not be afraid. We have been sent against the people of Lot.’
His wife was standing [nearby] and laughed. We gave her good news of Isaac and, after him, of Jacob
She said, ‘Alas for me! How am I to bear a child when I am an old woman, and my husband here is an old man? That would be a strange thing!’
They said, ‘Are you astonished at what God ordains? The grace of God and His blessings be upon you, people of this house! For He is worthy of all praise and glory.’
Then, when the fear left Abraham and the good news came to him, he pleaded with Us for Lot’s people
for Abraham was forbearing, tender-hearted, and devout
‘Abraham, cease your pleading: what your Lord has ordained has come about; punishment is coming to them, which cannot be turned back.’
And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was anxious for them, feeling powerless to protect them, and said, ‘This is a truly terrible day!’
His people came rushing towards him; they used to commit foul deeds. He said, ‘My people, here are my daughters.They are more wholesome for you, so have some fear of God and do not disgrace me with my guests. Is there not a single right-minded man among you?’
They said, ‘You know very well that we have no right to your daughters. You know very well what we want.’
He said, ‘If only I had the strength to stop you or could rely on strong support!’
They [the messengers] said, ‘Lot, we are your Lord’s messengers. They will not reach you. Leave with your household in the dead of night, and let none of you turn back. Only your wife will suffer the fate that befalls the others. Their appointed time is the morning: is the morning not near?’
And so when what We had ordained came about, We turned their town upside down and rained down stones of baked clay on it, layer upon layer
marked from your Lord. It is not far from the evildoers
And to Midian, We sent their brother Shuayb. He said, ‘My people, worship God. You have no god other than Him. Do not give short measure nor short weight. I see you are prospering, but I fear you will have torment on an overwhelming Day
My people, in fairness, give full measure and weight. Do not withhold from people things that are rightly theirs, and do not spread corruption in the land
What lasts with God is best for you, if you are believers: I am not your keeper.’
They said, ‘Shuayb, does your prayer tell you that we should abandon what our forefathers worshipped and refrain from doing whatever we please with our own property? Indeed you are a tolerant and sensible man.’
He answered, ‘My people, can you not see? What if I am acting on clear evidence from my Lord? He Himself has given me good provision: I do not want to do what I am forbidding you to do, I only want to put things right as far as I can. I cannot succeed without God’s help: I trust in Him, and always turn to Him
My people, do not let your opposition to me bring upon you a similar fate to the peoples of Noah or Hud or Salih; the people of Lot are not far away from you
Ask forgiveness from your Lord, and turn to Him in repentance: my Lord is merciful and most loving.’
They said, ‘Shuayb, we do not understand much of what you say, and we find you very weak in our midst. But for your family, we would have stoned you, for you have no great status among us.’
He said, ‘My people, is my family stronger in your estimation than God? And have you put Him behind you? My Lord surrounds everything you do
My people, do whatever is within your power, and I will do likewise. Soon you will know who will receive a disgraceful punishment and who is a liar. Watch out, and so will I.’
When what We had ordained came about, in Our mercy We saved Shuayb and his fellow believers, but a mighty blast struck the wrongdoers. By morning they lay dead in their homes
as if they had never lived and flourished there. Yes, away with the people of Midian, just like the Thamud
We also sent Moses, with Our signs and clear authority
to Pharaoh and his supporters, but they followed Pharaoh’s orders, and Pharaoh’s orders were misguided
He will be at the forefront of his people on the Day of Resurrection, leading them down towards the Fire. What a foul drinking place to be led to
They were pursued by God’s rejection in this life and will be on the Day of Resurrection, too. What a foul gift to be given
We relate to you [Muhammad] such accounts of earlier towns: some of them are still standing; some have been mown down
We did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. Their gods, which they called on beside God, were no use to them when what your Lord had ordained came about; they only increased their ruin
Such is the punishment of your Lord for towns in the midst of their sins: His punishment is terrible and severe
There truly is a sign in this for anyone who fears the punishment of the Hereafter. That is a Day in which all people will be gathered together, a Day for all to see
We are delaying it only for a specified period
and when that Day comes, no soul will speak except by His permission, and some of them will be wretched and some happy
The wretched ones will be in the Fire, sighing and groaning
there to remain for as long as the heavens and earth endure, unless your Lord wills otherwise: your Lord carries out whatever He wills
As for those who have been blessed, they will be in Paradise, there to remain as long as the heavens and earth endure, unless your Lord wills otherwise- an unceasing gift
[Prophet], have no doubt about what these people worship: it is merely what their fathers worshipped before them, and We shall certainly give them their share in full, without any reduction
We gave Moses the Scripture before you, but differences arose about it and if it had not been for a prior word from your Lord, a decision would already have been made between them, though they are in grave doubt about it
Your Lord will give everyone full due for whatever they have done: He is aware of everything they do
So keep to the right course as you have been commanded, together with those who have turned to God with you. Do not overstep the limits, for He sees everything you do
Do not rely on those who do evil, or the Fire may touch you, and then you will have no one to protect you from God, nor will you be helped
[Prophet], keep up the prayer at both ends of the day, and during parts of the night, for good things drive bad away- this is a reminder for those who are aware
Be steadfast: God does not let the rewards of those who do good go to waste
If only there had been, among the generations before your time, people with a rem-nant of good sense, to forbid corruption on the earth! We saved only a few of them, while the unjust pursued the enjoyment of plenty, and persisted in sin
Your Lord would not destroy any town without cause if its people were acting righteously
If your Lord had pleased, He would have made all people a single community, but they continue to have their differences
except those on whom your Lord has mercy- for He created them to be this way, and the word of your Lord is final: ‘I shall definitely fill Hell with both jinn and men.’
So [Muhammad], We have told you the stories of the prophets to make your heart firm and in these accounts truth has come to you, as well as lessons and reminders for the believers
Say to those who do not believe, ‘Do whatever you can: we too are doing what we can,’
and ‘Wait: we too are waiting.’
All that is hidden in the heavens and earth belongs to God, and all authority goes back to Him. So [Prophet], worship Him, and put your trust in Him: your Lord is never unaware of what you [people] are doing
Alif Lam Ra These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear––
We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran so that you [people] may understand
We tell you [Prophet] the best of stories in revealing this Quran to you. Before this you were one of those who knew nothing about them
Joseph said to his father, ‘Father, I dreamed of eleven stars and the sun and the moon: I saw them all bow down before me,’
and he replied, ‘My son, tell your brothers nothing of this dream, or they may plot to harm you––Satan is man’s sworn enemy
This is about how your Lord will choose you, teach you to interpret dreams, and perfect His blessing on you and the House of Jacob, just as He perfected it earlier on your forefathers Abraham and Isaac: your Lord is all knowing and wise.’
There are lessons in the story of Joseph and his brothers for all who seek them
The brothers said [to each other], ‘Although we are many, Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are–– our father is clearly in the wrong.’
[One of them said], ‘Kill Joseph or banish him to another land, and your father’s attention will be free to turn to you. After that you can be righteous.’
[Another of them] said, ‘Do not kill Joseph, but, if you must, throw him into the hidden depths of a well where some caravan may pick him up.’
They said to their father, ‘Why do you not trust us with Joseph? We wish him well
Send him with us tomorrow and he will enjoy himself and play- we will take good care of him.’
He replied, ‘The thought of you taking him away with you worries me: I am afraid a wolf may eat him when you are not paying attention.’
They said, ‘If a wolf were to eat him when there are so many of us, we would truly be losers!’
Then they took him away with them, resolved upon throwing him into the hidden depths of a well- We inspired him, saying, ‘You will tell them of all this [at a time] when they do not realize [who you are]!’
and at nightfall they returned to their father weeping
They said, ‘We went off racing one another, leaving Joseph behind with our things, and a wolf ate him. You will not believe us, though we are telling the truth!’
and they showed him his shirt, deceptively stained with blood. He cried, ‘No! Your souls have prompted you to do wrong! But it is best to be patient: from God alone I seek help to bear what you are saying.’
Some travellers came by. They sent someone to draw water and he let down his bucket. ‘Good news!’ he exclaimed. ‘Here is a boy!’ They hid him like a piece of merchandise- God was well aware of what they did
and then sold him for a small price, for a few pieces of silver: so little did they value him
The Egyptian who bought him said to his wife, ‘Look after him well! He may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son.’ In this way We settled Joseph in that land and later taught him how to interpret dreams: God always prevails in His purpose, though most people do not realize it
When he reached maturity, We gave him judgement and knowledge: this is how We reward those who do good
The woman in whose house he was living tried to seduce him: she bolted the doors and said, ‘Come to me,’ and he replied, ‘God forbid! My master has been good to me; wrongdoers never prosper.’
She made for him, and he would have succumbed to her if he had not seen evidence of his Lord- We did this in order to keep evil and indecency away from him, for he was truly one of Our chosen servants
They raced for the door- she tore his shirt from behind- and at the door they met her husband. She said, ‘What, other than prison or painful punishment, should be the reward of someone who tried to dishonour your wife?’
but he said, ‘She tried to seduce me.’ A member of her household suggested, ‘If his shirt is torn at the front, then it is she who is telling the truth and he who is lying
but if it is torn at the back, then she is lying and he is telling the truth.’
When the husband saw that the shirt was torn at the back, he said, ‘This is another instance of women’s treachery: your treachery is truly great
Joseph, overlook this; but you [wife], ask forgiveness for your sin- you have done wrong.’
Some women of the city said, ‘The governor’s wife is trying to seduce her slave! Love for him consumes her heart! It is clear to us that she has gone astray.’
When she heard their malicious talk, she prepared a banquet and sent for them, giving each of them a knife. She said to Joseph, ‘Come out and show yourself to them!’ and when the women saw him, they were stunned by his beauty, and cut their hands, exclaiming, ‘Great God! He cannot be mortal! He must be a precious angel!’
She said, ‘This is the one you blamed me for. I tried to seduce him and he wanted to remain chaste, but if he does not do what I command now, he will be put in prison and degraded.’
Joseph said, ‘My Lord! I would prefer prison to what these women are calling me to do. If You do not protect me from their treachery, I shall yield to them and do wrong,’
and his Lord answered his prayer and protected him from their treachery- He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing
In the end they thought it best, after seeing all the signs of his innocence, that they should imprison him for a while
Two young men went into prison alongside him. One of them said, ‘I dreamed that I was pressing grapes’; the other said, ‘I dreamed that I was carrying bread on my head and that the birds were eating it.’ [They said], ‘Tell us what this means- we can see that you are a knowledgeable man.’
He said, ‘I can tell you what this means before any meal arrives: this is part of what my Lord has taught me. I reject the faith of those who disbelieve in God and deny the life to come
and I follow the faith of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Because of God’s grace to us and to all mankind, we would never worship anything beside God, but most people are ungrateful
Fellow prisoners, would many diverse gods be better than God the One, the All Powerful? [No indeed]
All those you worship instead of Him are mere names you and your forefathers have invented, names for which God has sent down no sanction. Authority belongs to God alone, and He orders you to worship none but Him: this is the true faith, though most people do not realize it
Fellow prisoners, one of you will serve his master with wine; the other will be crucified and the birds will peck at his head. That is the end of the matter on which you asked my opinion.’
Joseph said to the one he knew would be saved, ‘Mention me to your master,’ but Satan made him forget to do this, and so Joseph remained in prison for a number of years
The king said, ‘I dreamed about seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones; seven green ears of corn and [seven] others withered. Counsellors, if you can interpret dreams, tell me the meaning of my dream.’
They said, ‘These are confusing dreams and we are not skilled at dream-interpretation,’
but the prisoner who had been freed at last remembered [Joseph] and said, ‘I shall tell you what this means. Give me leave to go.’
‘Truthful Joseph! Tell us the meaning of seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, seven green ears of corn and [seven] others withered
then I can return to the people to inform them.’ Joseph said, ‘You will sow for seven consecutive years as usual. Store all that you reap, left in the ear, apart from the little you eat
After that will come seven years of hardship which will consume all but a little of what you stored up for them
after that will come a year when the people will have abundant rain and will press grapes.’
The king said, ‘Bring him to me,’ but when the messenger came to fetch Joseph, he said, ‘Go back to your master and ask him about what happened to those women who cut their hands- my Lord knows all about their treachery.’
The king asked the women, ‘What happened when you tried to seduce Joseph?’ They said, ‘God forbid! We know nothing bad of him!’ and the governor’s wife said, ‘Now the truth is out: it was I who tried to seduce him- he is an honest man.’
[Joseph said, ‘This was] for my master to know that I did not betray him behind his back: God does not guide the mischief of the treacherous
I do not pretend to be blameless, for man’s very soul incites him to evil unless my Lord shows mercy: He is most forgiving, most merciful.’
The king said, ‘Bring him to me: I will have him serve me personally,’ and then, once he had spoken with him, ‘From now on you will have our trust and favour.’
Joseph said, ‘Put me in charge of the nation’s storehouses: I shall manage them prudently and carefully.’
In this way We settled Joseph in that land to live wherever he wished: We grant Our mercy to whoever We will and do not fail to reward those who do good
The reward of the Hereafter is best for those who believe and are mindful of God
Joseph’s brothers came and presented themselves before him. He recognized them- though they did not recognize him
and once he had given them their provisions, he said, ‘Bring me the brother [you left with] your father! Have you not seen me giving generous measure and being the best of hosts
You will have no more corn from me if you do not bring him to me, and you will not be permitted to approach me.’
They said, ‘We shall do all we can to persuade his father to send him with us, indeed we shall.’
Joseph said to his servants, ‘Put their [traded] goods back into their saddlebags, so that they may recognize them when they go back to their family, and [be eager to] return.’
When they returned to their father, they said, ‘Father, we have been denied any more corn, but send our brother back with us and we shall be given another measure. We shall guard him carefully.’
He said, ‘Am I to entrust him to you as I did his brother before? God is the best guardian and the Most Merciful of the merciful.’
Then, when they opened their packs, they discovered that their goods had been returned to them and they said, ‘Father! We need no more [goods to barter]: look, our goods have been returned to us. We shall get corn for our household; we shall keep our brother safe; we shall be entitled to another camel-load of grain- an extra measure so easily achieved!’
He said, ‘I will never send him with you, not unless you swear by God that you will bring him back to me if that is humanly possible.’ Then, when they had given him their pledge, he said, ‘Our words are entrusted to God.’
He said, ‘My sons, do not enter all by one gate- use different gates. But I cannot help you against the will of God: all power is in God’s hands. I trust in Him; let everyone put their trust in Him,’
and, when they entered as their father had told them, it did not help them against the will of God, it merely satisfied a wish of Jacob’s. He knew well what We had taught him, though most people do not
Then, when they presented themselves before Joseph, he drew his brother apart and said, ‘I am your brother, so do not be saddened by their past actions,’
and, once he had given them their provisions, he placed the drinking-cup in his brother’s pack. A man called out, ‘People of the caravan! You are thieves!’
and they turned and said, ‘What have you lost?’
They replied, ‘The king’s drinking-cup is missing,’ and, ‘Whoever returns it will get a camel-load [of grain],’ and, ‘I give you my word.’
They said, ‘By God! You must know that we did not come to make mischief in your land: we are no thieves.’
They asked them, ‘And if we find that you are lying, what penalty shall we apply to you?’
and they answered, ‘The penalty will be [the enslavement of] the person in whose bag the cup is found: this is how we punish wrongdoers.’
[Joseph] began by searching their bags, then his brother’s, and he pulled it out from his brother’s bag. In this way We devised a plan for Joseph- if God had not willed it so, he could not have detained his brother as a penalty under the king’s law- We raise the rank of whoever We will. Above everyone who has knowledge there is the One who is all knowing
[His brothers] said, ‘If he is a thief then his brother was a thief before him,’ but Joseph kept his secrets and did not reveal anything to them. He said, ‘You are in a far worse situation. God knows best the truth of what you claim.’
They said, ‘Mighty governor, he has an elderly father. Take one of us in his place. We can see that you are a very good man.’
He replied, ‘God forbid that we should take anyone other than the person on whom we found our property: that would be unjust of us.’
When they lost hope of [persuading] him, they withdrew to confer with each other: the eldest of them said, ‘Do you not remember that your father took a solemn pledge from you in the name of God and before that you failed in your duty with regard to Joseph? I will not leave this land until my father gives me leave or God decides for me- He is the best decider
so go back to your father and say, “Your son stole. We can only tell you what we saw. How could we guard against the unforeseen
Ask in the town where we have been; ask the people of the caravan we travelled with: we are telling the truth.”’
Their father said, ‘No! Your souls have prompted you to do wrong! But it is best to be patient: may God bring all of them back to me- He alone is the All Knowing, the All Wise,’
and he turned away from them, saying, ‘Alas for Joseph!’ His eyes went white with grief and he was filled with sorrow
They said, ‘By God! You will ruin your health if you do not stop thinking of Joseph, or even die.’
He said, ‘I plead my grief and sorrow before God. I have knowledge from God that you do not have
My sons, go and seek news of Joseph and his brother and do not despair of God’s mercy- only disbelievers despair of God’s mercy.’
Then, when they presented themselves before Joseph, they said, ‘Mighty governor, misfortune has afflicted us and our family. We have brought only a little merchandise, but give us full measure. Be charitable to us: God rewards the charitable.’
He said, ‘Do you now realize what you did to Joseph and his brother when you were ignorant?’
and they cried, ‘Could it be that you are Joseph?’ He said, ‘I am Joseph. This is my brother. God has been gracious to us: God does not deny anyone who is mindful of God and steadfast in adversity the rewards of those who do good.’
They said, ‘By God! God really did favour you over all of us and we were in the wrong!’
but he said, ‘You will hear no reproaches today. May God forgive you: He is the Most Merciful of the merciful
Take my shirt and lay it over my father’s face: he will recover his sight. Then bring your whole family back to me.’
Later, when the caravan departed, their father said, ‘You may think I am senile but I can smell Joseph,’
but [people] said, ‘By God! You are still lost in that old illusion of yours!’
Then, when the bearer of good news came and placed the shirt on to Jacob’s face, his eyesight returned and he said, ‘Did I not tell you that I have knowledge from God that you do not have?’
The [brothers] said, ‘Father, ask God to forgive our sins- we were truly in the wrong.’
He replied, ‘I shall ask my Lord to forgive you: He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.’
Later, when they presented themselves before Joseph, he drew his parents to him- he said, ‘Welcome to Egypt: you will all be safe here, God willing’
and took them up to [his] throne. They all bowed down before him and he said, ‘Father, this is the fulfilment of that dream I had long ago. My Lord has made it come true and has been gracious to me- He released me from prison and He brought you here from the desert- after Satan sowed discord between me and my brothers. My Lord is most subtle in achieving what He will; He is the All Knowing, the Truly Wise
My Lord! You have given me authority; You have taught me something about the interpretation of dreams; Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are my protector in this world and in the Hereafter. Let me die in true devotion to You. Join me with the righteous.’
This account is part of what was beyond your knowledge [Muhammad]. We revealed it to you: you were not present with Joseph’s brothers when they made their treacherous plans
However eagerly you may want them to, most men will not believe
You ask no reward from them for this: it is a reminder for all people
and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth that they pass by and give no heed to
most of them will only believe in God while also joining others with Him
Are they so sure that an overwhelming punishment from God will not fall on them, or that the Last Hour will not come upon them suddenly when they least expect it
Say, ‘This is my way: based on clear evidence, I, and all who follow me, call [people] to God- glory be to God!- I do not join others with Him.’
All the messengers We sent before you [Muhammad] were men to whom We made revelations, men chosen from the people of their towns. Have the [disbelievers] not travelled through the land and seen the end of those who went before them? For those who are mindful of God, the Home in the Hereafter is better. Do you [people] not use your reason
When the messengers lost all hope and realized that they had been dismissed as liars, Our help came to them: We saved whoever We pleased, but Our punishment will not be turned away from guilty people
There is a lesson in the stories of such people for those who understand. This revelation is no fabrication: it is a confirmation of the truth of what was sent before it; an explanation of everything; a guide and a blessing for those who believe
Alif Lam Mim Ra These are the signs of the Scripture. What your Lord has sent down to you [Prophet] is the truth, yet most people do not believe
It is God who raised up the heavens with no visible supports and then established Himself on the throne; He has subjected the sun and the moon each to pursue its course for an appointed time; He regulates all things, and makes the revelations clear so that you may be certain of meeting your Lord
it is He who spread out the earth, placed firm mountains and rivers on it, and made two of every kind of fruit; He draws the veil of night over the day. There truly are signs in this for people who reflect
There are, in the land, neighbouring plots, gardens of vineyards, cornfields, palm trees in clusters or otherwise, all watered with the same water, yet We make some of them taste better than others: there truly are signs in this for people who reason
If anything can amaze you [Prophet], then you should surely be amazed at their asking, ‘What? When we become dust, shall we be created anew?’ These are the ones who deny their Lord, who will wear iron collars around their necks and be the inhabitants of the Fire, there to remain
They ask you to bring on the punishment rather than any promised rewards, though there have been many examples before them––your Lord is full of forgiveness for people, despite their wrongdoing, but He is truly severe in punishment
The disbelievers say, ‘Why has no miracle been sent down to him from his Lord?’ But you are only there to give warning: [earlier] communities each had their guide
God knows what every female bears and how much their wombs shrink or swell- everything has its measure with Him
He knows what is not seen as well as what is seen; He is the Great, the Most High
It makes no difference whether any of you speak secretly or aloud, whether you are hiding under cover of night or walking about in the day
each person has guardian angels before him and behind, watching over him by God’s command. God does not change the condition of a people [for the worse] unless they change what is in themselves, but if He wills harm on a people, no one can ward it off–– apart from Him, they have no protector
It is He who shows you the lightning, inspiring fear and hope; He builds up the clouds heavy with rain
the thunder sounds His praises, as do the angels in awe of Him; He sends thunderbolts to strike whoever He will. Yet still they dispute about God- He has mighty plans
The only true prayer is to Him: those they pray to besides Him give them no answer any more than water reaches the mouth of someone who simply stretches out his hands for it- it cannot do so: the prayers of the disbelievers are all in vain
All that are in heaven and earth submit to God alone, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the mornings and in the evenings
Say [Prophet], ‘Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth?’ Say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Why do you take protectors other than Him, who can neither benefit nor harm even themselves?’ Say, ‘Are the blind equal to those who can see? And are the depths of darkness equal to the light?’ Have the partners they assign to God created anything like His creation so that their creation is indistinguishable from His? Say, ‘God is the Creator of all things: He is the One, the All Compelling.’
He sends water from the sky that fills riverbeds to overflowing, each according to its measure. The stream carries on its surface a growing layer of froth, like the froth that appears when people melt metals in the fire to make ornaments and tools: in this way God illustrates truth and falsehood- the froth disappears, but what is of benefit to man stays behind- this is how God makes illustrations
There will be the best of rewards for those who respond to their Lord; those who do not respond would willingly give away the earth’s contents twice over, if they had it, in order to ransom themselves, so terrible will be their reckoning. Hell will be their home, and their bed wretched
Can someone who knows that the revelation from your Lord is the Truth be equal to someone who is blind? Only those with understanding will take it to heart
those who fulfil the agreements they make in God’s name and do not break their pledges
who join together what God commands to be joined; who are in awe of their Lord and fear the harshness of the Reckoning
who remain steadfast through their desire for the face of their Lord; who keep up the prayer; who give secretly and openly from what We have provided for them; who repel evil with good. These will have the reward of the [true] home
they will enter perpetual Gardens, along with their righteous ancestors, spouses, and descendants; the angels will go in to them from every gate
‘Peace be with you, because you have remained steadfast. What an excellent reward is this home of yours!’
But there will be rejection for those who break their confirmed agreements made in God’s name, who break apart what God has commanded to be joined and who spread corruption on earth: theirs is the dreadful home
God gives abundantly to whoever He will, and sparingly to whoever He will- and though they may revel in the life of this world, it is but a fleeting comfort compared with the Life to come
The disbelievers say, ‘Why has no miracle been sent down to him from his Lord?’ [Prophet], say, ‘God leaves whoever He will to stray, and guides to Himself those who turn towards Him
those who have faith and whose hearts find peace in the remembrance of God- truly it is in the remembrance of God that hearts find peace
those who believe and do righteous deeds: joy awaits these, and their final homecoming will be excellent.’
So We have sent you [Prophet] to a community- other communities passed away long before them- to recite to them what We reveal to you. Yet they disbelieve in the Lord of Mercy. Say, ‘He is my Lord: there is no god but Him. I put my trust in Him and to Him is my return.’
If there were ever to be a Quran with which mountains could be moved, the earth shattered, or the dead made to speak [it would have been this one], but everything is truly in God’s hands. Do the believers not realize that if God had so willed, He could have guided all mankind? As for the disbelievers, because of their misdeeds, disaster will not cease to afflict them or fall close to their homes until God’s promise is fulfilled: God never fails to keep His promise
Many messengers before you [Muhammad] were mocked, but I granted respite to the disbelievers: in the end, I took them to task- how terrible My punishment was
Is He who stands over every soul marking its action [in need of any partner]? Yet they ascribe partners to God. Say, ‘Name them,’ or, ‘Can you tell Him about something on the earth He does not know to exist, or is this just a display of words?’ But the things they devise are made alluring to the disbelievers and they are barred from the [right] path: no one can guide those God leaves to stray
There is a punishment for them in this world, but the punishment of the Hereafter will be harder- no one will defend them against God
Here is a picture of the Garden that those mindful of God have been promised: flowing streams and perpetual food and shade. This is the reward that awaits those who are mindful of God; the disbelievers’ reward is the Fire
Those to whom We sent the Scripture rejoice in what has been revealed to you [Prophet]; some factions deny parts of it. Say, ‘I am commanded to worship God, and not join anything with Him in worship: to Him I call [others] and to Him I shall return.’
So We have sent down the Quran to give judgement in the Arabic language. If you were to follow their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, you would have no one to guard you or protect you from God
We sent messengers before you and gave them wives and offspring; no messenger was given the power to produce a miracle except with God’s permission. There was a Scripture for every age
God erases or confirms whatever He will, and the source of Scripture is with Him
Whether We let you [Prophet] see part of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die [before that], your duty is only to deliver the message: the Reckoning is Ours
Do they not see how We come to [their] land and shrink its borders? God decides- no one can reverse His decision- and He is swift in reckoning
Those before them also schemed, but the overall scheme belongs to God: He knows what each soul does. In the end, the disbelievers will find out who will have the excellent home
They say, ‘You have not been sent.’ Say, ‘God is sufficient witness between me and you: all knowledge of the Scripture comes from Him.’
Alif Lam Ra This is a Scripture which We have sent down to you [Prophet] so that, with their Lord’s permission, you may bring people from the depths of darkness into light, to the path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy One
God, to whom everything in the heavens and earth belongs. How terrible will be the torment of those who ignore [Him]
those who prefer the life of this world over the life to come, who turn others from God’s way, trying to make it crooked: such people have gone far astray
We have never sent a messenger who did not use his own people’s language to make things clear for them. But still God leaves whoever He will to stray, and guides whoever He will: He is the Almighty, the All Wise
We sent Moses with Our signs: ‘Bring out your people from the depths of darkness into light. Remind them of the Days of God:there truly are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful person.’
And so Moses said to his people, ‘Remember God’s blessing on you when He saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who were inflicting terrible suffering on you, slaughtering your sons and sparing only your women––that was a severe test from your Lord
Remember that He promised, “If you are thankful, I will give you more, but if you are thankless, My punishment is terrible indeed.” ’
And Moses said, ‘Even if you, together with everybody else on earth, are thankless, God is self-sufficient, worthy of all praise.’
Have you not heard about those who went before you, the people of Noah, Ad, Thamud, and those who lived after them, known only to God? Their messengers came to them with clear proof, but they tried to silence them, saying, ‘We do not believe the message with which you were sent. We have disturbing doubts about what you are asking us to do.’
Their messengers answered, ‘Can there be any doubt about God, the Creator of the heavens and earth? He calls you to Him in order to forgive you your sins and let you enjoy your life until the appointed hour.’ But they said, ‘You are only men like us. You want to turn us away from what our forefathers used to worship. Bring us clear proof then, [if you can].’
Their messengers answered, ‘True, we are only men like you, but God favours whichever of His servants He chooses. We cannot bring you any proof unless God permits it, so let the believers put all their trust in Him
why should we not put our trust in God when it is He who has guided us to this way we follow? We shall certainly bear steadfastly whatever harm you do to us. Let anyone who trusts, trust in God.’
The disbelievers said to their messengers, ‘We shall expel you from our land unless you return to our religion.’ But their Lord inspired the messengers: ‘We shall destroy the evildoers
and leave you to dwell in the land after them. This reward is for those who are in awe of meeting Me, and of My warnings.’
They asked God to decide, and every obstinate tyrant failed
Hell awaits each one; he will be given foul water to drink
which he will try to gulp but scarcely be able to swallow; death will encroach on him from every side, but he will not die; more intense suffering will lie ahead of him
The deeds of those who reject their Lord are like ashes that the wind blows furiously on a stormy day: they have no power over anything they have gained. This is to stray far, far away
[Prophet], do you not see that God created the heavens and the earth for a purpose? He could remove all of you and replace you with a new creation if He wished to
that is not difficult for God
When they all appear before Him, the weak will say to the powerseekers, ‘We were your followers. Can you protect us from any of God’s punishment?’ They will reply, ‘If God had guided us, we would have guided you. It makes no difference now whether we rage or endure with patience: there is no escape.’
When everything has been decided, Satan will say, ‘God gave you a true promise. I too made promises but they were false ones: I had no power over you except to call you, and you responded to my call, so do not blame me; blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I reject the way you associated me with God before.’ A bitter torment awaits such wrongdoers
but those who believed and did good deeds will be brought into Gardens graced with flowing streams, there to remain with their Lord’s permission: their greeting there is ‘Peace’
[Prophet], do you not see how God makes comparisons? A good word is like a good tree whose root is firm and whose branches are high in the sky
yielding constant fruit by its Lord’s leave- God makes such comparisons for people so that they may reflect
but an evil word is like a rotten tree, uprooted from the surface of the earth, with no power to endure
God will give firmness to those who believe in the firmly rooted word, both in this world and the Hereafter, but the evildoers He leaves to stray: God does whatever He will
[Prophet], do you not see those who, in exchange for God’s favour, offer only ingratitude and make their people end up in the home of ruin, Hell
where they burn? What an evil place to stay
They set up [false deities] as God’s equals to lead people astray from His path. Say, ‘Take your pleasure now, for your destination is the Fire.’
Tell My servants who have believed to keep up the prayer and give, secretly and in public, out of what We have provided them, before a Day comes when there will be no trading or friendship
It is God who created the heavens and earth, who has sent down water from the sky and with it brought forth produce to nourish you; He has made ships useful to you, sailing the sea by His command, and the rivers too
He has made the sun and the moon useful to you, steady on their paths; He has made the night and day useful to you
and given you some of everything you asked Him for. If you tried to count God’s favours you could never calculate them: man is truly unjust and ungrateful
Remember when Abraham said, ‘Lord, make this town safe! Preserve me and my offspring from idolatry
Lord, the [idols] have led many people astray! Anyone who follows me is with me, but as for anyone who disobeys me- You are surely forgiving and merciful
Our Lord, I have established some of my offspring in an uncultivated valley, close to Your Sacred House, Lord, so that they may keep up the prayer. Make people’s hearts turn to them, and provide them with produce, so that they may be thankful
Our Lord, You know well what we conceal and what we reveal: nothing at all is hidden from God, on earth or in heaven
Praise be to God, who has granted me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age: my Lord hears all requests
Lord, grant that I and my offspring may keep up the prayer. Our Lord, accept my request
Our Lord, forgive me, my parents, and the believers on the Day of Reckoning.’
Do not think [Prophet] that God is unaware of what the disbelievers do: He only gives them respite until a Day when their eyes will stare in terror
They will rush forward, craning their necks, unable to divert their eyes, a gaping void in their hearts
So warn people of the Day when punishment will come to them, and when the disbelievers will say, ‘Our Lord, give us a little more time: we shall answer Your call and follow the messengers.’ Did you [disbelievers] not swear in the past that your power would have no end
You lived in the same places as others who wronged themselves before, and you were clearly shown how We dealt with them––We gave you many examples
They made their plots, but, even if their plots had been able to move mountains, God had the answer
So do not think [Prophet] that God will break His promise to His messengers: He is mighty, and capable of retribution
One Day- when the earth is turned into another earth, the heavens into another heaven, and people all appear before God, the One, the Overpowering
you [Prophet] will see the guilty on that Day, bound together in fetters
in garments of pitch, faces covered in fire
[All will be judged] so that God may reward each soul as it deserves: God is swift in His reckoning
This is a message to all people, so that they may be warned by it, and know that He is the only God, and so that those who have minds may take heed
Alif Lam Ra These are the verses of the Scripture, a Quran that makes things clear
The disbelievers may well come to wish they had submitted to God
so [Prophet] leave them to eat and enjoy themselves. Let [false] hopes distract them: they will come to know
Never have We destroyed a community that did not have a set time
no community can bring its time forward, nor delay it
They say, ‘Receiver of this Quran! You are definitely mad
Why do you not bring us the angels, if you are telling the truth?’
But We send down the angels only to bring justice and then these people will not be reprieved
We have sent down the Quran Ourself, and We Ourself will guard it. Even before you [Prophet]
We sent messengers among the various communities of old
but they mocked every single messenger that came to them
in this way We make the message slip through the hearts of evildoers
They will not believe in it. That was what happened with the peoples of long ago
and even if We opened a gateway into Heaven for them and they rose through it, higher and higher
they would still say, ‘Our eyes are hallucinating. We are bewitched.’
We have set constellations up in the sky and made it beautiful for all to see
and guarded it from every stoned satan
any eavesdropper will be pursued by a clearly visible flame
As for the earth, We have spread it out, set firm mountains on it, and made everything grow there in due balance
We have provided sustenance in it for you and for all those creatures for whom you do not provide
There is not a thing whose storehouses are not with Us. We send it down only according to a well-defined measure
We send the winds to fertilize, and We bring down water from the sky for you to drink- you do not control its sources
It is We who give life and death; it is We who inherit [everything]
We know exactly those of you who come first and those who come later
[Prophet], it is your Lord who will gather them all together: He is all wise, all knowing
We created man out of dried clay formed from dark mud
the jinn We created before, from the fire of scorching wind
Your Lord said to the angels, ‘I will create a mortal out of dried clay, formed from dark mud
When I have fashioned him and breathed My spirit into him, bow down before him,’
and the angels all did so
But not Iblis: he refused to bow down like the others
God said, ‘Iblis, why did you not bow down like the others?’
and he answered, ‘I will not bow to a mortal You created from dried clay, formed from dark mud.’
‘Get out of here!’ said God. ‘You are an outcast
rejected until the Day of Judgement.’
Iblis said, ‘My Lord, give me respite until the Day when they are raised from the dead.’
‘You have respite,’ said God
‘until the Day of the Appointed Time.’
Iblis then said to God, ‘Because You have put me in the wrong, I will lure mankind on earth and put them in the wrong
all except Your devoted servants.’
God said, ‘[Devotion] is a straight path to Me
you will have no power over My servants, only over the ones who go astray and follow you
Hell is the promised place for all these
with seven gates, each gate having its allotted share of them
But the righteous will be in Gardens with springs
“Enter them in peace and safety!”––
and We shall remove any bitterness from their hearts: [they will be like] brothers, sitting on couches, face to face
No weariness will ever touch them there, nor will they ever be expelled.’
[Prophet], tell My servants that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful
but My torment is the truly painful one
Tell them too about Abraham’s guests
when they came to him and said, ‘Peace,’ he said, ‘We are afraid of you.’
‘Do not be afraid,’ they said, ‘We bring you good news of a son who will have great knowledge.’
He said, ‘How can you give me such news when old age has come to me? What sort of news is this?’
They said, ‘We have told you the truth, so do not despair.’
He said, ‘Who but the misguided despair of the mercy of their Lord?’
and then asked, ‘Messengers, what is your errand?’
They replied, ‘We have been sent to a people who are guilty.’
But We shall save the household of Lot
all except his wife: We have decreed that she will be one of those who stay behind
When the messengers came to the household of Lot
he said, ‘You are strangers.’
They said, ‘We have brought you what they said would never happen
we have brought you the Truth. We speak truly
so leave in the dead of the night with your household, and walk behind them. Let none of you look back. Go where you are commanded.’
We made this decree known to him: the last remnants of those people would be wiped out in the morning
The people of the town came along, revelling
and he told them, ‘These are my guests, do not disgrace me
Fear God, and do not shame me.’
They answered, ‘Have we not told you not to interfere [between us and] anyone else?’
He said, ‘My daughters are here, if you must.’
By your life [Prophet], they wandered on in their wild intoxication
and the blast overtook them at sunrise
We turned their city upside down and rained on them a shower of clay stones
There truly is a sign in this for those who can learn
it is still there on the highway
there truly is a sign in this for those who believe
The forest-dwellers, too, were wrongdoers
and We took retribution on them; both are still there on the highway, plain for all to see
The people of al-Hijr also rejected Our messengers
We gave them Our signs, but they turned their backs
They carved out dwellings in the mountains, and lived in security
the blast overwhelmed them early in the morning
What they had gained was of no use to them
We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything between them without a true purpose: the Hour will certainly come, so [Prophet] bear with them graciously
Your Lord is the All Knowing Creator
We have given you the seven oft-recited versesand the whole glorious Quran
Do not look longingly at the good things We have given some to enjoy. Do not grieve over the [disbelievers], but lower your wings over the believers
and say, ‘I am here to give plain warning,’
like the [warning] We have sent down for those who divide themselves into bands
and abuse the Quran––
by your Lord, We will question them all
about their deeds
So proclaim openly what you have been commanded [to say], and ignore the idolaters
We are enough for you against all those who ridicule your message
who set up another god beside God- they will come to know
We are well aware that your heart is weighed down by what they say
Celebrate the glory of your Lord and be among those who bow down to Him
worship your Lord until what is certain comes to you
God’s Judgement is coming, so do not ask to bring it on sooner. Glory be to Him! He is far above anything they join with Him
He sends down angels with inspiration at His command, to whichever of His servants He chooses, to give [His] warning: ‘There is no god but Me, so beware of Me.’
He created the heavens and earth for a true purpose, and He is far above whatever they join with Him
He created man from a drop of fluid, and yet man openly challenges Him
And livestock––He created them too. You derive warmth and other benefits from them: you get food from them
you find beauty in them when you bring them home to rest and when you drive them out to pasture
They carry your loads to lands you yourselves could not reach without great hardship––truly your Lord is kind and merciful––
horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride and use for show, and other things you know nothing about
God points out the right path, for some paths lead the wrong way: if He wished, He could guide you all
It is He who sends down water for you from the sky, from which comes a drink for you, and the shrubs that you feed to your animals
With it He grows for you grain, olives, palms, vines, and all kinds of other crops. There truly is a sign in this for those who reflect
By His command He has made the night and day, the sun, moon, and stars all of benefit to you. There truly are signs in this for those who use their reason
He has made of benefit to you the many-coloured things He has multiplied on the earth. There truly are signs in this for those who take it to heart
It is He who made the sea of benefit to you: you eat fresh fish from it and bring out jewellery to wear; you see the ships cutting through its waves so that you may go in search of His bounty and give thanks
He has made mountains stand firm on the earth, to prevent it shaking under you, and rivers and paths so that you may find your way
and landmarks and stars to guide people
Can He who creates be compared to one who cannot create? Why do you not take heed
If you tried to count God’s blessings, you could never take them all in: He is truly most forgiving and most merciful
He knows what you conceal and what you reveal
Those they invoke beside God create nothing; they are themselves created
They are dead, not living. They do not know when they will be raised up
Your God is the One God. As for those who deny the life to come, their hearts refuse to admit the truth and they are arrogant
There is no doubt that God knows what they conceal and what they reveal. He does not love the arrogant
When they are asked, ‘What has your Lord sent down?’ they say, ‘Ancient fables.’
On the Day of Resurrection they will bear the full weight of their own burden, as well as some of the burden of those they misled with no true knowledge. How terrible their burden will be
Those who went before them also schemed, but God attacked the very foundations of what they built. The roof fell down on them: punishment came on them from unimagined directions
In the end, on the Day of Resurrection, He will shame them, saying, ‘Where are these “partners” of Mine on whose account you opposed [Me]?’ Those given knowledge will say, ‘Shame and misery on the disbelievers today!’
Those whose lives the angels take while they are wronging themselves will show submission: ‘We were doing no evil.’ ‘Yes you were: God knows fully everything that you have done
so enter the gates of Hell. There you will remain- the home of the arrogant is evil indeed.’
But when the righteous are asked, ‘What has your Lord sent down?’ they will say, ‘All that is good.’ There is a reward in this present world for those who do good, but their home in the Hereafter is far better: the home of the righteous is excellent
They will enter perpetual Gardens graced with flowing streams. There they will have everything they wish. This is the way God rewards the righteous
those whose lives the angels take in a state of goodness. They will say to them, ‘Peace be upon you. Enter the Garden as a reward for what you have done.’
Are the disbelievers waiting for the angels to come to them, or your Lord’s Judgement? Those who went before them did the same. God did not wrong them; they wronged themselves
So the evil they had done hit them and they were surrounded by the very thing they had mocked
Those who worshipped others alongside God say, ‘If God had willed, we would not have worshipped anything but Him, nor would our fathers. We would not have declared anything forbidden without His sanction.’ Those before them said the same. Are the messengers obliged to do anything other than deliver [their message] clearly
We sent a messenger to every community, saying, ‘Worship God and shun false gods.’ Among them were some God guided; misguidance took hold of others. So travel through the earth and see what was the fate of those who denied the truth
Though you [Prophet] may be eager to guide them, God does not guide those who misguide [others], nor will they have anyone to help them
They have sworn by God with their strongest oaths that He will not raise the dead to life. But He will- it is His binding promise, though most people do not realize it
in order to make clear for them what they have differed about and so that the disbelievers may realize that what they said was false
When We will something to happen, all that We say is, ‘Be,’ and it is
As for those who emi-grated in God’s cause after being wronged, We shall give them a good home in this world, but the reward of the Hereafter will be far greater, if they only knew it
They are the ones who are steadfast and put their trust in their Lord
[Prophet], all the messengers We sent before you were simply men to whom We had given the Revelation: you [people] can ask those who have knowledge if you do not know
We sent them with clear signs and scriptures. We have sent down the message to you too [Prophet], so that you can explain to people what was sent for them, so that they may reflect
Are those who plan evil so sure that God will not make the earth swallow them up, that punishment will not come on them from some unimagined direction
that it will not catch them suddenly in the midst of their comings and goings- for they cannot frustrate God
or that it will not catch up with them gradually? Indeed your Lord is kind and merciful
Do the [disbelievers] not observe the things that God has created, casting their shadows right and left, submitting themselves to God obediently
It is to God that everything in the heavens and earth submits, every beast that moves, even the angels- they are free from arrogance
they fear their Lord above them, and they do as they are commanded
God said, ‘Do not take two gods’- for He is the One God––‘ I alone am the One that you should hold in awe.’
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Him: everlasting obedience is His right. Will you heed anyone other than God
Whatever good things you possess come from God, and when hardship afflicts you, it is to Him alone you cry out for help
yet when He has relieved you of your hardship- lo and behold!- some of you attribute partners to your Lord
Let them show ingratitude for the favours We have shown them; ‘Enjoy your brief time- soon you will know.’
They set aside part of the sustenance We give them, for [idols] about which they have no true knowledge. By God! You will be questioned about your false inventions
They assign daughters to God––may He be exalted!––and the [sons] they desire to themselves
When one of them is given news of the birth of a baby girl, his face darkens and he is filled with gloom
In his shame he hides himself away from his people because of the bad news he has been given. Should he keep her and suffer contempt or bury her in the dust? How ill they judge
Those who do not believe in the Hereafter should have the contemptible image, and God should have the highest one: He is the Mighty, the Wise
If God took people to task for the evil they do, He would not leave one living creature on earth, but He reprieves them until an appointed time: when their time comes they cannot delay it for a moment nor can they bring it forward
They attribute to God what they themselves dislike while their own tongues utter the lie that the best belongs to them. Without doubt it is the Fire that belongs to them: they will be given priority there
By God, We have sent messengers before you [Muhammad] to other communities, but Satan made their foul deeds seem alluring to them. He is the patron of these present disbelievers too, and a painful punishment awaits them all
We have sent down the Scripture to you only to make clear to them what they differ about, and as guidance and mercy to those who believe
It is God who sends water down from the sky and with it revives the earth when it is dead. There truly is a sign in this for people who listen
In livestock, too, you have a lesson- We give you a drink from the contents of their bellies, between waste matter and blood, pure milk, sweet to the drinker
From the fruits of date palms and grapes you take sweet juice and wholesome provisions. There truly is a sign in this for people who use their reason
And your Lord inspired the bee, saying, ‘Build yourselves houses in the mountains and trees and what people construct
Then feed on all kinds of fruit and follow the ways made easy for you by your Lord.’ From their bellies comes a drink of different colours in which there is healing for people. There truly is a sign in this for those who think
It is God who has created you and in time will cause you to die. Some of you will be reduced, in old age, to a most abject state, so that, after having knowledge, they will know nothing at all: God is truly all knowing and all powerful
God has given some of you more provision than others. Those who have been given more are unwilling to pass their provision on to the slaves they possess so that they become their equals. How can they refuse to acknowledge God’s blessings
And it is God who has given you spouses from amongst yourselves and through them He has given you children and grandchildren and provided you with good things. How can they believe in falsehood and deny God’s blessings
Those they worship beside God have no power to provide anything for them from the heavens or the earth: they can do nothing
So do not make up images about God: God knows and you do not
God presents this illustration: a slave controlled by his master, with no power over anything, and another man We have supplied with good provision, from which he gives alms privately and openly. Can they be considered equal? All praise belongs to God, but most of them do not recognize this
God presents another illustration: two men, one of them dumb, unable to do anything, a burden to his carer- whatever task he directs him to, he achieves nothing good- can he be considered equal to one who commands justice and is on the straight path
All that is hidden from view in the heavens and earth belongs to God. The coming of the Hour of Judgement is like the blink of an eye, or even quicker: God has power over everything
It is God who brought you out of your mothers’ wombs knowing nothing, and gave you hearing and sight and minds, so that you might be thankful
Do they not see the birds made to fly through the air in the sky? Nothing holds them up except God. There truly are signs in this for those who believe
It is God who has given you a place of rest in your homes and from the skins of animals made you homes that you find light [to handle] when you travel and when you set up camp; furnishings and comfort for a while from their wool, fur, and hair
It is God who has given you shade from what He has created, and places of shelter in the mountains; garments to protect you from the heat, and garments to protect you in your wars. In this way He perfects His blessings on you, so that you may devote yourselves to Him
But if they turn away [Prophet], your only duty is to deliver the message clearly
They know God’s blessings, but refuse to recognize them: most of them are ungrateful
The day will come when We raise up a witness from every community, when the disbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses or amends
When the evildoers face punishment it will not be lightened for them nor will they be given any respite
When the idolaters see the partners they joined with God they will say, ‘Our Lord, these are the partners we used to invoke beside You,’ but the partners will retort, ‘You are liars,’
and on that Day they will offer total submission to God: their false deities will desert them
Because of the corruption they spread, We shall add torment upon torment for those who disbelieved and barred others from the path of God
The day will come when We raise up in each community a witness against them, and We shall bring you [Prophet] as a witness against these people, for We have sent the Scripture down to you explaining everything, and as guidance and mercy and good news to those who devote themselves to God
God commands justice, doing good, and generosity towards relatives and He forbids what is shameful, blameworthy, and oppressive. He teaches you, so that you may take heed
Fulfil any pledge you make in God’s name and do not break oaths after you have sworn them, for you have made God your surety: God knows everything you do
Do not use your oaths to deceive each other- like a woman who unravels the thread she has firmly spun- just because one party may be more numerous than another. God tests you with this, and on the Day of the Resurrection He will make clear to you those things you differed about
If God so willed, He would have made you all one people, but He leaves to stray whoever He will and guides whoever He will. You will be questioned about your deeds
Do not use your oaths to deceive each other lest any foot should slip after being firmly placed and lest you should taste the penalty for having hindered others from the path of God, and suffer terrible torment
Do not sell for a small price any pledge made in God’s name: what God has [to give] is better for you, if you only knew
What you have runs out but what God has endures, and We shall certainly reward those who remain steadfast according to the best of their actions
To whoever, male or female, does good deeds and has faith, We shall give a good life and reward them according to the best of their actions
[Prophet], when you recite the Quran, seek God’s protection from the outcast, Satan
He has no power over those who believe and trust in their Lord
his power is only over those who ally themselves with him and those who, because of him, join partners with God
When We substitute one revelation for another- and God knows best what He reveals- they say, ‘You are just making it up,’ but most of them have no knowledge
Say that the Holy Spirit has brought the Revelation with the Truth step by step from your Lord, to strengthen the believers and as guidance and good news to the devout
We know very well that they say, ‘It is a man who teaches him,’ but the language of the person they allude to is foreign, while this revelation is in clear Arabic
If people do not believe in God’s revelation, God does not guide them, and a painful punishment awaits them
Falsehood is fabricated only by those who do not believe in God’s revelation: they are the liars
With the exception of those who are forced to say they do not believe, although their hearts remain firm in faith, those who reject God after believing in Him and open their hearts to disbelief will have the wrath of God upon them and a grievous punishment awaiting them
This is because they love the life of this world more than the one to come, and God does not guide those who reject Him
These are people whose hearts, hearing, and sight have been closed off by God: they are heedless
and there is no doubt that they will be the losers in the Hereafter
But your Lord will be most forgiving and most merciful to those who leave their homes after persecution, then strive and remain steadfast
On the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself, every soul will be paid in full for all its actions- they will not be wronged
God presents the example of a town that was secure and at ease, with provisions coming to it abundantly from all places. Then it became ungrateful for God’s blessings, so God afflicted it with the garment of famine and fear, for what its people had done
A messenger who was one of them came to them, but they called him a liar. So punishment overwhelmed them in the midst of their evildoing
So eat of the good and lawful things God has provided for you and be thankful for His blessings, if it is Him that you worship
He has forbidden you only these things: carrion, blood, pig’s meat, and animals over which any name other than God’s has been invoked. But if anyone is forced by hunger, not desiring it nor exceeding their immediate need, God is forgiving and merciful
Do not say falsely, ‘This is lawful and that is forbidden,’ inventing a lie about God: those who invent lies about God will not prosper
they may have a little enjoyment, but painful punishment awaits them
[Prophet], We forbade the Jews what We told you about. We did not wrong them; they wronged themselves
But towards those who do wrong out of ignorance, and afterwards repent and make amends, your Lord is most forgiving and merciful
Abraham was truly an example: devoutly obedient to God and true in faith. He was not an idolater
he was thankful for the blessings of God who chose him and guided him to a straight path
We gave him blessings in this world, and he is among the right-eous in the Hereafter
Then We revealed to you [Muhammad], ‘Follow the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith who was not an idolater.’
The Sabbath was made obligatory only for those who differed about it. On the Day of Resurrection your Lord will judge between them as to their differences
[Prophet], call [people] to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good teaching. Argue with them in the most courteous way, for your Lord knows best who has strayed from His way and who is rightly guided
If you [believers] have to respond to an attack, make your response proportionate, but it is best to stand fast
So [Prophet] be steadfast: your steadfastness comes only from God. Do not grieve over them; do not be distressed by their scheming
for God is with those who are mindful of Him and who do good
Glory to Him who made His servant travel by night from the sacred place of worship to the furthest place of worship, whose surroundings We have blessed, to show him some of Our signs: He alone is the All Hearing, the All Seeing
We also gave Moses the Scripture, and made it a guide for the Children of Israel. ‘Entrust yourselves to no one but Me
you descendants of those We carried with Noah: he was truly a thankful servant.’
We declared to the Children of Israel in the Scripture, ‘Twice you will spread corruption in the land and become highly arrogant.’
When the first of these warnings was fulfilled, We sent against you servants of Ours with great force, and they ravaged your homes. That warning was fulfilled
but then We allowed you to prevail against your enemy. We increased your wealth and offspring and made you more numerous––
whether you do good or evil it is to your own souls––and when the second warning was fulfilled [We sent them] to shame your faces and enter the place of worship as they did the first time, and utterly destroy whatever fell into their power
Your Lord may yet have mercy on you, but if you do the same again, so shall We: We have made Hell a prison for those who defy [Our warning]
This Quran does indeed show the straightest way. It gives the faithful who do right the good news that they will have a great reward and
warns that We have prepared an agonizing punishment for those who do not believe in the world to come
Yet man prays for harm, just as he prays for good: man is ever hasty
We made the night and the day as two signs, then darkened the night and made the daylight for seeing, for you to seek your Lord’s bounty and to know how to count the years and calculate. We have explained everything in detail
We have bound each human being’s destiny to his neck. On the Day of Resurrection, We shall bring out a record for each of them, which they will find spread wide open
‘Read your record. Today your own soul is enough to calculate your account.’
Whoever accepts guidance does so for his own good; whoever strays does so at his own peril. No soul will bear another’s burden, nor do We punish until We have sent a messenger
When We decide to destroy a town, We command those corrupted by wealth [to reform], but they [persist in their] disobedience; Our sentence is passed, and We destroy them utterly
How many generations We have destroyed since Noah! Your Lord knows and observes the sins of His servants well enough
If anyone desires [only] the fleeting life, We speed up whatever We will in it, for whoever We wish; in the end We have prepared Hell for him in which to burn, disgraced and rejected
But if anyone desires the life to come and strives after it as he should, as a true believer, his striving will be thanked
To both the latter and the former, We give some of your Lord’s bounty. [Prophet], your Lord’s bounty is not restricted
see how We have given some more than others- but the Hereafter holds greater ranks and greater favours
Set up no other god beside God, or you will end up disgraced and forsaken
Your Lord has commanded that you should worship none but Him, and that you be kind to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age with you, say no word that shows impatience with them, and do not be harsh with them, but speak to them respectfully
and lower your wing in humility towards them in kindness and say, ‘Lord, have mercy on them, just as they cared for me when I was little.’
Your Lord knows best what is in your heart. If you are good, He is most forgiving to those who return to Him
Give relatives their due, and the needy, and travellers- do not squander your wealth wastefully
those who squander are the brothers of Satan, and Satan is most ungrateful to his Lord
but if, while seeking some bounty that you expect from your Lord, you turn them down, then at least speak some word of comfort to them
Do not be tight-fisted, nor so open-handed that you end up blamed and overwhelmed with regret
Your Lord gives abundantly to whoever He will, and sparingly to whoever He will: He knows and observes His servants thoroughly
Do not kill your children for fear of poverty––We shall provide for them and for you––killing them is a great sin
And do not go anywhere near adultery: it is an outrage, and an evil path
Do not take life, which God has made sacred, except by right: if anyone is killed wrongfully, We have given authority to the defender of his rights, but he should not be excessive in taking life, for he is already aided [by God]
Do not go near the orphan’s property, except with the best [intentions], until he reaches the age of maturity. Honour your pledges: you will be questioned about your pledges
Give full measure when you measure, and weigh with accurate scales: that is better and fairer in the end
Do not follow blindly what you do not know to be true: ears, eyes, and heart, you will be questioned about all these
Do not strut arrogantly about the earth: you cannot break it open, nor match the mountains in height
The evil of all these actions is hateful to your Lord
[Prophet], this is some of the wisdom your Lord has revealed to you: do not set up another god beside God, or you will be thrown into Hell, blamed and rejected
What? Has your Lord favoured you people with sons and taken daughters for Himself from the angels?What a monstrous thing for you to say
We have explained things in various ways in this Quran, so that such people might take notice, but it has only turned them further away
Say, ‘If there were other gods along with Him, as they say there are, then they would have tried to find a way to the Lord of the Throne.’
Glory to Him! He is far above what they say
The seven heavens and the earth and everyone in them glorify Him. There is not a single thing that does not celebrate His praise, though you do not understand their praise: He is most forbearing, most forgiving
[Prophet], when you recite the Quran, We put an invisible barrier between you and those who do not believe in the life to come
We have put covers on their hearts that prevent them from understanding it, and heaviness in their ears. When you mention your Lord in the Quran, and Him alone, they turn their backs and run away
We know best the way they listen, when they listen to you and when they confer in secret, and these wrongdoers say, ‘You are only following a man who is bewitched.’
See what they think you are like! But they are lost and cannot find the right way
They also say, ‘What? When we are turned to bones and dust, shall we really be raised up in a new act of creation?’
Say, ‘[Yes] even if you were [as hard as] stone, or iron
or any other substance you think hard to bring to life.’ Then they will say, ‘Who will bring us back?’ Say, ‘The One who created you the first time.’ Then they will shake their heads at you and say, ‘When will that be?’ Say, ‘It may well be very soon
it will be the Day when He calls you, and you answer by praising Him, and you think you have stayed [on earth] only a little while.’
[Prophet], tell My servants to say what is best. Satan sows discord among them: Satan is a sworn enemy of man
Your Lord has the most knowledge about all of you: if He pleases He will have mercy on you, and if He pleases He will punish you. [Prophet], We did not send you to take charge of them
Your Lord knows best about everyone in the heavens and the earth. We gave some prophets more than others: We gave David a book [of Psalms]
Say, ‘Call upon those you claim to be deities beside God: they have no power to remove or avert any harm from you.’
Those [angels] they pray to are themselves seeking a way to their Lord, even those who are closest to Him. They hope for His mercy and fear His punishment. The punishment of your Lord is much to be feared
there is no community We shall not destroy, or punish severely, before the Day of Resurrection- this is written in the Book
Nothing prevents Us from sending miraculous signs, except the fact that previous peoples denied them. We gave the people of Thamud the she-camel as a clear sign, yet they maltreated it. We send signs only to give warning
[Prophet], We have told you that your Lord knows all about human beings. The vision We showed you was only a test for people, as was the cursed tree [mentioned] in the Quran. We warn them, but this only increases their insolence
When We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they all bowed down, but not Iblis. He retorted, ‘Why should I bow down to someone You have created out of clay?’
and [then] said, ‘You see this being You have honoured above me? If You reprieve me until the Day of Resurrection, I will lead all but a few of his descendants by the nose.’
God said, ‘Go away! Hell will be your reward, and the reward of any of them who follow you- an ample reward
Rouse whichever of them you can with your voice, muster your cavalry and infantry against them, share their wealth and their children with them, and make promises to them- Satan promises them nothing but delusion
but you will have no authority over My [true] servants: Your Lord can take care of them well enough.’
[People], it is your Lord who makes ships go smoothly for you on the sea so that you can seek His bounty: He is most merciful towards you
When you get into distress at sea, those you pray to besides Him desert you, but when He brings you back safe to land you turn away: man is ever ungrateful
Can you be sure that God will not have you swallowed up into the earth when you are back on land, or that He will not send a sandstorm against you? Then you will find no one to protect you
Or can you be sure that He will not send you back out to sea, and send a violent storm against you to drown you for being so ungrateful? You will find no helper against Us there
We have honoured the children of Adam and carried them by land and sea; We have provided good sustenance for them and favoured them specially above many of those We have created
On the Day when We summon each community, along with its leader, those who are given their record in their right hand will read it [with pleasure]. But no one will be wronged in the least
those who were blind in this life will be blind in the Hereafter, and even further off the path
[Prophet], the disbelievers tried to tempt you away from what We revealed to you, so that you would invent some other revelation and attribute it to Us and then they would have taken you as a friend
If We had not made you stand firm, you would almost have inclined a little towards them
In that case, We would have made you taste a double punishment in this life, and a double punishment after death and then you would have found no one to help you against Us
They planned to scare you off the land, but they would not have lasted for more than a little while after you
Such was Our way with the messengers We sent before you, and you will find no change in Our ways
So perform the regular prayers in the period from the time the sun is past its zenith till the darkness of the night, and [recite] the Quran at dawn- dawn recitation is always witnessed––
and dur-ing the night wake up and pray, as an extra offering of your own, so that your Lord may raise you to a [highly] praised status
Say, ‘My Lord, make me go in truthfully, and come out truthfully, and grant me supporting authority from You.’
And say, ‘The truth has come, and falsehood has passed away: falsehood is bound to pass away.’
We send down the Quran as healing and mercy to those who believe; as for those who disbelieve, it only increases their loss
When We favour man he turns arrogantly to one side, but when harm touches him, he falls into despair
Say, ‘Everyone does things their own way, but your Lord is fully aware of who follows the best-guided path.’
[Prophet], they ask you about the Spirit. Say, ‘The Spirit is part of my Lord’s domain. You have only been given a little knowledge.’
If We pleased, We could take away what We have revealed to you- then you would find no one to plead for you against Us
if it were not for your Lord’s mercy: His favour to you has been truly great
Say, ‘Even if all mankind and jinn came together to produce something like this Quran, they could not produce anything like it, however much they helped each other.’
In this Quran, We have set out all kinds of examples for people, yet most of them persist in disbelieving
They say, ‘We will not believe for you [Muhammad] until you make a spring gush out of the ground for us
or until you have a garden of date palms and vines, and make rivers pour through them
or make the sky fall on us in pieces, as you claimed will happen; or bring God and the angels before us face to face
or have a house made of gold; or ascend into the sky- even then, we will not believe in your ascension until you send a real book down for us to read.’ Say, ‘Glory be to my Lord! Am I anything but a mortal, a messenger?’
The only thing that kept these people from believing, when guidance came to them, was that they said, ‘How could God have sent a human being as a messenger?’
Say, ‘If there were angels walking about on earth, feeling at home, We would have sent them an angel from Heaven as a messenger.’
Say, ‘God is witness enough between me and you. He knows and observes His servants well.’
[Prophet], anyone God guides is truly guided, and you will find no protector other than Him for anyone He leaves astray. On the Day of Resurrection We shall gather them, lying on their faces, blind, dumb, and deaf. Hell will be their Home. Whenever the Fire goes down, We shall make it blaze more fiercely for them
This is what they will get for rejecting Our signs and saying, ‘What? When we are turned to bones and dust, how can we be raised in a new act of creation?’
Do they not see that God, who created the heavens and earth, can create the likes of them [anew]? He has ordained a time for them- there is no doubt about that- but the evildoers refuse everything except disbelief
Say, ‘If you possessed the very stores of my Lord’s bounty, you would hold them back in your fear of spending: man is ever grudging.’
In the past, We gave Moses nine clear signs- ask the Children of Israel. When Moses came to [the Egyptians], Pharaoh said to him, ‘Moses, I think you are bewitched.’
He said, ‘You know very well that only the Lord of the heavens and earth could have sent these signs as clear proof. I think that you, Pharaoh, are doomed.’
So he wanted to wipe them off the [face of the] earth, but We drowned him and those with him
After his death, We told the Children of Israel, ‘Live in the land, and when the promise of the Hereafter is fulfilled, We shall bring you to the assembly of all people.’
We sent down the Quran with the truth, and with the truth it has come down- [Prophet], We sent you only to give good news and warning
it is a recitation that We have revealed in parts, so that you can recite it to people at intervals; We have sent it down little by little
Say, ‘Whether you believe it or not, those who were given knowledge earlier fall down on their faces when it is recited to them
and say, “Glory to our Lord! Our Lord’s promise has been fulfilled.”
They fall down on their faces, weeping, and [the Quran] increases their humility.’
Say [to them], ‘Call on God, or on the Lord of Mercy- whatever names you call Him, the best names belong to Him.’ [Prophet], do not be too loud in your prayer, or too quiet, but seek a middle way
and say, ‘Praise belongs to God, who has no child nor partner in His rule. He is not so weak as to need a protector. Proclaim His limitless greatness!’
Praise be to God, who sent down the Scripture to His servant and made it unerringly straight
warning of severe punishment from Him, and [giving] glad news to the believers who do good deeds––an excellent reward
that they will always enjoy
It warns those people who assert, ‘God has offspring.’
They have no knowledge about this, nor did their forefathers––it is a monstrous assertion that comes out of their mouths: what they say is nothing but lies
But [Prophet] are you going to worry yourself to death over them if they do not believe in this message
We have adorned the earth with attractive things so that We may test people to find out which of them do best
but We shall reduce all this to barren dust
[Prophet], do you find the Companions in the Cave and al-Raqim so wondrous, among all Our other signs
When the young men sought refuge in the cave and said, ‘Our Lord, grant us Your mercy, and find us a good way out of our ordeal,’
We sealed their ears [with sleep] in the cave for years
Then We woke them so that We could make clear which of the two parties was better able to work out how long they had been there
[Prophet], We shall tell you their story as it really was. They were young men who believed in their Lord, and We gave them more and more guidance
We gave strength to their hearts when they stood up and said, ‘Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and earth. We shall never call upon any god other than Him, for that would be an outrageous thing to do
These people of ours have taken gods other than Him. Why do they not produce clear evidence about them? Who could be more unjust than someone who makes up lies about God
Now that you have left such people, and what they worshipped instead of God, take refuge in the cave. God will shower His mercy on you and make you an easy way out of your ordeal.’
You could have seen the [light of the] sun as it rose, moving away to the right of their cave, and when it set, moving away to the left of them, while they lay in the wide space inside the cave. (This is one of God’s signs: those people God guides are rightly guided, but you will find no protector to lead to the right path those He leaves to stray)
You would have thought they were awake, though they lay asleep. We turned them over, to the right and the left, with their dog stretching out its forelegs at the entrance. If you had seen them, you would have turned and run away, filled with fear of them
In time We woke them, and they began to question one another. One of them asked, ‘How long have you been here?’ and [some] answered, ‘A day or part of a day,’ but then [others] said, ‘Your Lord knows best how long you have been here. One of you go to the city with your silver coins, find out where the best food is there, and bring some back. But be careful not to let anyone know about you
if they found you out, they would stone you or force you to return to their religion, where you would never come to any good.’
In this way We brought them to people’s attention so that they might know that God’s promise [of resurrection] is true and that there is no doubt about the Last Hour, [though] people argue among themselves. [Some] said, ‘Construct a building over them: their Lord knows best about them.’ Those who prevailed said, ‘We shall build a place of worship over them.’
[Some] say, ‘The sleepers were three, and their dog made four,’ others say, ‘They were five, and the dog made six’- guessing in the dark- and some say, ‘They were seven, and their dog made eight.’ Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord knows best how many they were.’ Only a few have real knowledge about them, so do not argue, but stick to what is clear, and do not ask any of these people about them
do not say of anything, ‘I will do that tomorrow,’
without adding, ‘God willing,’ and, whenever you forget, remember your Lord and say, ‘May my Lord guide me closer to what is right.’
[Some say], ‘The sleepers stayed in their cave for three hundred years,’ some added nine more
Say [Prophet], ‘God knows best how long they stayed.’ His is the knowledge of all that is hidden in the heavens and earth- How well He sees! How well He hears!- and they have no one to protect them other than Him; He does not allow anyone to share His rule
[Prophet], follow what has been revealed to you of your Lord’s Scripture: there is no changing His words, nor can you find any refuge except with Him
Content yourself with those who pray to their Lord morning and evening, seeking His approval, and do not let your eyes turn away from them out of desire for the attractions of this worldly life: do not yield to those whose hearts We have made heedless of Our Quran, those who follow their own low desires, those whose ways are unbridled
Say, ‘Now the truth has come from your Lord: let those who wish to believe in it do so, and let those who wish to reject it do so.’ We have prepared a Fire for the wrongdoers that will envelop them from all sides. If they call for relief, they will be relieved with water like molten metal, scalding their faces. What a terrible drink! What a painful resting place
As for those who believe and do good deeds- We do not let the reward of anyone who does a good deed go to waste
they will have Gardens of lasting bliss graced with flowing streams. There they will be adorned with bracelets of gold. There they will wear green garments of fine silk and brocade. There they will be comfortably seated on soft chairs. What a blessed reward! What a pleasant resting place
Tell them the parable of two men: for one of them We made two gardens of grape vines, surrounded them with date palms, and put corn fields in between
both gardens yielded fruit and did not fail in any way; We made a stream flow through them
and so he had abundant fruit. One day, while talking to his friend, he said, ‘I have more wealth and a larger following than you.’
He went into his garden and wronged himself by saying, ‘I do not think this will ever perish
or that the Last Hour will ever come- even if I were to be taken back to my Lord, I would certainly find something even better there.’
His companion retorted, ‘Have you no faith in Him who created you from dust, from a small drop of fluid, then shaped you into a man
But, for me, He is God, my Lord, and I will never set up any partner with Him
If only, when you entered your garden, you had said, “This is God’s will. There is no power not [given] by God.” Although you see I have less wealth and offspring than you
my Lord may well give me something better than your garden, and send thunderbolts on your garden from the sky, so that it becomes a heap of barren dust
or its water may sink so deep into the ground that you will never be able to reach it again.’
And so it was: his fruit was completely destroyed, and there he was, wringing his hands over what he had invested in it, as it drooped on its trellises, and saying, ‘I wish I had not set up any partner to my Lord.’
He had no forces to help him other than God- he could not even help himself
In that situation, the only protection is that of God, the True God: He gives the best rewards and the best outcome
Tell them, too, what the life of this world is like: We send water down from the skies and the earth’s vegetation absorbs it, but soon the plants turn to dry stubble scattered about by the wind: God has power over everything
Wealth and children are the attractions of this worldly life, but lasting good works have a better reward with your Lord and give better grounds for hope
One day We shall make the mountains move, and you will see the earth as an open plain. We shall gather all people together, leaving no one
They will be lined up before your Lord: ‘Now you have come to Us as We first created you, although you claimed We had not made any such appointment for you.’
The record of their deeds will be laid open and you will see the guilty, dismayed at what they contain, saying, ‘Woe to us! What a record this is! It does not leave any deed, small or large, unaccounted for!’ They will find everything they ever did laid in front of them: your Lord will not be unjust to anyone
We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ and they all bowed down, but not Iblis: he was one of the jinn and he disobeyed his Lord’s command. Are you [people] going to take him and his offspring as your masters instead of Me, even though they are your enemies? What a bad bargain for the evildoers
I did not make them witnesses to the creation of the heavens and earth, nor to their own creation; I do not take as My supporters those who lead others astray
On the Day God will say, ‘Call on those you claimed were My partners,’ they will call them but they will not answer; We shall set a deadly gulf between them
The evildoers will see the Fire and they will realize that they are about to fall into it: they will find no escape from it
In this Quran We have presented every kind of description for people but man is more contentious than any other creature
Now that guidance has come to them, what stops these people believing and asking forgiveness from their Lord before the fate of earlier peoples annihilates them or their torment confronts them
We only send messengers to bring good news and to deliver warning, yet the disbelievers seek to refute the truth with false arguments and make fun of My messages and warnings
Who could be more wrong than the person who is reminded of his Lord’s messages and turns his back on them, ignoring what his hands are storing up for him [in the Hereafter]? We have put covers over their hearts, so they cannot understand the Quran, and We put heaviness in their ears: although you call them to guidance [Prophet] they will never accept it
Your Lord is the Most Forgiving, and full of mercy: if He took them to task for the wrongs they have done, He would hasten their punishment on. They have an appointed time from which they will have no escape
[just like] the former communities We destroyed for doing wrong: We set an appointed time for their destruction
Moses said to his servant, ‘I will not rest until I reach the place where the two seas meet, even if it takes me years!’
but when they reached the place where the two seas meet, they had forgotten all about their fish, which made its way into the sea and swam away
They journeyed on, and then Moses said to his servant, ‘Give us our lunch! This journey of ours is very tiring,’
and [the servant] said, ‘Remember when we were resting by the rock? I forgot the fish- Satan made me forget to pay attention to it- and it [must have] made its way into the sea.’ ‘How strange!’
Moses said, ‘Then that was the place we were looking for.’ So the two turned back, retraced their footsteps
and found one of Our servants- a man to whom We had granted Our mercy and whom We had given knowledge of Our own
Moses said to him, ‘May I follow you so that you can teach me some of the right guidance you have been taught?’
The man said, ‘You will not be able to bear with me patiently
How could you be patient in matters beyond your knowledge?’
Moses said, ‘God willing, you will find me patient. I will not disobey you in any way.’
The man said, ‘If you follow me then, do not query anything I do before I mention it to you myself.’
They travelled on. Later, when they got into a boat, and the man made a hole in it, Moses said, ‘How could you make a hole in it? Do you want to drown its passengers? What a strange thing to do!’
He replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear with me patiently?’
Moses said, ‘Forgive me for forgetting. Do not make it too hard for me to follow you.’
And so they travelled on. Then, when they met a young boy and the man killed him, Moses said, ‘How could you kill an innocent person? He has not killed anyone! What a terrible thing to do!’
He replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear with me patiently?’
Moses said, ‘From now on, if I query anything you do, banish me from your company- you have put up with enough from me.’
And so they travelled on. Then, when they came to a town and asked the inhabitants for food but were refused hospitality, they saw a wall there that was on the point of falling down and the man repaired it. Moses said, ‘But if you had wished you could have taken payment for doing that.’
He said, ‘This is where you and I part company. I will tell you the meaning of the things you could not bear with patiently
the boat belonged to some needy people who made their living from the sea and I damaged it because I knew that coming after them was a king who was seizing every [serviceable] boat by force
The young boy had parents who were people of faith, and so, fearing he would trouble them through wickedness and disbelief
we wished that their Lord should give them another child- purer and more compassionate- in his place
The wall belonged to two young orphans in the town and there was buried treasure beneath it belonging to them. Their father had been a righteous man, so your Lord intended them to reach maturity and then dig up their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do [these things] of my own accord: these are the explanations for those things you could not bear with patience.’
[Prophet], they ask you about Dhu ’l-Qarnayn. Say, ‘I will tell you something about him.’
We established his power in the land, and gave him the means to achieve everything
He travelled on a certain road
then, when he came to the setting of the sun, he found it [seemed to be] setting into a muddy spring. Nearby he found some people and We said, ‘Dhu ’l-Qarnayn, you may choose [which of them] to punish or show kindness to.’
He answered, ‘We shall punish those who have done evil, and when they are returned to their Lord He will punish them [even more] severely
while those who believed and did good deeds will have the best of rewards: we shall command them to do what is easy for them.’
He travelled on
then, when he came to the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no shelter from it
And so it was: We knew all about him
He travelled on
then, when he reached a place between two mountain barriers, he found beside them a people who could barely understand him
They said, ‘Dhu ’l-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog are ruining this land. Will you build a barrier between them and us if we pay you a tribute?’
He answered, ‘The power my Lord has given me is better than any tribute, but if you lend me your strength, I will put up a fortification between you and them
bring me lumps of iron!’ and then, when he had filled the gap between the two mountainsides [he said], ‘Work your bellows!’ and then, when he had made it glow like fire, he said, ‘Bring me molten metal to pour over it!’
Their enemies could not scale the barrier, nor could they pierce it
and he said, ‘This is a mercy from my Lord. But when my Lord’s promise is fulfilled, He will raze this barrier to the ground: my Lord’s promise always comes true.’
On that Day, We shall let them surge against each other like waves and then the Trumpet will be blown and We shall gather them all together
We shall show Hell to the disbelievers
those whose eyes were blind to My signs, those who were unable to hear
Did they think that they could take My servants as masters instead of Me? We have prepared Hell as the disbelievers’ resting place
Say [Prophet], ‘Shall we tell you who has the most to lose by their actions
whose efforts in this world are misguided, even when they think they are doing good work
It is those who disbelieve in their Lord’s messages and deny that they will meet Him.’ Their deeds come to nothing: on the Day of Resurrection We shall give them no weight
Their recompense for having disbelieved and made fun of My messages and My messengers will be Hell
But those who believe and do good deeds will be given the Gardens of Paradise
There they will remain, never wishing to leave
Say [Prophet], ‘If the whole ocean were ink for writing the words of my Lord, it would run dry before those words were exhausted’- even if We were to add another ocean to it
Say, ‘I am only a human being, like you, to whom it has been revealed that your God is One. Anyone who fears to meet his Lord should do good deeds and give no one a share in the worship due to his Lord
Kaf Ha Ya 'Ayn Sad
This is an account of your Lord’s grace towards His servant, Zachariah
when he called to his Lord secretly, saying
‘Lord, my bones have weakened and my hair is ashen grey, but never, Lord, have I ever prayed to You in vain
I fear [what] my kinsmen [will do] when I am gone, for my wife is barren, so grant me a successor––a gift from You––
to be my heir and the heir of the family of Jacob. Lord, make him well pleasing [to You].’
‘Zachariah, We bring you good news of a son whose name will be John––We have chosen this name for no one before him.’
He said, ‘Lord, how can I have a son when my wife is barren, and I am old and frail?’
He said, ‘This is what your Lord has said: “It is easy for Me: I created you, though you were nothing before.” ’
He said, ‘Give me a sign, Lord.’ He said, ‘Your sign is that you will not [be able to] speak to anyone for three full [days and] nights.’
He went out of the sanctuary to his people and signalled to them to praise God morning and evening
[We said], ‘John, hold on to the Scripture firmly.’ While he was still a boy, We granted him wisdom
tenderness from Us, and purity. He was devout
kind to his parents, not domineering or rebellious
Peace was on him the day he was born, the day he died, and it will be on him the day he is raised to life again
Mention in the Quran the story of Mary. She withdrew from her family to a place to the east
and secluded herself away; We sent Our Spirit to appear before her in the form of a perfected man
She said, ‘I seek the Lord of Mercy’s protection against you: if you have any fear of Him [do not approach]!’
but he said, ‘I am but a Mes-senger from your Lord, [come] to announce to you the gift of a pure son.’
She said, ‘How can I have a son when no man has touched me? I have not been unchaste,’
and he said, ‘This is what your Lord said: “It is easy for Me- We shall make him a sign to all people, a blessing from Us.”’
And so it was ordained: she conceived him. She withdrew to a distant place
and, when the pains of childbirth drove her to [cling to] the trunk of a palm tree, she exclaimed, ‘I wish I had been dead and forgotten long before all this!’
but a voice cried to her from below, ‘Do not worry: your Lord has provided a stream at your feet
and, if you shake the trunk of the palm tree towards you, it will deliver fresh ripe dates for you
so eat, drink, be glad, and say to anyone you may see: “I have vowed to the Lord of Mercy to abstain from conversation, and I will not talk to anyone today.”’
She went back to her people carrying the child, and they said, ‘Mary! You have done something terrible
Sister of Aaron! Your father was not an evil man; your mother was not unchaste!’
She pointed at him. They said, ‘How can we converse with an infant?’
[But] he said: ‘I am a servant of God. He has granted me the Scripture; made me a prophet
made me blessed wherever I may be. He commanded me to pray, to give alms as long as I live
to cherish my mother. He did not make me domineering or graceless
Peace was on me the day I was born, and will be on me the day I die and the day I am raised to life again.’
Such was Jesus, son of Mary. [This is] a statement of the Truth about which they are in doubt
it would not befit God to have a child. He is far above that: when He decrees something, He says only, ‘Be,’ and it is
‘God is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him: that is a straight path.’
But factions have differed among themselves. What suffering will come to those who obscure the truth when a dreadful Day arrives
How sharp of hearing, how sharp of sight they will be when they come to Us, although now they are clearly off course! Warn them [Muhammad] of the Day of Remorse when the matter will be decided
for they are heedless and do not believe
It is We who will inherit the earth and all who are on it: they will all be returned to Us
Mention too, in the Quran, the story of Abraham. He was a man of truth, a prophet
He said to his father, ‘Father, why do you worship something that can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way
Father, knowledge that has not reached you has come to me, so follow me: I will guide you to an even path
Father, do not worship Satan- Satan has rebelled against the Lord of Mercy
Father, I fear that a punishment from the Lord of Mercy may afflict you and that you may become Satan’s companion [in Hell].’
His father answered, ‘Abraham, do you reject my gods? I will stone you if you do not stop this. Keep out of my way!’
Abraham said, ‘Peace be with you: I will beg my Lord to forgive you- He is always gracious to me
but for now I will leave you, and the idols you all pray to, and I will pray to my Lord and trust that my prayer will not be in vain.’
When he left his people and those they served beside God, We granted him Isaac and Jacob and made them both prophets
We granted Our grace to all of them, and gave them a noble reputation
Mention too, in the Quran, the story of Moses. He was specially chosen, a messenger and a prophet
We called to him from the right-hand side of the mountain and brought him close to Us in secret communion
out of Our grace We granted him his brother Aaron as a prophet
Mention too, in the Quran, the story of Ishmael. He was true to his promise, a messenger and a prophet
He commanded his household to pray and give alms, and his Lord was well pleased with him
Mention too, in the Quran, the story of Idris. He was a man of truth, a prophet
We raised him to a high position
These were the prophets God blessed- from the seed of Adam, of those We carried in the Ark with Noah, from the seed of Abraham and Israel- and those We guided and chose. When the revelations of the Lord of Mercy were recited to them, they fell to their knees and wept
but there came after them generations who neglected prayer and were driven by their own desires. These will come face to face with their evil
but those who repent, who believe, who do righteous deeds, will enter Paradise. They will not be wronged in the least
they will enter the Gardens of Lasting Bliss, promised by the Lord of Mercy to His servants- it is not yet seen but truly His promise will be fulfilled
There they will hear only peaceful talk, nothing bad; there they will be given provision morning and evening
That is the Garden We shall give as their own to those of Our servants who were devout
[Gabriel said],‘We only descend [with revelation] at your Lord’s command––everything before us, everything behind us, everything in between, all belongs to Him––your Lord is never forgetful
He is Lord of the heavens and earth and everything in between so worship Him: be steadfast in worshipping Him. Do you know of anyone equal to Him?’
Man says, ‘What? Once I am dead, will I be brought back to life?’
but does man not remember that We created him when he was nothing before
By your Lord [Prophet] We shall gather them and the devils together and set them on their knees around Hell
We shall seize out of each group those who were most disobedient towards the Lord of Mercy
We know best who most deserves to burn in Hell
but every single one of you will approach it, a decree from your Lord which must be fulfilled
We shall save the devout and leave the evildoers there on their knees
When Our revelations are recited to them in all their clarity, [all that] the disbelievers say to the believers [is], ‘Which side is better situated? Which side has the better following?’
We have destroyed many a generation before them who surpassed them in riches and outward glitter
Say [Prophet], ‘The Lord of Mercy lengthens [the lives] of the misguided, until, when they are confronted with what they have been warned about- either the punishment [in this life] or the Hour [of Judgement]- they realize who is worse situated and who has the weakest forces.’
But God gives more guidance to those who are guided, and good deeds of lasting merit are best and most rewarding in your Lord’s sight
Have you considered the man who rejects Our revelation, who says, ‘I will certainly be given wealth and children’
Has he penetrated the unknown or received a pledge to that effect from the Lord of Mercy
No! We shall certainly record what he says and prolong his punishment
We shall inherit from him all that he speaks of and he will come to Us all alone
They have taken other gods beside God to give them strength
but these gods will reject their worship and will even turn against them
Have you [Prophet] not seen how We send devils to incite the disbelievers to sin
There is no need for you to be impatient concerning them: We are counting down their [allotted] time
On the Day We gather the righteous as an honoured company before the Lord of Mercy
and drive the sinful like a thirsty herd into Hell
no one will have power to intercede except for those who have permission from the Lord of Mercy
The disbelievers say, ‘The Lord of Mercy has offspring.’
How terrible is this thing you assert
it almost causes the heavens to be torn apart, the earth to split asunder, the mountains to crumble to pieces
that they attribute offspring to the Lord of Mercy
It does not befit the Lord of Mercy [to have offspring]
there is no one in the heavens or earth who will not come to the Lord of Mercy as a servant
He has counted them all: He has numbered them exactly
and they will each return to Him on the Day of Resurrection all alone
But the Lord of Mercy will give love to those who believe and do righteous deeds
We have made it easy, in your own language [Prophet], so that you may bring glad news to the righteous and warnings to a stubborn people
How many generations We have destroyed before them! Do you perceive a single one of them now, or hear as much as a whisper
Ta Ha
It was not to distress you [Prophet] that We sent down the Quran to you
but as a reminder for those who hold God in awe
a revelation from the One who created the earth and the high heaven
the Lord of Mercy, established on the throne
Everything in the heavens and on earth, everything between them, everything beneath the soil, belongs to Him
Whatever you may say aloud, He knows what you keep secret and what is even more hidden
God––there is no god but Him––the most excellent names belong to Him
Has the story of Moses come to you [Prophet]
He saw a fire and said to his people, ‘Stay here––I can see a fire. Maybe I can bring you a flaming brand from it or find some guidance there.’
When he came to the fire, he was summoned, ‘Moses
I am your Lord. Take off your shoes: you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa
I have chosen you, so listen to what is being revealed
I am God; there is no god but Me. So worship Me and keep up the prayer so that you remember Me
The Hour is coming––though I choose to keep it hidden––for each soul to be rewarded for its labour
Do not let anyone who does not believe in it and follows his own desires distract you from it, and so bring you to ruin.’
‘Moses, what is that in your right hand?’
‘It is my staff,’ he said, ‘I lean on it; restrain my sheep with it; I also have other uses for it.’
God said, ‘Throw it down, Moses.’
He threw it down and- lo and behold!- it became a fast-moving snake
He said, ‘Pick it up without fear: We shall turn it back into its former state
Now place your hand under your armpit and it will come out white, though unharmed: that is another sign
We do this to show you some of Our greatest signs
Go to Pharaoh, for he has truly become a tyrant.’
Moses said, ‘Lord, lift up my heart
and ease my task for me
Untie my tongue
so that they may understand my words
and give me a helper from my family
my brother Aaron
augment my strength through him
Let him share my task
so that we can glorify You much
and remember You often
You are always watching over us.’
God said, ‘Moses, your request is granted
Indeed We showed you favour before
We inspired your mother, saying
“Put your child into the chest, then place him in the river. Let the river wash him on to its bank, and he will be taken in by an enemy of Mine and his.” I showered you with My love and planned that you should be reared under My watchful eye
Your sister went out, saying, “I will tell you someone who will nurse him,” then We returned you to your mother so that she could rejoice and not grieve. Later you killed a man, but We saved you from distress and tried you with other tests. You stayed among the people of Midian for years, then you came here as I ordained
I have chosen you for Myself
Go, you and your brother, with My signs, and make sure that you remember Me
Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has exceeded all bounds
Speak to him gently so that he may take heed, or show respect.’
They said, ‘Lord, we fear he will do us great harm or exceed all bounds.’
He said, ‘Do not be afraid, I am with you both, hearing and seeing everything
Go and tell him, “We are your Lord’s mes-sengers, so send the Children of Israel with us and do not oppress them. We have brought you a sign from your Lord. Peace be upon whoever follows the right guidance
it has been revealed to us that punishment falls on whoever rejects the truth and turns his back on it.”’
[Pharaoh] said, ‘Moses, who is this Lord of yours?’
Moses said, ‘Our Lord is He who gave everything its form, then gave it guidance.’
He said, ‘What about former generations?’
Moses said, ‘My Lord alone has knowledge of them, all in a record; my Lord does not err or forget.’
It was He who spread out the earth for you and traced routes in it. He sent down water from the sky. With that water We bring forth every kind of plant
so eat, and graze your cattle. There are truly signs in all this for people of understand-ing
From the earth We created you, into it We shall return you, and from it We shall raise you a second time
We showed Pharaoh all Our signs, but he denied them and refused [to change]
He said, ‘Have you come to drive us from our land with your sorcery, Moses
We will confront you with sorcery to match your own: make an appointment between us which neither of us will fail to keep, in a mutually agreeable place.’
He said, ‘Your meeting will be on the day of the feast, so let the people be assembled when the sun has risen high.’
Pharaoh withdrew and gathered his resources, then he returned
Moses said to them, ‘Beware, do not invent lies against God or He will destroy you with His punishment. Whoever invents lies will fail.’
So they discussed their plan among themselves, talking secretly
saying, ‘These two men are sorcerers. Their purpose is to drive you out of your land with their sorcery and put an end to your time-honoured way of life
So gather your resources and line up for the contest. Whoever wins today is sure to prosper.’
They said, ‘Moses, will you throw first or shall we?’
‘You throw,’ said Moses, and––lo and behold!––through their sorcery, their ropes and staffs seemed to him to be moving
Moses was inwardly alarmed
but We said, ‘Do not be afraid, you have the upper hand
Throw down what is in your right hand: it will swallow up what they have produced. They have only produced the tricks of a sorcerer, and a sorcerer will not prosper, wherever he goes.’
[So it was, and] the sorcerers threw themselves down in submission. ‘We believe,’ they said, ‘in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.’
Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in him before I have given you permission? This must be your master, the man who taught you witchcraft. I shall certainly cut off your alternate hands and feet, then crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. You will know for certain which of us has the fiercer and more lasting punishment.’
They said, ‘We shall never prefer you to the clear sign that has come to us, nor to Him who created us. So decide whatever you will: you can only decide matters of this present life
we believe in our Lord, [hoping] He may forgive us our sins and the sorcery that you forced us to practise- God is better and more lasting.’
Hell will be the reward of those who return to their Lord as evildoers: there they will stay, neither living nor dying
But those who return to their Lord as believers with righteous deeds will be rewarded with the highest of ranks
Gardens of lasting bliss graced with flowing streams, and there they will stay. Such is the reward of those who purify themselves
We revealed to Moses, ‘Go out at night with My servants and strike a dry path for them across the sea. Have no fear of being overtaken and do not be dismayed.’
Pharaoh pursued them with his armies and was overwhelmed by the sea
Pharaoh truly led his people astray; he did not guide them
Children of Israel, We rescued you from your enemies. We made a pledge with you on the right-hand side of the mountain. We sent down manna and quails for you
‘Eat from the good things We have provided for you, but do not overstep the bounds, or My wrath will descend on you. Anyone on whom My wrath descends has truly fallen
Yet I am most forgiving towards those who repent, believe, do righteous deeds, and stay on the right path.’
[God said], ‘Moses, what has made you come ahead of your people in such haste?’
and he said, ‘They are following in my footsteps. I rushed to You, Lord, to please You,’
but God said, ‘We have tested your people in your absence: the Samiri has led them astray.’
Moses returned to his people, angry and aggrieved. He said, ‘My people, did your Lord not make you a gracious promise? Was my absence too long for you? Did you want anger to fall on you from your Lord and so broke your word to me?’
They said, ‘We did not break our word to you deliberately. We were burdened with the weight of people’s jewellery, so we threw it [into the fire], and the Samiri did the same,’
but he [used the molten jewellery to] produce an image of a calf which made a lowing sound, and they said, ‘This is your god and Moses’ god, but he has forgotten.’
Did they not see that [the calf] gave them no answer, that it had no power to harm or benefit them
Aaron did say to them, ‘My people, this calf is a test for you. Your true Lord is the Lord of Mercy, so follow me and obey my orders,’
but they replied, ‘We shall not give up our devotion to it until Moses returns to us.’
Moses said, ‘When you realized they had gone astray, what prevented you, Aaron
from coming after me? How could you disobey my orders?’
He said, ‘Son of my mother- let go of my beard and my hair!- I was afraid you would say, “You have caused division among the children of Israel and have not heeded what I said.”’
Moses said, ‘And what was the matter with you, Samiri?’
He replied, ‘I saw something they did not; I took in some of the teachings of the Messenger but tossed them aside: my soul prompted me to do what I did.’
Moses said, ‘Get away from here! Your lot in this life is to say, “Do not touch me,” but you have an appointment from which there is no escape. Look at your god which you have kept on worshipping- we shall grind it down and scatter it into the sea
[People], your true god is the One God- there is no god but Him- whose knowledge embraces everything.’
In this way We relate to you [Prophet] stories of what happened before. We have given you a Quran from Us
Whoever turns away from it will bear on the Day of Resurrection a heavy burden
and will remain under it. What a terrible burden to carry on that Day
When the trumpet is sounded and We gather the sinful, sightless
they will murmur to one another, ‘You stayed only ten days [on earth]’
We know best what they say- but the more perceptive of them will say, ‘Your stay [on earth] was only a single day.’
They ask you [Prophet] about the mountains: say, ‘[On that Day] my Lord will blast them into dust
and leave a flat plain
with no peak or trough to be seen
On that Day, people will follow the summoner from whom there is no escape; every voice will be hushed for the Lord of Mercy; only whispers will be heard
On that Day, intercession will be useless except from those to whom the Lord of Mercy has granted permission and whose words He approves
He knows what is before and behind them, though they do not comprehend Him
and [all] faces will be humbled before the Living, Ever Watchful One. Those burdened with evil deeds will despair
but whoever has done righteous deeds and believed need have no fear of injustice or deprivation.’
We have sent the Quran down in the Arabic tongue and given all kinds of warnings in it, so that they may beware or take heed
exalted be God, the one who is truly in control. [Prophet], do not rush to recite before the revelation is fully complete but say, ‘Lord, increase me in knowledge!’
We also commanded Adam before you, but he forgot and We found him lacking in constancy
When We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they did. But Iblis refused
so We said, ‘Adam, this is your enemy, yours and your wife’s: do not let him drive you out of the garden and make you miserable
In the garden you will never go hungry, feel naked
be thirsty, or suffer the heat of the sun.’
But Satan whispered to Adam, saying, ‘Adam, shall I show you the tree of immortality and power that never decays?’
and they both ate from it. They became conscious of their nakedness and began to cover themselves with leaves from the garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and was led astray
later his Lord brought him close, accepted his repentance, and guided him
God said, ‘Get out of the garden as each other’s enemy.’ Whoever follows My guidance, when it comes to you [people], will not go astray nor fall into misery
but whoever turns away from it will have a life of great hardship. We shall bring him blind to the Assembly on the Day of Resurrection
and he will say, ‘Lord, why did You bring me here blind? I was sighted before!’
God will say, ‘This is how it is: You ignored Our revelations when they came to you, so today you will be ignored.’
This is how We reward those who go too far, and who do not believe in their Lord’s revelations. The greatest and most enduring punishment is in the Hereafter
Do they not draw a lesson from the many generations We destroyed before them, through whose dwelling places they now walk? There truly are signs in this for anyone with understanding
If it were not for a preordained Word from your Lord [Prophet], they would already have been destroyed. Their time has been set
so [Prophet] be patient with what they say- celebrate the praise of your Lord, before the rising and setting of the sun, celebrate His praise during the night, and at the beginning and end of the day, so that you may find contentment
and do not gaze longingly at what We have given some of them to enjoy, the finery of this present life: We test them through this, but the provision of your Lord is better and more lasting
Order your people to pray, and pray steadfastly yourself. We are not asking you to give Us provision;We provide for you, and the rewards of the Hereafter belong to the devout
The disbelievers say, ‘Why does he not bring us a sign from his Lord?’ Have they not been given clear proof confirming what was in the earlier scriptures
If We had destroyed them through punishment before this Messenger came, they would have said, ‘Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we could have followed Your revelations before we suffered humiliation and disgrace!’
[Prophet], say, ‘We are all waiting, so you carry on waiting: you will come to learn who has followed the even path, and been rightly guided.’
Ever closer to people draws their reckoning, while they turn away, heedless
Whenever any fresh revelation comes to them from their Lord, they listen to it playfully
with frivolous hearts. The evildoers conferred in secret: ‘Is this man anything but a mortal like yourselves? Are you going to fall under his spell with your eyes wide open?’
He said, ‘My Lord knows everything that is said in the heavens and the earth: He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.’
Some say, ‘Muddled dreams’; others, ‘He made it up’; yet others, ‘He is just a poet, let him show us a sign as previous messengers did.’
But of the communities We destroyed before them not a single one believed. Will these now believe
And even before your time [Prophet], all the messengers We sent were only men We inspired–– if you [disbelievers] do not know, ask people who know the Scripture––
We did not give them bodies that ate no food, nor were they immortal
We fulfilled Our promise to them in the end: We saved them and those We wished to save, and We destroyed those who exceeded all bounds
And now We have sent down to you [people] a Scripture to remind you. Will you not use your reason
How many communities of evildoers We have destroyed! How many others We have raised up in their places
When they felt Our might coming upon them, see how they tried to escape it
‘Do not try to escape. Go back to your homes and the pleasure you revelled in: you may be questioned.’
They said, ‘Woe to us! We were wrong!’
and that cry of theirs did not cease until We made them burnt-offstubble
We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything between them playfully
If We had wished for a pastime, We could have found it within Us- if We had wished for any such thing
No! We hurl the truth against falsehood, and truth obliterates it- see how falsehood vanishes away! Woe to you [people] for the way you describe God
Everyone in the heavens and earth belongs to Him, and those that are with Him are never too proud to worship Him, nor do they grow weary
they glorify Him tirelessly night and day
Have they chosen any gods from the earth who can give life to the dead
If there had been in the heavens or earth any gods but Him, both heavens and earth would be in ruins: God, Lord of the Throne, is far above the things they say
He cannot be called to account for anything He does, whereas they will be called to account
Have they chosen to worship other gods instead of Him? Say, ‘Bring your proof. This is the Scripture for those who are with me and the Scripture for those who went before me.’ But most of them do not recognize the truth, so they pay no heed
We never sent any messenger before you [Muhammad] without revealing to him: ‘There is no god but Me, so serve Me.’
And they say, ‘The Lord of Mercy has taken offspring for Himself.’ May He be exalted! No! They are only His honoured servants
they do not speak before He speaks and they act by His command
He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and they cannot intercede without His permission––indeed they themselves stand in awe of Him
If any of them were to claim, ‘I am a god beside Him,’ We would reward them with Hell: this is how We reward evildoers
Are the disbelievers not aware that the heavens and the earth used to be joined together and that We ripped them apart, that We made every living thing from water? Will they not believe
And We put firm mountains on the earth, lest it should sway under them, and set broad paths on it, so that they might follow the right direction
and We made the sky a well-secured canopy- yet from its wonders they turn away
It is He who created night and day, the sun and the moon, each floating in its orbit
We have not granted everlasting life to any other human being before you either [Muhammad]- if you die, will [the disbelievers] live for ever
Every soul is certain to taste death: We test you all through the bad and the good, and to Us you will all return
When the disbelievers see you, they laugh at you: ‘Is this the one who talks about your gods?’ They reject any talk of the Lord of Mercy
Man was created hasty: I will show you My signs soon, so do not ask Me to hasten them
They say, ‘When will this promise be fulfilled, if what you say is true?’
If the disbelievers only knew, the time will arrive when they will not be able to ward off the Fire from their faces or their backs, and they will get no help
It will come upon them suddenly and stupefy them; they will be powerless to push it away; they will not be reprieved
Messengers before you [Muhammad] were also ridiculed, but those who mocked them were overwhelmed in the end by the very thing they had mocked
Say, ‘Who could protect you night and day from the Lord of Mercy?’ Yet they turn away when their Lord is mentioned
Do they have gods who can defend them against Us? Their gods have no power to help themselves, nor can they be protected from Us
We have allowed these sinners and their forefathers to enjoy life for a long time. But do they not see how We are shrinking their borders? Is it they who will prevail
Say, ‘I warn you only through the Revelation.’ The deaf will not hear the warning call
yet if a mere breath of your Lord’s punishment touches them, they will be sure to cry, ‘Woe to us! We were wrong!’
We will set up scales of justice for the Day of Resurrection so that no one can be wronged in the least, and if there should be even the weight of a mustard seed, We shall bring it out- We take excellent account
We gave Moses and Aaron [the Scripture] that distinguishes right from wrong, a light and a reminder for those who are mindful of God
those who stand in awe of their Lord, though He is unseen, and who fear the Hour
This [Quran] too is a blessed message We have sent down- are you [people] going to deny it
Long ago We bestowed right judgement on Abraham and We knew him well
He said to his father and his people, ‘What are these images to which you are so devoted?’
They replied, ‘We found our fathers worshipping them.’
He said, ‘You and your fathers have clearly gone astray.’
They asked, ‘Have you brought us the truth or are you just playing about?’
He said, ‘Listen! Your true Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, He who created them, and I am a witness to this
By God I shall certainly plot against your idols as soon as you have turned your backs!’
He broke them all into pieces, but left the biggest one for them to return to
They said, ‘Who has done this to our gods? How wicked he must be!’
Some said, ‘We heard a youth called Abraham talking about them.’
They said, ‘Bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may witness [his trial].’
They asked, ‘Was it you, Abraham, who did this to our gods?’
He said, ‘No, it was done by the biggest of them- this one. Ask them, if they can talk.’
They turned to one another, saying, ‘It is you who are in the wrong,’
but then they lapsed again and said, ‘You know very well these gods cannot speak.’
Abraham said, ‘How can you worship what can neither benefit nor harm you, instead of God
Shame on you and on the things you worship instead of God. Have you no sense?’
They said, ‘Burn him and avenge your gods, if you are going to do the right thing.’
But We said, ‘Fire, be cool and safe for Abraham.’
They planned to harm him, but We made them suffer the greatest loss
We saved him and Lot [and sent them] to the land We blessed for all people
and We gave him Isaac and Jacob as an additional gift, and made each of them righteous
We made all of them leaders, guiding others by Our command, and We inspired them to do good works, to keep up the prayer, and to give alms: they were Our true worshippers
We gave Lot sound judgement and knowledge and saved him from the community who practised obscenities- they were shameless people who broke God’s law
We admitted him to Our mercy; he was a righteous man
Long before that, We answered Noah when he cried out to Us: We saved him and his family from the great calamity
and We helped him against the people who rejected Our signs- they were evil people, so We drowned them all
And remember David and Solomon, when they gave judgement regarding the field into which sheep strayed by night and grazed. We witnessed their judgement
and made Solomon understand the case [better], though We gave sound judgement and knowledge to both of them. We made the mountains and the birds celebrate Our praises with David- We did all these things
We taught him how to make coats of mail for the benefit of you [people], to protect you in your wars, but are you grateful for this
We harnessed the stormy wind for Solomon, so that it sped by his command to the land We had blessed- We have knowledge of all things
and We made some of the jinn subservient to him, to dive for him and do other works besides. We were watching over them
Remember Job, when he cried to his Lord, ‘Suffering has truly afflicted me, but you are the Most Merciful of the merciful.’
We answered him, removed his suffering, and restored his family to him, along with more like them, as an act of grace from Us and a reminder for all who serve Us
And remember Ishmael, Idris, and Dhu’l-Kifl: they were all steadfast
We admitted them to Our mercy; they were truly righteous
And remember the man with the whale,when he went off angrily, thinking We could not restrict him, but then he cried out in the deep darkness, ‘There is no God but You, glory be to You, I was wrong.’
We answered him and saved him from distress: this is how We save the faithful
Remember Zachariah, when he cried to his Lord, ‘My Lord, do not leave me childless, though You are the best of heirs.’
We answered him––We gave him John, and cured his wife of barrenness- they were always keen to do good deeds. They called upon Us out of longing and awe, and humbled themselves before Us
Remember the one who guarded her chastity. We breathed into her from Our Spirit and made her and her son a sign for all people
[Messengers], this community of yours is one single community and I am your Lord, so serve Me
They have torn their unity apart, but they will all return to Us
If anyone does good deeds and is a believer, his efforts will not be ignored: We record them for him
No community destroyed by Us can escape its return
and when the peoples of Gog and Magog are let loose and swarm swiftly from every highland
when the True Promise draws near, the disbelievers’ eyes will stare in terror, and they will say, ‘Woe to us! We were not aware of this at all. We were wrong.’
You [disbelievers] and what you worship instead of God will be fuel for Hell: that is where you will go
if these [idols] had been real gods they would not have gone there- you will all stay there
There the disbelievers will be groaning piteously, but the [idols] will hear nothing
But those for whom We have decreed Paradise will be kept far from Hell
they will not hear a murmur from it- and endlessly they will enjoy everything their souls desire
They will have no fear of the great Terror: the angels will receive them with the words, ‘This is the Day you were promised!’
On that Day, We shall roll up the skies as a writer rolls up [his] scrolls. We shall reproduce creation just as We produced it the first time: this is Our binding promise. We shall certainly do all these things
We wrote in the Psalms, as We did in [earlier] Scripture: ‘My righteous servants will inherit the earth.’
There truly is a message in this for the servants of God
It was only as a mercy that We sent you [Prophet] to all people
Say, ‘What is revealed to me is that your God is one God- will you submit to Him?’
But if they turn away, say, ‘I have proclaimed the message fairly to you all. I do not know whether the judgement you are promised is near or far
but He knows what you reveal and conceal
I do not know: this [time] may well be a test for you, and enjoyment for a while.’
He said,‘My Lord, pass the true judgement.’ And, ‘Our Lord is the Lord of Mercy. We seek His assistance against what you [disbelievers] say.’
People, be mindful of your Lord, for the earthquake of the Last Hour will be a mighty thing
on the Day you see it, every nursing mother will think no more of her baby, every pregnant female will miscarry, you will think people are drunk when they are not, so severe will be God’s torment
Yet still there are some who, with no knowledge, argue about God, who follow every devilish rebel
fated to lead astray those who take his side, and guide them to the suffering of the blazing flame
People, [remember,] if you doubt the Resurrection, that We created you from dust, then a drop of fluid, then a clinging form, then a lump of flesh, both shaped and unshaped: We mean to make Our power clear to you. Whatever We choose We cause to remain in the womb for an appointed time, then We bring you forth as infants and then you grow and reach maturity. Some die young and some are left to live on to such an age that they forget all they once knew. You sometimes see the earth lifeless, yet when We send down water it stirs and swells and produces every kind of joyous growth
this is because God is the Truth; He brings the dead back to life; He has power over everything
There is no doubt that the Last Hour is bound to come, nor that God will raise the dead from their graves
yet still there are some who, with no knowledge or guidance or any book of enlightenment, argue about God
turning scornfully aside to lead others away from God’s path. Disgrace in this world awaits such a person and, on the Day of Resurrection, We shall make him taste the suffering of the Fire
[It will be said], ‘This is for what you have stored up with your own hands: God is never unjust to His creatures.’
There are also some who serve God with unsteady faith: if something good comes their way, they are satisfied, but if they are tested, they revert to their old ways, losing both this world and the next- that is the clearest loss
Instead of God, they call upon what can neither harm nor help them- that is straying far away
or invoke one whose harm is closer than his help: an evil master and an evil companion
But God will admit those who believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with flowing streams. God does whatever He wishes
Anyone who thinks that God will not support him in this world and the next should stretch a rope up to the sky, climb all the way up it, and see whether this strategy removes the cause of his anger
In this way, We send the Quran down as clear messages, and God guides whoever He will
As for the believers, those who follow the Jewish faith, the Sabians, the Christians, the Magians, and the idolaters, God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection; God witnesses all things
Do you not realize [Prophet] that everything in the heavens and earth submits to God: the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, and the animals? So do many human beings, though for many others punishment is well deserved. Anyone disgraced by God will have no one to honour him: God does whatever He will
These two kinds of people disagree about their Lord. Garments of fire will be tailored for those who disbelieve; scalding water will be poured over their heads
melting their insides as well as their skins
there will be iron crooks to restrain them
whenever, in their anguish, they try to escape, they will be pushed back in and told, ‘Taste the suffering of the Fire.’
But God will admit those who believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with flowing streams; there they will be adorned with golden bracelets and pearls; there they will have silken garments
They were guided to good speech and to the path of the One Worthy of all Praise
As for the disbelievers, who bar others from God’s path and from the Sacred Mosque- which We made for all people, residents and visitors alike- and who try to violate it with wrongdoing, We shall make them taste a painful punishment
We showed Abraham the site of the House, saying, ‘Do not assign partners to Me. Purify My House for those who circle around it, those who stand to pray, and those who bow and prostrate themselves
Proclaim the Pilgrimage to all people. They will come to you on foot and on every kind of swift mount, emerging from every deep mountain pass
to attain benefits and celebrate God’s name, on specified days, over the livestock He has provided for them- feed yourselves and the poor and unfortunate
so let the pilgrims perform their acts of cleansing, fulfil their vows, and circle around the Ancient House.’
All this [is ordained by God]: anyone who honours the sacred ordinances of God will have good rewards from his Lord. Livestock have been made lawful to you, except for what has been explicitly forbidden. Shun the filth of idolatrous beliefs and practices and shun false utterances
Devote yourselves to God and assign Him no partners, for the person who does so is like someone who has been hurled down from the skies and snatched up by the birds or flung to a distant place by the wind
All this [is ordained by God]: those who honour God’s rites show the piety of their hearts
Live-stock are useful to you until the set time. Then their place of sacrifice is near the Ancient House
We appointed acts of devotion for every community, for them to celebrate God’s name over the livestock He provided for them: your God is One, so devote yourselves to Him. [Prophet], give good news to the humble
whose hearts fill with awe whenever God is mentioned, who endure whatever happens to them with patience, who keep up the prayer, who give to others out of Our provision to them
We have made camels part of God’s sacred rites for you. There is much good in them for you, so invoke God’s name over them as they are lined up for sacrifice, then, when they have fallen down dead, feed yourselves and those who do not ask, as well as those who do. We have subjected them to you in this way so that you may be thankful
It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches God but your piety. He has subjected them to you in this way so that you may glorify God for having guided you. Give good news to those who do good
God will defend the believers; God does not love the unfaithful or the ungrateful
Those who have been attacked are permitted to take up arms because they have been wronged- God has the power to help them
those who have been driven unjustly from their homes only for saying, ‘Our Lord is God.’ If God did not repel some people by means of others, many monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, where God’s name is much invoked, would have been destroyed. God is sure to help those who help His cause- God is strong and mighty
those who, when We establish them in the land, keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, command what is right, and forbid what is wrong: God controls the outcome of all events
If they reject you [Prophet], so did the people of Noah before them, and those of Ad, Thamud
Abraham, Lot
Midian. Moses too was called a liar. I gave the disbelievers time, but in the end I punished them. How I condemned them
How many towns steeped in wrongdoing We have destroyed and left in total ruin; how many deserted wells; how many lofty palaces
Have these people [of Mecca] not travelled through the land with hearts to understand and ears to hear? It is not people’s eyes that are blind, but their hearts within their breasts
They will challenge you [Prophet] to hasten the punishment. God will not fail in His promise- a Day with your Lord is like a thousand years by your reckoning
To many a town steeped in wrongdoing I gave more time and then struck them down: they all return to Me in the end
Say [Prophet], ‘People, I am sent only to give you clear warning.’
Those who believe and do good deeds will be forgiven and have a generous reward
but those who strive to oppose Our messages and try in vain to defeat Us are destined for the Blaze
We have never sent any messenger or prophet before you [Muhammad] into whose wishes Satan did not insinuate something, but God removes what Satan insinuates and then God affirms His message. God is all knowing and wise
He makes Satan’s insinuations a temptation only for the sick at heart and those whose hearts are hardened- the evildoers are profoundly opposed [to the Truth]
and He causes those given knowledge to realize that this Revelation is your Lord’s Truth, so that they may believe in it and humble their hearts to Him: God guides the faithful to the straight path
The disbelievers will remain in doubt about it until the Hour suddenly overpowers them or until torment descends on them on a Day devoid of all hope
On that Day control will belong to God: He will judge between them. Those who believe and do good deeds will be admitted to Gardens of Delight
while those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations will receive a humiliating torment
He will give a generous provision to those who migrated in God’s way and were killed or died. He is the Best Provider
He will admit them to a place that will please them: God is all knowing and most forbearing
So it will be. God will help those who retaliate against an aggressive act merely with its like and are then wronged again: God is pardoning and most forgiving
So it will be, because God makes night pass into day, and day into night, and He is all hearing and all seeing
So it will be, because it is God alone who is the Truth, and whatever else they invoke is sheer falsehood: it is God who is the Most High, the Most Great
Have you [Prophet] not considered how God sends water down from the sky and the next morning the earth becomes green? God is truly most subtle, all aware
everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Him; God alone is self-sufficient, worthy of all praise
Have you not considered how God has made everything on the earth of service to you? That ships sail the sea at His command? That He keeps the heavens from falling down on the earth without His permission? God is most compassionate and most merciful to mankind
it is He who gave you [people] life, will cause you to die, then will give you life again- but man is ungrateful
We have appointed acts of devotion for every community to observe, so do not let them argue with you [Prophet] about this matter. Call them to your Lord- you are on the right path
and if they argue with you, say, ‘God is well aware of what you are doing.’
On the Day of Resurrection, God will judge between you regarding your differences
Are you [Prophet] not aware that God knows all that is in the heavens and earth? All this is written in a Record; this is easy for God
Yet beside God they serve that for which He has sent no authority and of which they have no knowledge: the evildoers will have no one to help them
[Prophet], you can see the hostility on the faces of the disbelievers when Our messages are recited clearly to them: it is almost as if they are going to attack those who recite Our messages to them. Say, ‘Shall I tell you what is far worse than what you feel now? The Fire that God has promised the disbelievers! What a dismal end!’
People, here is an illustration, so listen carefully: those you call on beside God could not, even if they combined all their forces, create a fly, and if a fly took something away from them, they would not be able to retrieve it. How feeble are the petitioners and how feeble are those they petition
They have no grasp of God’s true measure: God is truly most strong and mighty
God chooses messengers from among the angels and from among men. God is all hearing, all seeing
He knows what lies before and behind them. All matters return to Him
Believers, bow down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and do good so that you may succeed
Strive hard for God as is His due: He has chosen you and placed no hardship in your religion, the faith of your forefather Abraham. God has called you Muslims––both in the past and in this [message]––so that the Messenger can bear witness about you and so that you can bear witness about other people. So keep up the prayer, give the prescribed alms, and seek refuge in God: He is your protector––an excellent protector and an excellent helper
[How] prosperous are the believers
Those who pray humbly
who shun idle talk
who pay the prescribed alms
who guard their chastity
except with their spouses or their slaves––with these they are not to blame
but anyone who seeks more than this is exceeding the limits––
who are faithful to their trusts and pledges
and who keep up their prayers
will rightly be given
Paradise as their own, there to remain
We created man from an essence of clay
then We placed him as a drop of fluid in a safe place
then We made that drop into a clinging form, and We made that form into a lump of flesh, and We made that lump into bones, and We clothed those bones with flesh, and later We made him into other forms––glory be to God, the best of creators!––
then you will die
and then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be raised up again
We created seven levels above you: We are never unmindful of Our creation
We sent water down from the sky in due measure and lodged it in the earth––We have the power to take it all away if We so wish––
with it We produced for you gardens of date palms and vines, with many fruits there for you to eat
and a tree, growing out of Mount Sinai, that produces oil and seasoning for your food
There is a lesson for you in livestock: We produce milk for you to drink from their bellies. And they have many other benefits: you eat them
and you ride on them, as you do in ships
We sent Noah to his people. He said, ‘My people, serve God, for He is your only god. Will you not heed Him?’
But the leading disbelievers among his people said, ‘He is merely a mortal like you, trying to gain some superiority over you. God would have sent down angels if He had wished; besides, we never heard of anything like this from our forefathers
He is just a madman, so let’s wait and see what happens to him.’
Noah said, ‘My Lord, help me! They call me a liar,’
and so We revealed to him: ‘Build the Ark under Our watchful eye and according to Our revelation. When Our command comes and water gushes up out of the earth,take pairs of every species on board, and your family, except for those on whom the sentence has already been passed- do not plead with me for the evildoers: they will be drowned
and when you and your companions are settled on the Ark, say, “Praise be to God, who delivered us from the wicked people,”
and say, “My Lord, let me land with Your blessing: it is You who provide the best landings”.’
There are signs in all this: We have always put [people] to the test
Then We raised another generation after them
and sent one of their own as a messenger: ‘Serve God, for He is your only god. Will you not heed Him?’
But the leading disbelievers among his people, who denied the Meeting in the Hereafter, to whom We had granted ease and plenty in this life, said, ‘He is just a mortal like you- he eats what you eat and drinks what you drink
and you will really be losers if you obey a mortal like yourselves
How can he promise you that after you die and become dust and bones you will be brought out alive
What you are promised is very farfetched
There is only the life of this world: we die, we live, but we will never be resurrected
He is just a man making lies up about God. We will never believe in him.’
The prophet said, ‘My Lord, help me! They call me a liar,’
and so God said, ‘Soon they will be filled with regret.’
The blast justly struck them and We swept them away like scum. Away with the evildoers
We raised other generations after them
no community can advance or delay its time
and We sent Our messengers in succession: whenever a messenger came to a community they invariably called him a liar, so We destroyed them one after the other and made them into cautionary tales. Away with the disbelievers
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our signs and clear authority
to Pharaoh and his prominent leaders, but they responded with arrogance: they were a haughty people
They said, ‘Are we to believe in two mortals like us? And their people are our servants?’
and so they called them both liars: they became another ruined people
We gave Moses the Scripture, so that they might be rightly guided
We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign; We gave them shelter on a peaceful hillside with flowing water
Messengers, eat good things and do good deeds: I am well aware of what you do
This community of yours is one- and I am your Lord: be mindful of Me
but they have split their community into sects, each rejoicing in their own
So [Muhammad] leave them for a while steeped [in their ignorance]
Do they reckon that, by giving them wealth and sons
We race to give them good things? They really have no idea
Those who stand in awe of their Lord
who believe in His messages
who do not ascribe partners to Him
who always give with hearts that tremble at the thought that they must return to Him
are the ones who race toward good things, and they will be the first to get them
We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear- We have a Record that tells the truth- they will not be wronged
But the disbelievers’ hearts are steeped [in ignorance of ] all this; and there are other things besides this that they do
When We bring Our punishment on those corrupted with wealth, they will cry for help
‘Do not cry out today: you will get no help from Us
Time and time again My messages were recited to you, but you turned arrogantly on your heels
and spent the evening making fun of [the Quran].’
Have they not contemplated the Word of God? Has something come to them that did not come to their forefathers
Do they not recognize their Messenger? So why do they reject him
Why do they say he is possessed? He has brought them the truth and most of them hate it
but if the truth were in accordance with their desires, the heavens, the earth, and everyone in them would disintegrate. We have brought them their Reminder and they turn away from it
Do you [Prophet] ask them for any payment? Your Lord’s is the best payment: He is the Best of Providers
You call them to a straight path
and those who do not believe in the Hereafter turn away from that path
Even if We were to show them mercy and relieve them of distress, they would blindly persist in their transgression
We have already afflicted them, yet they did not submit to their Lord: they will not humble themselves
until We open a gate to severe torment for them- then they will be plunged into utter despair
It is God who endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts- how seldom you are grateful
It is He who made you multiply on earth. It is to Him that you will be gathered
it is He who gives life and death; the alternation of night and day depends on Him; will you not use your minds
But, like others before them
they say, ‘What? When we die and turn to dust and bones, shall we really be resurrected
We have heard such promises before, and so did our forefathers. These are just ancient fables.’
Say [Prophet], ‘Who owns the earth and all who live in it, if you know [so much]?’
and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Will you not take heed?’
Say, ‘Who is the Lord of the seven heavens? Who is the Lord of the Mighty Throne?’
and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Will you not be mindful?’
Say, ‘Who holds control of everything in His hand? Who protects, while there is no protection against Him, if you know [so much]?’
and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Then how can you be so deluded?’
The fact is, We brought them the truth and they are lying
God has never had a child. Nor is there any god beside Him- if there were, each god would have taken his creation aside and tried to overcome the others. May God be exalted above what they describe
He knows what is not seen as well as what is seen; He is far above any partner they claim for Him
Say, ‘Lord, if You are going to show me the punishment You have promised them
then Lord, do not include me among the evildoers!’
We certainly are able to show you the punishment We have promised them
Repel evil with good- We are well aware of what they attribute to Us
and say, ‘Lord, I take refuge with You from the goadings of the evil ones
I seek refuge with you, Lord, so that they may not come near me.’
When death comes to one of them, he cries, ‘My Lord, let me return
so as to make amends for the things I neglected.’ Never! This will not go beyond his words: a barrier stands behind such people until the very Day they are resurrected
On that Day when the Trumpet is blown, the ties between them will be as nothing and they will not ask about each other
those whose good deeds weigh heavy will be successful
but those whose balance is light will have lost their souls for ever and will stay in Hell
the Fire will scorch their faces and their lips will be twisted in pain
‘Were My messages not recited over and over to you and still you rejected them?’
They will say, ‘Lord, our waywardness overcame us and we went astray
Lord, take us away from this and if we go back to our old ways, then we shall really be evildoers.’
He will say, ‘Away with you! In you go! Do not speak to Me
Among My servants there were those who said, “Lord, We believe. Forgive us and have mercy on us: You are the most merciful of all.”
But you kept on laughing at them: so intent were you on laughing at them that it made you forget My warning
Today I have rewarded them for their patience: it is they who will succeed.’
He will say, ‘How many years were you on earth?’
and they will reply, ‘We stayed a day or a part of a day, but ask those who keep count.’
He will say, ‘You stayed but a little, if you had only known
Did you think We had created you in vain, and that you would not be brought back to Us?’
Exalted be God, the true King, there is no god but Him, the Lord of the Glorious Throne
Whoever prays to another god alongside Him- a god for whose existence he has no evidence- will face his reckoning with his Lord. Those who reject the truth will not prosper
Say [Prophet], ‘Lord, forgive and have mercy: You are the most merciful of all.’
This is a sura We have sent down and made obligatory: We have sent down clear revelations in it, so that you may take heed
Strike the adulteress and the adulterer one hundred times. Do not let compassion for them keep you from carrying out God’s law––if you believe in God and the Last Day––and ensure that a group of believers witnesses the punishment
The adulterer is only [fit] to marry an adulteress or an idolatress, and the adulteress is only [fit] to marry an adulterer or an idolater: such behaviour is forbidden to believers
As for those who accuse chaste women of fornication, and then fail to provide four witnesses, strike them eighty times, and reject their testimony ever afterwards: they are the lawbreakers
except for those who repent later and make amends––God is most forgiving and merciful
As for those who accuse their own wives of adultery, but have no other witnesses, let each one four times call God to witness that he is telling the truth
and, the fifth time, call God to reject him if he is lying
punishment shall be averted from his wife if she in turn four times calls God to witness that her husband is lying
and, the fifth time, calls God to reject her if he is telling the truth
If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy towards you, if it were not that God accepts repentance and is wise
It was a group from among you that concocted the lie––do not consider it a bad thing for you [people]; it was a good thing––and every one of them will be charged with the sin he has earned. He who took the greatest part in it will have a painful punishment
When you heard the lie, why did believing men and women not think well of their own people and declare, ‘This is obviously a lie’
And why did the accusers not bring four witnesses to it? If they cannot produce such witnesses, they are the liars in God’s eyes
If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy towards you in this world and the next, you would already have been afflicted by terrible suffering for indulging in such talk
When you took it up with your tongues, and spoke with your mouths things you did not know [to be true], you thought it was trivial but to God it was very serious
When you heard the lie, why did you not say, ‘We should not repeat this- God forbid!- It is a monstrous slander’
God warns you never to do anything like this again, if you are true believers
God makes His messages clear to you: God is all knowing, all wise
A painful punishment waits in this world and the next for those who like indecency to spread among the believers: God knows and you do not
If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy and the fact that He is compassionate and merciful
Believers, do not follow in Satan’s footsteps- if you do so, he will urge you to indecency and evil. If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy towards you, not one of you would ever have attained purity. God purifies whoever He will: God is all hearing, all seeing
Those who have been graced with bounty and plenty should not swear that they will [no longer] give to kinsmen, the poor, those who emigrated in God’s way: let them pardon and forgive. Do you not wish that God should forgive you? God is most forgiving and merciful
Those who accuse honourable but unwary believing women are rejected by God, in this life and the next. A painful punishment awaits them
on the Day when their own tongues, hands, and feet will testify against them about what they have done
on that Day, God will pay them their just due in full- and they will realize that God is the Truth that makes everything clear
Corrupt women are for corrupt men, and corrupt men are for corrupt women; good women are for good men and good men are for good women. The good are innocent of what has been said against them; they will have forgiveness and a generous provision
Believers, do not enter other people’s houses until you have asked permission to do so and greeted those inside- that is best for you: perhaps you will bear this in mind
If you find no one in, do not enter unless you have been given permission to do so. If you are told, ‘Go away’, then do so- that is more proper for you. God knows well what you do
You will not be blamed for entering houses where no one lives, and which could provide you with some useful service. God knows everything you do openly and everything you conceal
[Prophet], tell believing men to lower their glances and guard their private parts: that is purer for them. God is well aware of everything they do
And tell believing women that they should lower their glances, guard their private parts, and not display their charms beyond what [it is acceptable] to reveal; they should let their headscarves fall to cover their necklines and not reveal their charms except to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands’ fathers, their sons, their husbands’ sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their womenfolk, their slaves, such men as attend them who have no sexual desire, or children who are not yet aware of women’s nakedness; they should not stamp their feet so as to draw attention to any hidden charms. Believers, all of you, turn to God so that you may prosper
Marry off the single among you and those of your male and female slaves who are fit [for marriage]. If they are poor, God will provide for them from His bounty: God’s bounty is infinite and He is all knowing
Those who are unable to marry should keep chaste until God gives them enough out of His bounty. If any of your slaves wish to pay for their freedom, make a contract with them accordingly, if you know they have good in them, and give them some of the wealth God has given you. Do not force your slave-girls into prostitution, when they themselves wish to remain honourable, in your quest for the short-term gains of this world, although, if they are forced, God will be forgiving and merciful to them
We have sent verses down to you [people] clarifying the right path, examples of those who passed away before you, and advice for those who are mindful of God
God is the Light of the heavens and earth. His Light is like this: there is a niche, and in it a lamp, the lamp inside a glass, a glass like a glittering star, fuelled from a blessed olive tree from neither east nor west, whose oil almost gives light even when no fire touches it- light upon light- God guides whoever He will to his Light; God draws such comparisons for people; God has full knowledge of everything
shining out in houses of worship. God has ordained that they be raised high and that His name be remembered in them, with men in them celebrating His glory morning and evening
men who are not distracted, either by commerce or profit, from remembering God, keeping up the prayer, and paying the prescribed alms, fearing a day when hearts and eyes will turn over
God will reward such people according to the best of their actions, and He will give them more of His bounty: God provides limitlessly for anyone He will
But the deeds of those who disbelieve are like a mirage in a desert: the thirsty person thinks there will be water but, when he gets there, he finds only God, who pays him his account in full- God is swift in reckoning
Or like shadows in a deep sea covered by wave upon wave, with clouds above- layer upon layer of darkness- if he holds out his hand, he is scarcely able to see it. The one to whom God gives no light has no light at all
[Prophet], do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and earth praise God, as do the birds with wings outstretched? Each knows its [own way] of prayer and glorification: God has full knowledge of what they do
Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God: and to God is the final return
Do you not see that God drives the clouds, then gathers them together and piles them up until you see rain pour from their midst? He sends hail down from [such] mountains in the sky, pouring it on whoever He wishes and diverting it from whoever He wishes- the flash of its lightning almost snatches sight away
God alternates night and day- there truly is a lesson in [all] this for those who have eyes to see
and God created each animal out of [its own] fluid: some of them crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some on four. God creates whatever He will; God has power over everything
We have sent verses that clarify the right path: God guides whoever He will to a straight path
They say, ‘We believe in God and the Messenger; we obey,’ but then some of them turn away: these people are not true believers
and when they are summoned to God and His Messenger in order for him to judge between them, some of them turn away
If they were claiming their right, they would come willingly [to the Prophet]
Do they have sickness in their hearts? Are they full of doubts? Do they fear that God and His Messenger might deal with them unjustly? No, it is they who are the unjust ones
When the true believers are summoned to God and His Messenger in order for him to judge between them, they say, ‘We hear and we obey.’ These are the ones who will prosper
whoever obeys God and His Messenger, stands in awe of God, and keeps his duty to Him will be triumphant
[The others] solemnly swear by God that if you [Prophet] commanded them, they would march out. Tell them, ‘Do not swear: it is reasonable obedience that is required, and God is aware of everything you do.’
Say, ‘Obey God; obey the Messenger. If you turn away, [know that] he is responsible for the duty placed upon him, and you are responsible for the duty placed upon you. If you obey him, you will be rightly guided, but the Messenger’s duty is only to deliver the message clearly.’
God has made a promise to those among you who believe and do good deeds: He will make them successors to the land, as He did those who came before them; He will empower the religion He has chosen for them; He will grant them security to replace their fear. ‘They will worship Me and not join anything with Me.’ Those who are defiant after that will be the rebels
[People], keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and obey the Messenger, so that you may be given mercy
Do not think [Prophet] that the disbelievers can escape God on earth; the Fire will be their final home, an evil end
Believers, your slaves and any who have not yet reached puberty should ask your permission to come in at three times of day: before the dawn prayer; when you lay your garments aside in the midday heat; and after the evening prayer. These are your three times for privacy; at other times, there is no blame on you or them if you move around each other freely. In this way God makes messages clear: God is all knowing, all wise
When your children reach puberty, they should [always] ask your permission to enter, like their elders do. This is how God makes His messages clear to you: God is all knowing, all wise
No blame will be attached to elderly women who are not hoping for sex, if they take off their outer garments without flaunting their charms, but it is preferable for them not to do this: God is all hearing, all seeing
No blame will be attached to the blind, the lame, the sick.Whether you eat in your own houses, or those of your fathers, your mothers, your brothers, your sisters, your paternal uncles, your paternal aunts, your maternal uncles, your maternal aunts, houses you have the keys for, or any of your friends’ houses, you will not be blamed: you will not be blamed whether you eat in company or separately. When you enter any house, greet one another with a greeting of blessing and goodness as enjoined by God. This is how God makes His messages clear to you so that you may understand
The true believers are those who believe in God and His Mes-senger, who, when they are gathered with him on a communal matter, do not depart until they have asked his permission- those who ask your permission [Prophet] are the ones who truly believe in God and His Messenger. When they ask your permission to attend to their private affairs, allow whoever you see fit and ask God to forgive them. God is most forgiving and merciful
[People], do not regard the Messenger’s summons to you like one of you summoning another- God is well aware of those of you who steal away surreptitiously- and those who go against his order should beware lest a trial afflict them or they receive a painful punishment
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God: He knows what state you are in- on the Day when all are returned to Him, He will tell them everything they have done- God has full knowledge of everything
Exalted is He who has sent the Differentiator down to His servant so that it may be a warning to all people
It is He who has control over the heavens and earth and has no offspring––no one shares control with Him––and who created all things and made them to an exact measure
Yet the disbelievers take as their gods things beneath Him that create nothing, and are themselves created, that can neither harm nor help themselves, and have no control over death, life, or resurrection
The disbelievers say, ‘This can only be a lie he has forged with the help of others’––they themselves have done great wrong and told lies––
and they say, ‘It is just ancient fables, which he has had written down: they are dictated to him morning and evening.’
Say, ‘It was sent down by Him who knows the secrets of the heavens and earth. He is all forgiving, all merciful.’
They also say, ‘What sort of messenger is this? He eats food and walks about in the marketplaces! Why has no angel been sent down to help him with his warnings
Why has he not been given treasure or a garden to supply his food?’ and the evildoers say, ‘The man you follow is simply under a spell.’
See what they think you are like! They have gone astray and cannot find the right way
Exalted is He who can, if He wishes, give you better things than these: Gardens graced with flowing streams, and palaces too
It is actually the coming of the Hour that they reject: We have prepared a blazing fire for those who reject the Hour
When it sees them from a distance, they will hear it raging and roaring
and when they are hurled into a narrow part of it, chained together, they will cry out for death
‘Do not cry out this day for one death, but for many.’
Say, ‘Which is better, this or the lasting Garden that those who are mindful of God have been promised as their reward and journey’s end?’
There they will find everything they wish for, and there they will stay. [Prophet], this is a binding promise from your Lord
On the Day He gathers them all together with those they worship beside Him, He will say, ‘Was it you [false gods] who led these creatures of Mine astray, or did they stray from the path by themselves?’
They will say, ‘May You be exalted! We ourselves would never take masters other than You! But You granted them and their forefathers pleasures in this life, until they forgot Your Reminder and were ruined.’
[God will say], ‘Now your gods have denounced what you say as lies: you cannot avoid the punishment; you will not get any help.’ If any of you commits such evil, We shall make him taste agonizing torment
No messenger have We sent before you [Muhammad] who did not eat food and walk about in the marketplace. But We have made some of you a means of testing others- will you stand fast? Your Lord is always watching
Those who do not fear to meet Us say, ‘Why are the angels not sent down to us?’ or ‘Why can we not see our Lord?’ They are too proud of themselves and too insolent
There will be no good news for the guilty on the Day they see the angels. The angels will say, ‘You cannot cross the forbidden barrier,’
and We shall turn to the deeds they have done and scatter them like dust
But the companions in the Garden will have a better home on that Day, and a fairer place to rest
On the Day when the sky and its clouds are split apart and the angels sent down in streams
on that Day, true authority belongs to the Lord of Mercy. It will be a grievous Day for the disbelievers
On that Day the evildoer will bite his own hand and say, ‘If only I had taken the same path as the Messenger
Woe is me! If only I had not taken so and so as a friend
he led me away from the Revelation after it reached me. Satan has always betrayed mankind.’
The Messenger has said, ‘Lord, my people treat this Quran as something to be shunned,’
but We have always appointed adversaries from the wicked, for every prophet: Your Lord is sufficient guide and helper
The disbelievers also say, ‘Why was the Quran not sent down to him all at once?’ We sent it in this way to strengthen your heart [Prophet]; We gave it to you in gradual revelation
They cannot put any argument to you without Our bringing you the truth and the best explanation
It is those driven [falling], on their faces,to Hell who will be in the worst place- they are the furthest from the right path
We gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron to help him
We said, ‘Go, both of you, to the people who have rejected Our signs.’ Later We destroyed those people utterly
The people of Noah, too: when they rejected their messengers, We drowned them and made them an example to all people. We have prepared a painful torment for the evildoers
as We did for the people of Ad, Thamud, and al-Rass, and many generations in between
To each of them We gave warnings, and each of them We destroyed completely
These disbelievers must have passed by the town that was destroyed by the terrible rain––did they not see it? Yet they do not expect to be raised from the dead
Whenever they see you [Prophet] they ridicule you: ‘Is this the one God has sent as a messenger
He might almost have led us astray from our gods if we had not stood so firmly by them.’ When they see the punishment, they will know who is furthest from the path
Think [Prophet] of the man who has taken his own passion as a god: are you to be his guardian
Do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are just like cattle- no, they are further from the path
Do you not see how your Lord lengthens the shade? If He had willed, He could have made it stand still- We made the sun its indicator
but We gradually draw it towards Us, little by little
It is He who made the night a garment for you, and sleep a rest, and made the day like a resurrection
It is He who sends the winds as heralds of good news before His Mercy. We send down pure water from the sky
so that We can revive a dead land with it, and We give it as a drink to many animals and people We have created
Many times We have repeated this to people so that they might take heed, but most persist in their ingratitude
If it had been Our will, We would have sent a warner to every town
so do not give in to the disbelievers: strive hard against them with this Quran
It is He who released the two bodies of flowing water, one sweet and fresh and the other salty and bitter, and put an insurmountable barrier between them
It is He who creates human beings from fluid, then makes them kin by blood and marriage: your Lord is all powerful
Yet instead of God they worship things that can neither benefit nor harm them: the disbeliever has always turned his back on his Lord
We sent you only to give good news and warning
Say, ‘I am not asking for any reward for it, but anyone who wishes should take a path to his Lord.’
Put your trust in the Living [God] who never dies, and celebrate His praise. He knows the sins of His servants well enough
it is He who created the heavens and earth and what is between them in six Days, and then established Himself on the throne- He is the Lord of Mercy; He is the Best Informed
Yet when they are told, ‘Bow down before the Lord of Mercy,’ they say, ‘What is the Lord of Mercy? Should we bow down before anything you command?’ and they turn even further away
Exalted is He who put constellations in the heavens, a radiant light, and an illuminating moon
it is He who made the night and day follow each other- so anyone who wishes may be mindful or show gratitude
The servants of the Lord of Mercy are those who walk humbly on the earth, and who, when the foolish address them, reply, ‘Peace’
those who spend the night bowed down or standing, worshipping their Lord
who plead, ‘Our Lord, turn away from us the suffering of Hell, for it is a dreadful torment to suffer
It is an evil home, a foul resting place!’
They are those who are neither wasteful nor niggardly when they spend, but keep to a just balance
those who never invoke any other deity beside God, nor take a life, which God has made sacred, except in the pursuit of justice, nor commit adultery. (Whoever does these things will face the penalties)
their torment will be doubled on the Day of Resurrection, and they will remain in torment, disgraced
except those who repent, believe, and do good deeds: God will change the evil deeds of such people into good ones. He is most forgiving, most merciful
People who repent and do good deeds truly return to God
[The servants of the Lord of Mercy are] those who do not give false testimony, and who, when they see some frivolity, pass by with dignity
who, when reminded of their Lord’s signs, do not turn a deaf ear and a blind eye to them
those who pray, ‘Our Lord, give us joy in our spouses and offspring. Make us good examples to those who are aware of You’
These servants will be rewarded with the highest place in Paradise for their steadfastness. There they will be met with greetings and peace
There they will stay- a happy home and resting place
[Prophet, tell the disbelievers], ‘What are you to my Lord without your supplication? But since you have written offthe truth as lies, the inevitable will happen.’
Ta Sin Mim
These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear
[Prophet], are you going to worry yourself to death because they will not believe
If We had wished, We could have sent them down a sign from heaven, at which their necks would stay bowed in utter humility
Whenever they are brought a new revelation from the Lord of Mercy, they turn away
they deny it, but the truth of what they scorned will soon hit them
Do they not see the earth, and what noble kinds of thing We grow in it
There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
Your Lord called to Moses: ‘Go to those wrongdoers
the people of Pharaoh. Will they not take heed?’
Moses said, ‘My Lord, I fear they will call me a liar
and I will feel stressed and tongue-tied, so send Aaron too
besides, they have a chargeagainst me, and I fear they may kill me.’
God said, ‘No [they will not]. Go, both of you, with Our signs––We shall be with you, listen-ing
Go, both of you, to Pharaoh and say, “We bring a message from the Lord of the Worlds
let the Children of Israel leave with us.” ’
Pharaoh said, ‘Did we not bring you up as a child among us? Did you not stay with us for many years
And then you committed that crime of yours: you were so ungrateful.’
Moses replied, ‘I was misguided when I did it
and I fled from you in fear; later my Lord gave me wisdom and made me one of His messengers
And is this- that you have enslaved the Children of Israel- the favour with which you reproach me?’
Pharaoh asked, ‘What is this “Lord of the Worlds”?’
Moses replied, ‘He is the Lord of the heavens and earth and everything between them. If you would only have faith!’
Pharaoh said to those present, ‘Do you hear what he says?’
Moses said, ‘He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.’
Pharaoh said, ‘This messenger who has been sent to you is truly possessed.’
Moses continued, ‘Lord of the East and West and everything between them. If you would only use your reason!’
But Pharaoh said [to him], ‘If you take any god other than me, I will throw you into prison,’
and Moses asked, ‘Even if I show you something convincing?’
‘Show it then,’ said Pharaoh, ‘if you are telling the truth.’
So Moses threw down his staff and- lo and behold!- it became a snake for everyone to see
Then he drew out his hand and- lo and behold!- it was white for the onlookers to see
Pharaoh said to the counsellors around him, ‘This man is a learned sorcerer
He means to use his sorcery to drive you out of your land! What do you suggest?’
They answered, ‘Delay him and his brother for a while, and send messengers to all the cities
to bring every accomplished sorcerer to you.’
The sorcerers were [to be] assembled at the appointed time on a certain day
and the people were asked
‘Are you all coming? We may follow the sorcerers if they win!’
When the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, ‘Shall we be rewarded if we win?’
and he said, ‘Yes, and you will join my inner court.’
Moses said to them, ‘Throw down whatever you will.’
They threw their ropes and staffs, saying, ‘By Pharaoh’s might, we shall be victorious.’
But Moses threw his staff and- lo and behold!- it swallowed up their trickery
and the sorcerers fell down on their knees
exclaiming, ‘We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
the Lord of Moses and Aaron.’
Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in him before I have given you permission? He must be the master who taught you sorcery! Soon you will see: I will cut off your alternate hands and feet and then crucify the lot of you!’
‘That will do us no harm,’ they said, ‘for we are sure to return to our Lord
We hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, as we were the first to believe.’
Then We revealed Our will to Moses, ‘Leave with My servants by night, for you will be pursued!’
Pharaoh sent messengers into the cities, proclaiming
‘These people are a puny band––
they have enraged us
and we are a large army, on the alert.’
So it was that We made them leave their gardens and their springs
their treasures and their noble dwellings
We gave [such] things [later]to the Children of Israel
Pharaoh and his people pursued them at sunrise
and as soon as the two sides came within sight of one another, Moses’ followers said, ‘We shall definitely be caught.’
Moses said, ‘No, my Lord is with me: He will guide me,’
and We revealed to Moses: ‘Strike the sea with your staff.’ It parted- each side like a mighty mountain
and We brought the others to that place
We saved Moses and all his companions
and drowned the rest
There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
Tell them the story of Abraham
when he asked his father and his people, ‘What do you worship?’
They said, ‘We worship idols, and are constantly in attendance on them.’
He asked, ‘Do they hear you when you call
Do they help or harm you?’
They replied, ‘No, but this is what we saw our fathers doing.’
Abraham said, ‘Those idols you have worshipped
you and your forefathers
are my enemies; not so the Lord of the Worlds
who created me. It is He who guides me
He who gives me food and drink
He who cures me when I am ill
He who will make me die and then give me life again
and He who will, I hope, forgive my faults on the Day of Judgement
My Lord, grant me wisdom; join me with the righteous
give me a good name among later generations
make me one of those given the Garden of Bliss
forgive my father, for he is one of those who have gone astray
and do not disgrace me on the Day when all people are resurrected
the Day when neither wealth nor children can help
when the only one who will be saved is the one who comes before God with a heart devoted to Him.’
When the Garden is brought near to the righteous
and the Fire is placed in full view of the misguided
it will be said to them, ‘Where are those you worshipped
beside God? Can they help you now, or even help themselves?’
and then they will all be hurled into Hell, together with those that misled them
and all Iblis’s supporters
There they will say to their gods, as they bicker among themselves
‘We were clearly misguided
when we made you equal with the Lord of the Worlds
It was the evildoers who led us astray
and now we have no intercessor
and no true friend
If only we could live our lives again, we would be true believers!’
There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
The people of Noah, too, called the messengers liars
Their brother Noah said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God
I am a faithful messenger sent to you
be mindful of God and obey me
I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds
be mindful of God and obey me.’
They answered, ‘Why should we believe you when the worst sort of people follow you?’
He said, ‘What knowledge do I have of what they used to do
It is for my Lord alone to bring them to account- if only you could see
I will not drive believers away
I am here only to give people a clear warning.’
So they said, ‘Noah, if you do not stop this, you will be stoned.’
He said, ‘My Lord, my people have rejected me
so make a firm judgement between me and them, and save me and my believing followers.’
So We saved him and his followers in the fully laden ship
and drowned the rest
There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
The people of Ad, too, called the messengers liars
Their brother Hud said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God
I am a faithful messenger sent to you
be mindful of God and obey me
I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds
How can you be so vain that you set up monuments on every high place
Do you build fortresses because you hope to be immortal
Why do you act like tyrants whenever you attack someone
Be mindful of God and obey me
be mindful of Him who has provided you with everything you know
He has given you livestock, sons
gardens, springs
for I truly fear that the torment of a grievous day will overtake you.’
They replied, ‘It makes no difference to us whether you warn us or not
for we only do what our forefathers used to do
we shall not be punished.’
They denounced him as a liar, and so We destroyed them. There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
The people of Thamud, too, called the messengers liars
Their brother Salih said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God
I am a faithful messenger to you
be mindful of God and obey me
I ask no reward from you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds
[Do you think] you will be left secure for ever in what you have here
gardens, springs
fields, palm trees laden with fruit
carving your fine houses from the mountains
Be mindful of God and obey me
do not obey those who are given to excess
and who spread corruption in the land instead of doing what is right.’
They said, ‘You are bewitched
You are nothing but a man like us. Show us a sign, if you are telling the truth.’
He said, ‘Here is a camel. She should have her turn to drink and so should you, each on a specified day
so do not harm her, or the punishment of a terrible day will befall you.’
But they hamstrung her. In the morning they had cause to regret it
the punishment fell upon them. There truly is a sign in this, though most of them will not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
The people of Lot, too, called the messengers liars
Their brother Lot said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God
I am a faithful messenger to you
be mindful of God and obey me
I ask no reward from you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds
Must you, unlike [other] people, lust after males
and abandon the wives that God has created for you? You are exceeding all bounds,’
but they replied, ‘Lot! If you do not stop this, you will be driven away.’
So he said, ‘I loathe what you do
Lord, save me and my family from what they are doing.’
We saved him and all his family
except for an old woman who stayed behind
then We destroyed the others
and poured a rain of destruction down upon them. How dreadful that rain was for those who had been forewarned
There truly is a sign in this, though most of them will not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
The forest-dwellers, too, called the messengers liars
Shuayb said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God
I am a faithful messenger to you
be mindful of God and obey me
I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds
Give full measure: do not sell others short
Weigh with correct scales
do not deprive people of what is theirs. Do not spread corruption on earth
Be mindful of God who created you and former generations,’
but they replied, ‘You are bewitched
You are nothing but a man like us. In fact we think you are a liar
Make bits of the heavens fall down on us, if you are telling the truth.’
He said, ‘My Lord knows best what you do.’
They called him a liar, and so the torment of the Day of Shadow came upon them- it was the torment of a terrible day
There truly is a sign in this, though most of them will not believe
your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful
Truly, this Quran has been sent down by the Lord of the Worlds
the Trustworthy Spirit brought it down
to your heart [Prophet], so that you could bring warning
in a clear Arabic tongue
This was foretold in the scriptures of earlier religions
Is it not proof enough for them that the learned men of the Children of Israel have recognized it
If We had sent it down to someone who was not an Arab
and he had recited it to them, they still would not have believed in it
So We make it pass straight through the hearts of the guilty
they will not believe in it until they see the grievous torment
which will suddenly hit them when they are not expecting it
and then they will say, ‘Can we have more time?’
How can they ask that Our punishment be brought to them sooner
Think, if we let them enjoy this life for some years
and then the promised torment came upon them
what good would their past enjoyment be to them
Never have We destroyed a town without sending down messengers to warn it
as a reminder from Us: We are never unjust
It was not the jinn who brought down this Quran
it is neither in their interests nor in their power
indeed they are prevented from overhearing it
So [Prophet] do not invoke any gods beside God, or you will incur punishment
Warn your nearest kinsfolk
and lower your wing tenderly over the believers who follow you
If they disobey you, say, ‘I bear no responsibility for your actions.’
Put your trust in the Almighty, the Merciful
who sees you when you stand up [for prayer]
and sees your movements among the worshippers
He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing
Shall I tell you who the jinn come down to
They come down to every lying sinner
who readily lends an ear to them, and most of them are liars
only those who are lost in error follow the poets
Do you not see how they rove aimlessly in every valley
how they say what they do not do
Not so those [poets] who believe, do good deeds, remember God often, and defend themselves after they have been wronged. The evildoers will find out what they will return to
Ta Sin These are the verses of the Quran––a scripture that makes things clear
a guide and joyful news for the believers
who keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and believe firmly in the life to come
As for those who do not believe in the life to come, We have made their deeds seem alluring to them, so they wander blindly
it is they who will have the worst suffering, and will be the ones to lose most in the life to come
You [Prophet] receive the Quran from One who is all wise, all knowing
Moses said to his family, ‘I have seen a fire. I will bring you news from there, or a burning stick for you to warm yourselves.’
When he reached the fire, a voice called: ‘Blessed is the person near this fireand those around it; may God be exalted, the Lord of the Worlds
Moses, I am God, the Mighty, the Wise
Throw down your staff,’ but when he saw it moving like a snake, he turned and fled. ‘Moses, do not be afraid! The messengers need have no fear in My presence
I am truly most forgiving and merciful to those who do wrong,and then replace their evil with good
Put your hand inside your cloak and it will come out white, but unharmed. These are among the nine signs that you will show Pharaoh and his people; they have really gone too far.’
But when Our enlightening signs came to them, they said, ‘This is clearly [just] sorcery!’
They denied them, in their wickedness and their pride, even though their souls acknowledged them as true. See how those who spread corruption met their end
We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said, ‘Praise be to God, who has favoured us over many of His believing servants.’
Solomon succeeded David. He said, ‘People, we have been taught the speech of birds, and we have been given a share of everything: this is a clearly a great favour.’
Solomon’s hosts of jinn, men, and birds were marshalled in ordered ranks before him
and when they came to the Valley of the Ants, one ant said, ‘Ants! Go into your homes, in case Solomon and his hosts unwittingly crush you.’
Solomon smiled broadly at her words and said, ‘Lord, inspire me to be thankful for the blessings You have granted me and my parents, and to do good deeds that please You; admit me by Your grace into the ranks of Your righteous servants.’
Solomon inspected the birds and said, ‘Why do I not see the hoopoe? Is he absent
I will punish him severely, or kill him, unless he brings me a convincing excuse for his absence.’
But the hoopoe did not stay away long: he came and said, ‘I have learned something you did not know: I come to you from Sheba with firm news
I found a woman ruling over the people, who has been given a share of everything- she has a magnificent throne
[but] I found that she and her people worshipped the sun instead of God. Satan has made their deeds seem alluring to them, and diverted them from the right path: they cannot find the right path
Should they not worship God, who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and earth and knows both what you people conceal and what you declare
He is God, there is no god but Him, the Lord of the mighty throne.’
Solomon said, ‘We shall see whether you are telling the truth or lying
Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then withdraw and see what answer they send back.’
The Queen of Sheba said, ‘Counsellors, a gracious letter has been delivered to me
It is from Solomon, and it says, “In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
do not put yourselves above me, and come to me in submission to God.”’
She said, ‘Counsellors, give me your counsel in the matter I now face: I only ever decide on matters in your presence.’
They replied, ‘We possess great force and power in war, but you are in command, so consider what orders to give us.’
She said, ‘Whenever kings go into a city, they ruin it and humiliate its leaders- that is what they do
but I am going to send them a gift, then see what answer my envoys bring back.’
When her envoy came to Solomon, Solomon said, ‘What! Are you offering me wealth? What God has given me is better than what He has given you, though you rejoice in this gift of yours
Go back to your people: we shall certainly come upon them with irresistible forces, and drive them, disgraced and humbled, from their land.’
Then he said, ‘Counsellors, which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission?’
A powerful and crafty jinn replied, ‘I will bring it to you before you can even rise from your place. I am strong and trustworthy enough,’
but one of them who had some knowledge of the Scripture said, ‘I will bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye.’ When Solomon saw it set before him, he said, ‘This is a favour from my Lord, to test whether I am grateful or not: if anyone is grateful, it is for his own good, if anyone is ungrateful, then my Lord is self-sufficient and most generous.’
Then he said, ‘Disguise her throne, and we shall see whether or not she recognizes it.’
When she arrived, she was asked, ‘Is this your throne?’ She replied, ‘It looks like it.’ [Solomon said], ‘We were given knowledge before her, and we devoted ourselves to God
she was prevented by what she worshipped instead of God, for she came from a disbelieving people.’
Then it was said to her, ‘Enter the hall,’ but when she saw it, she thought it was a deep pool of water, and bared her legs. Solomon explained, ‘It is just a hall paved with glass,’ and she said, ‘My Lord, I have wronged myself: I devote myself, with Solomon, to God, the Lord of the Worlds.’
To the people of Thamud We sent their brother, Salih, saying, ‘Worship God alone,’ but they split into two rival factions
Salih said, ‘My people, why do you rush to bring [forward] what is bad rather than good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of God, so that you may be given mercy?’
They said, ‘We see you and your fol-lowers as an evil omen.’ He replied, ‘God will decide on any omen you may see: you people are being put to the test.’
There were nine men in the city who spread corruption in the land without making amends
They said, ‘Swear by God: we shall attack this man and his household in the night, then say to his next of kin, “We did not witness the destruction of his household. We are telling the truth.”’
So they devised their evil plan, but We too made a plan of which they were unaware
See how their scheming ended: We destroyed them utterly, along with all their people
As a result of their evil deeds, their homes are desolate ruins- there truly is a sign in this for those who know
but We saved those who believed and were mindful of God
We also sent Lot to his people. He said to them, ‘How can you commit this outrage with your eyes wide open
How can you lust after men instead of women? What fools you are!’
The only answer his people gave was to say, ‘Expel Lot’s followers from your town! These men mean to stay chaste!’
We saved him and his family- except for his wife: We made her stay behind
and We brought rain down on them. How dreadful that rain was for those who had been warned
Say [Prophet], ‘Praise be to God and peace on the servants He has chosen. Who is better: God, or those they set up as partners with Him
Who created the heavens and earth? Who sends down water from the sky for you- with which We cause gardens of delight to grow: you have no power to make the trees grow in them- is it another god beside God? No! But they are people who take others to be equal with God
Who is it that made the earth a stable place to live? Who made rivers flow through it? Who set immovable mountains on it and created a barrier between the fresh and salt water? Is it another god beside God? No! But most of them do not know
Who is it that answers the distressed when they call upon Him? Who removes their suffering? Who makes you successors in the earth? Is it another god beside God? Little notice you take
Who is it that guides you through the darkness on land and sea? Who sends the winds as heralds of good news before His mercy? Is it another god beside God? God is far above the partners they put beside him
Who is it that creates life and reproduces it? Who is it that gives you provision from the heavens and earth? Is it another god beside God?’ Say, ‘Show me your evidence then, if what you say is true.’
Say, ‘No one in the heavens or on earth knows the unseen except God.’ They do not know when they will be raised from the dead
their knowledge cannot comprehend the Hereafter; they are in doubt about it; they are blind to it
So the disbelievers say, ‘What! When we and our forefathers have become dust, shall we be brought back to life again
We have heard such promises before, and so did our forefathers. These are just ancient fables.’
[Prophet], say, ‘Travel through the earth and see how the evildoers ended up.’
[Prophet], do not grieve over them; do not be distressed by their schemes
They also say, ‘When will this promise be fulfilled if what you say is true?’
Say, ‘Maybe some of what you seek to hasten is near at hand.’
Your Lord is bountiful to people, though most of them are ungrateful
He knows everything their hearts conceal and everything they reveal
there is nothing hidden in the heavens or on earth that is not in a clear Record
Truly, this Quran explains to the Children of Israel most of what they differ about
and it is guidance and grace for those who believe
Truly, your Lord will judge between them in His wisdom- He is the Almighty, the All Knowing
so [Prophet], put your trust in God, you are on the path of clear truth
You cannot make the dead hear, you cannot make the deaf listen to your call when they turn their backs and leave
you cannot guide the blind out of their error: you cannot make anyone hear you except those who believe in Our signs and submit [to Us]
When the verdict is given against them, We shall bring a creature out of the earth, which will tell them that people had no faith in Our revelations
The Day will come when We gather from every community a crowd of those who disbelieved in Our signs and they will be led in separate groups
until, when they come before Him, He will say, ‘Did you deny My messages without even taking them in? Or what were you doing?’
The verdict will be given against them because of their wrongdoing: they will not speak
Did they not see that We gave them the night for rest, and the day for light? There truly are signs in this for those who believe
On the Day the Trumpet sounds, everyone in heaven and on earth will be terrified- except such as God wills- and all will come to Him in utter humility
You will see the mountains and think they are firmly fixed, but they will float away like clouds: this is the handiwork of God who has perfected all things. He is fully aware of what you do
whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded with something better, and be secure from the terrors of that Day
but whoever comes with evil deeds will be cast face downwards into the Fire. ‘Are you rewarded for anything except what you have done?’
[Say Prophet], ‘What I am commanded to do is to serve the Sustainer of this town, which He has made inviolable. Everything belongs to Him; I am commanded to be one of those devoted to Him
I am commanded to recite the Quran.’ Whoever chooses to follow the right path does so for his own good. Say to whoever deviates from it, ‘I am only here to warn.’
Say, ‘Praise belongs to God: He will show you His signs so that you will recognize them.’ Your Lord is never unmindful of what you all do
Ta Sin Mim
These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear
We recount to you [Prophet] part of the story of Moses and Pharaoh, setting out the truth for people who believe
Pharaoh made himself high and mighty in the land and divided the people into different groups: one group he oppressed, slaughtering their sons and sparing their women––he was one of those who spread corruption––
but We wished to favour those who were oppressed in that land, to make them leaders, the ones to survive
to establish them in the land, and through them show Pharaoh, Haman, and their armies the very thing they feared
We inspired Moses’ mother, saying, ‘Suckle him, and then, when you fear for his safety, put him in the river: do not be afraid, and do not grieve, for We shall return him to you and make him a messenger.’
Pharaoh’s household picked him up––later to become an enemy and a source of grief for them: Pharaoh, Haman, and their armies were wrongdoers––
and Pharaoh’s wife said, ‘Here is a joy to behold for me and for you! Do not kill him: he may be of use to us, or we may adopt him as a son.’ They did not realize what they were doing
The next day, Moses’ mother felt a void in her heart––if We had not strengthened it to make her one of those who believe, she would have revealed everything about him––
and she said to his sister, ‘Follow him.’ So she watched him from a distance, without them knowing
We had ordained that he would refuse to feed from wet nurses. His sister approached them and said, ‘Shall I tell you about a household which could bring him up for you and take good care of him?’
We restored him to his mother in this way, so that she might be comforted, not grieve, and know that God’s promise is true, though most of them do not know
When Moses reached full maturity and manhood, We gave him wisdom and knowledge: this is how We reward those who do good
He entered the city, unnoticed by its people, and found two men fighting: one from his own people, the other an enemy. The one from his own people cried out to him for help against the enemy. Moses struck him with his fist and killed him. He said, ‘This must be Satan’s work: clearly he is a misleading enemy.’
He said, ‘Lord, I have wronged myself. Forgive me,’ so He forgave him; He is truly the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful
He said, ‘My Lord, because of the blessings You have bestowed upon me, I shall never support those who do evil.’
Next morning, he was walking in the city, fearful and vigilant, when suddenly the man he had helped the day before cried out to him for help. Moses said, ‘You are clearly a troublemaker.’
As he was about to attack the man who was an enemy to both of them, the man said, ‘Moses, are you going to kill me as you killed that person yesterday? You clearly want to be a tyrant in the land; you do not intend to put things right.’
Then a man came running from the furthest part of the city and said, ‘Moses, the authorities are talking about killing you, so leave- this is my sincere advice.’
So Moses left the city, fearful and wary, and prayed, ‘My Lord, save me from people who do wrong.’
As he made his way towards Midian, he was saying, ‘May my Lord guide me to the right way.’
When he arrived at Midian’s waters, he found a group of men watering [their flocks], and beside them two women keeping their flocks back, so he said, ‘What is the matter with you two?’ They said, ‘We cannot water [our flocks] until the shepherds take their sheep away: our father is a very old man.’
He watered their flocks for them, withdrew into the shade, and prayed, ‘My Lord, I am in dire need of whatever good thing You may send me,’
and then one of the two women approached him, walking shyly, and said, ‘My father is asking for you: he wants to reward you for watering our flocks for us.’ When Moses came to him and told him his story, the old man said, ‘Do not be afraid, you are safe now from people who do wrong.’
One of the women said, ‘Father, hire him: a strong, trustworthy man is the best to hire.’
The father said, ‘I would like to marry you to one of these daughters of mine, on condition that you serve me for eight years: if you complete ten, it will be of your own free will. I do not intend to make things difficult for you: God willing, you will find I am a fair man.’
Moses said, ‘Let that be the agreement between us- whichever of the two terms I fulfil, let there be no injustice to me- God is witness to what we say.’
Once Moses had fulfilled the term and was travelling with his family, he caught sight of a fire on the side of the mountain and said to his family, ‘Wait! I have seen a fire. I will bring you news from there, or a burning stick for you to warm yourselves.’
But when he reached it, a voice called out to him from the right-hand side of the valley, from a tree on the blessed ground: ‘Moses, I am God, the Lord of the Worlds
Throw down your staff.’ When he saw his staff moving like a snake, he fled in fear and would not return. Again [he was called]: ‘Moses! Draw near! Do not be afraid, for you are one of those who are safe
Put your hand inside your shirt and it will come out white but unharmed- hold your arm close to your side, free from all fear. These shall be two signs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs; they are truly wicked people.’
Moses said, ‘My Lord, I killed one of their men, and I fear that they may kill me
My brother Aaron is more eloquent than I: send him with me to help me and confirm my words- I fear they may call me a liar.’
God said, ‘We shall strengthen you through your brother; We shall give you both power so that they cannot touch you. With Our signs you, and those who follow you, will triumph.’
But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said, ‘These are mere conjuring tricks; we never heard this from our forefathers.’
Moses said, ‘My Lord knows best who comes with guidance from Him and who will have the final Home: wrongdoers will never succeed.’
Pharaoh said, ‘Counsellors, you have no other god that I know of except me. Haman, light me a fire to bake clay bricks, then build me a tall building so that I may climb up to Moses’ God: I am convinced that he is lying.’
Pharaoh and his armies behaved arrogantly in the land with no right- they thought they would not be brought back to Us
so We seized him and his armies and threw them into the sea. See what became of the wrongdoers
We made them leaders calling [others] only to the Fire: on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped
We made Our rejection pursue them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be among the despised
After We had destroyed the earlier generations, We gave Moses the Scripture to provide insight, guidance, and mercy for people, so that they might take heed
You [Muhammad] were not present on the western side of the mountain when We gave Our command to Moses: you were not there
We have brought into being many generations who lived long lives- you did not live among the people of Midian or recite Our Revelation to them- We have always sent messengers to people
nor were you present on the side of Mount Sinai when We called out to Moses. But you too have been sent as an act of grace from your Lord, to give warning to a people to whom no warner has come before, so that they may take heed
and may not say, if a disaster should befall them as a result of what they have done with their own hands, ‘Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we might have followed Your message and become believers.’
Even now that Our truth has come to them, they say, ‘Why has he not been given signs like those given to Moses?’ Did they not also deny the truth that was given to Moses before? They say, ‘Two kinds of sor-cery, helping each other,’ and, ‘We refuse to accept either of them.’
Say [Muhammad], ‘Then produce a book from God that gives better guidance than these two and I will follow it, if you are telling the truth.’
If they do not respond to you, you will know that they follow only their own desires. Who is further astray than the one who follows his own desires with no guidance from God? Truly God does not guide those who do wrong
We have caused Our Word to come to them so that they may be mindful
Those to whom We gave the Scripture before believe in it
and, when it is recited to them, say, ‘We believe in it, it is the truth from our Lord. Before it came we had already devoted ourselves to Him.’
They will be given their rewards twice over because they are steadfast, repel evil with good, give to others out of what We have provided for them
and turn away whenever they hear frivolous talk, saying, ‘We have our deeds and you have yours. Peace be with you! We do not seek the company of ignorant people.’
You [Prophet] cannot guide everyone you love to the truth; it is God who guides whoever He will: He knows best those who will follow guidance
They say, ‘If we were to follow guidance with you [Prophet], we would be swept from our land.’ Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary where every kind of produce is brought, as a provision from Us? But most of them do not comprehend
We have destroyed many a community that once revelled in its wanton wealth and easy living: since then their dwelling places have barely been inhabited- We are the only heir
Your Lord would never destroy towns without first raising a messenger in their midst to recite Our messages to them, nor would We destroy towns unless their inhabitants were evildoers
Whatever things you have been given for the life of this world are merely [temporary] gratification and vanity: that which is with God is better and more lasting- will you not use your reason
Can the person who will see the fulfilment of the good promise We gave him be compared to someone We have given some enjoyments for this worldly life but who, on the Day of Resurrection, will be summoned
The Day will come when God will call them, saying, ‘Where now are those you allege are My partners?’
and those [ringleaders] against whom the verdict will be passed will say, ‘Our Lord, these are the ones we caused to deviate. We caused them to deviate as we ourselves deviated, but now we disown them before You: they did not really serve us.’
It will then be said to them, ‘Now call those you worshipped as partners,’ and they will call them but receive no answer. They will see the suffering and wish they had followed guidance
On that Day He will call them, saying, ‘How did you respond to My messengers?’
All arguments will seem obscure to them on that Day; they will not be able to consult one another
Yet anyone who has repented, believed, and done good deeds can hope to find himself among the successful
Your Lord creates what He pleases and chooses those He will- they have no choice- so glory be to God, and may He be exalted above the partners they ascribe to Him
Your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal
He is God; there is no god but Him; all praise belongs to Him in this world and the next; His is the Judgement; and to Him you shall be returned
Say [Prophet], ‘Just think, if God were to cast perpetual night over you until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than He could bring you light? Do you not listen?’
Say, ‘Just think, if God were to cast perpetual day over you until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than He could give you night in which to rest? Do you not see
In His mercy He has given you night and day, so that you may rest and seek His bounty and be grateful.’
The Day will come when He will call out to them, saying, ‘Where are the partners you claimed for Me?’
We shall call a witness from every community, and say, ‘Produce your evidence,’ and then they will know that truth belongs to God alone; the gods they invented will forsake them
Qarun was one of Moses’ people, but he oppressed them. We had given him such treasures that even their keys would have weighed down a whole company of strong men. His people said to him, ‘Do not gloat, for God does not like people who gloat
Seek the life to come by means of what God has granted you, but do not neglect your rightful share in this world. Do good to others as God has done good to you. Do not seek to spread corruption in the land, for God does not love those who do this,’
but he answered, ‘This wealth was given to me on account of the knowledge I possess.’ Did he not know that God had destroyed many generations before him, who had greater power than him and built up greater wealth? The guilty will not be questioned about their sins
He went out among his people in all his pomp, and those whose aim was the life of this world said, ‘If only we had been given something like what Qarun has been given: he really is a very fortunate man,’
but those who were given knowledge said, ‘Alas for you! God’s reward is better for those who believe and do good deeds: only those who are steadfast will attain this.’
We caused the earth to swallow him and his home: he had no one to help him against God, nor could he defend himself
The next day, those who had, the day before, wished to be in his place exclaimed, ‘Alas [for you, Qarun]! It is God alone who gives what He will, abundantly or sparingly, to whichever He will of His creatures: if God had not been gracious to us, He would have caused the earth to swallow us too.’ Alas indeed! Those who deny the truth will never prosper
We grant the Home in the Hereafter to those who do not seek superiority on earth or spread corruption: the happy ending is awarded to those who are mindful of God
Whoever comes before God with a good deed will receive a better reward; whoever comes with an evil deed will be punished only for what he has done
He who has made the Quran binding on you [Prophet] will bring you back home. So say, ‘My Lord knows best who has brought true guidance and who is blatantly astray.’
You yourself could not have expected the Scripture to be sent to you; it came only as a mercy from your Lord. So give no help to the disbelievers
Do not let them turn you away from God’s revelations after they have been revealed to you. Call people to your Lord. Never become one of those who ascribe partners to God
Do not call out to any other god beside God, for there is no god but Him. Everything will perish except His Face. His is the Judgement and to Him you shall all be brought back
Alif Lam Mim
Do people think they will be left alone after saying ‘We believe’ without being put to the test
We tested those who went before them: God will certainly mark out which ones are truthful and which are lying
Do the evildoers think they can escape us? How ill they judge
But as for those who strive for their meeting with God, God’s appointed time is bound to come; He is the All Seeing, the All Knowing
Those who exert themselves do so for their own benefit––God does not need His creatures––
We shall certainly blot out the misdeeds of those who believe and do good deeds, and We shall reward them according to the best of their actions
We have commanded people to be good to their parents, but do not obey them if they strive to make you serve, beside Me, anything of which you have no knowledge: you will all return to Me, and I shall inform you of what you have done
We shall be sure to admit those who believe and do good deeds to the ranks of the righteous
There are some people who say, ‘We believe in God,’ but, when they suffer for His cause, they think that human persecution is as severe as God’s punishment––yet, if any help comes to you [Prophet] from your Lord, they will say, ‘We have always been with you’. Does God not know best what is in everyone’s hearts
God will be sure to mark out which ones are the believers, and which the hypocrites
Those who disbelieve say to the believers, ‘Follow our path and we shall bear [the consequences for] your sins,’ yet they will not do so––they are liars
They will bear their own burdens and others besides: they will be questioned about their false assertions on the Day of Resurrection
We sent Noah out to his people. He lived among them for fifty years short of a thousand but when the Flood overwhelmed them they were still doing evil
We saved him and those with him on the Ark. We made this a sign for all people
We also sent Abraham. He said to his people, ‘Serve God and be mindful of Him: that is better for you, if only you knew
What you worship instead of God are mere idols; what you invent is nothing but falsehood. Those you serve instead of God have no power to give you provisions, so seek provisions from God, serve Him, and give Him thanks: you will all be returned to Him
If you say this is a lie, [be warned that] other communities before you said the same. The messenger’s only duty is to give clear warning.’
Do they not see that God brings life into being and reproduces it? Truly this is easy for God
Say, ‘Travel throughout the earth and see how He brings life into being: and He will bring the next life into being. God has power over all things
He punishes whoever He will and shows mercy to whoever He will. You will all be returned to Him
You cannot escape Him on earth or in the heavens; you will have no one to protect or help you besides God.’
Those who deny God’s Revelation and their meeting with Him have no hope of receiving My grace: they will have a grievous torment
The only answer Abraham’s people gave was, ‘Kill him or burn him!’ but God saved him from the Fire: there truly are signs in this for people who believe
Abraham said to them, ‘You have chosen idols instead of God but your love for them will only last for the present life: on the Day of Resurrection, you will disown and reject one another. Hell will be your home and no one will help you.’
Lot believed him, and said, ‘I will flee to my Lord: He is the Almighty, the All Wise.’
We gave Isaac and Jacob to Abraham, and placed prophethood and Scripture among his offspring. We gave him his rewards in this world, and in the life to come he will be among the righteous
And Lot: when He said to his people, ‘You practise outrageous acts that no people before you have ever committed
How can you lust after men, waylay travellers, and commit evil in your gatherings?’ the only answer his people gave was, ‘Bring God’s punishment down on us, if what you say is true.’
So he prayed, ‘My Lord, help me against these people who spread corruption.’
When Our mes-sengers brought the good news [of the birth of a son] to Abraham,they told him, ‘We are about to destroy the people of that town. They are wrongdoers.’
Abraham said, ‘But Lot lives there.’ They answered, ‘We know who lives there better than you do. We shall save him and his household, except for his wife: she will be one of those who stay behind.’
When Our messengers came to Lot, he was troubled and distressed on their account. They said, ‘Have no fear or grief: we shall certainly save you and your household, except for your wife- she will be one of those who stay behind
and we shall send a punishment from heaven down on the people of this town because they violate [God’s order].’
We left some [of the town] there as a clear sign for those who use their reason
To the people of Midian We sent their brother Shuayb. He said, ‘My people, serve God and think ahead to the Last Day. Do not commit evil and spread corruption in the land.’
They rejected him and so the earthquake overtook them. When morning came, they were lying dead in their homes
[Remember] the tribes of 'Ad and Thamud: their history is made clear to you by [what is left of] their dwelling places. Satan made their foul deeds seem alluring to them and barred them from the right way, though they were capable of seeing
[Remember] Qarun and Pharaoh and Haman: Moses brought them clear signs, but they behaved arrogantly on earth. They could not escape Us
and We punished each one of them for their sins: some We struck with a violent storm; some were overcome by a sudden blast; some We made the earth swallow; and some We drowned. It was not God who wronged them; they wronged themselves
Those who take protectors other than God can be compared to spiders building themselves houses- the spider’s is the frailest of all houses- if only they could understand
God knows what things they call upon beside Him: He is the Mighty, the Wise
Such are the comparisons We draw for people, though only the wise can grasp them
God has created the heavens and earth for a true purpose. There truly is a sign in this for those who believe
[Prophet], recite what has been revealed to you of the Scripture; keep up the prayer: prayer restrains outrageous and unacceptable behaviour. Remembering God is greater: God knows everything you are doing
[Believers], argue only in the best way with the People of the Book, except with those of them who act unjustly. Say, ‘We believe in what was revealed to us and in what was revealed to you; our God and your God are one [and the same]; we are devoted to Him.’
This is the way We sent the Scripture to you [Muhammad]. Those to whom We had already given Scripture believe in [the Quran] and so do some of these people. No one refuses to acknowledge Our revelations but the defiant
You never recited any Scripture before We revealed this one to you; you never wrote one down with your hand. If you had done so, those who follow falsehood might have had cause to doubt
But no, [this Quran] is a revelation that is clear to the hearts of those endowed with knowledge. No one refuses to acknowledge Our revelations but the evildoers
They say, ‘Why have no miracles been sent to him by his Lord?’ Say, ‘Miracles lie in God’s hands; I am simply here to warn you plainly.’
Do they not think it is enough that We have sent down to you the Scripture that is recited to them? There is a mercy in this and a lesson for believing people
Say, ‘God is sufficient witness between me and you: He knows what is in the heavens and earth. Those who believe in false deities and deny God will be the losers.’
They challenge you to hasten the punishment: they would already have received a punishment if God had not set a time for it, and indeed it will come to them suddenly and catch them unawares
They challenge you to hasten the punishment: Hell will encompass all those who deny the truth
on the Day when punishment overwhelms them from above and from below their very feet, and they will be told, ‘Now taste the punishment for what you used to do.’
My believing servants! My earth is vast, so worship Me and Me alone
Every soul will taste death, then it is to Us that you will be returned
We shall lodge those who believed and did good deeds in lofty dwellings, in the Garden graced with flowing streams, there to remain. How excellent is the reward of those who labour
those who are steadfast, those who put their trust in their Lord
How many are the creatures who do not store their sustenance! God sustains them and you: He alone is the All Hearing, the All Knowing
If you ask the disbelievers who created the heavens and earth and who harnessed the sun and moon, they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Then why do they turn away from Him
It is God who gives abundantly to whichever of His servants He will, and sparingly to whichever He will: He has full knowledge of everything
If you ask them, ‘Who sends water down from the sky and gives life with it to the earth after it has died?’ they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Praise belongs to God!’ Truly, most of them do not use their reason
The life of this world is merely an amusement and a diversion; the true life is in the Hereafter, if only they knew
Whenever they go on board a ship they call on God, and dedicate their faith to Him alone, but once He has delivered them safely back to land, see how they ascribe partners to Him
Let them show their ingratitude for what We have given them; let them take their enjoyment- soon they will know
Can they not see that We have made [them] a secure sanctuary though all around them people are snatched away? Then how can they believe in what is false and deny God’s blessing
Who could be more wicked than the person who invents lies about God, or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is Hell not the home for the disbelievers
But We shall be sure to guide to Our ways those who strive hard for Our cause: God is with those who do good
Alif Lam Mim
The Byzantines have been defeated
in a nearby land. They will reverse their defeat with a victory
in a few years’ time––God is in command, first and last. On that day, the believers will rejoice
at God’s help. He helps whoever He pleases: He is the Mighty, the Merciful
This is God’s promise: God never breaks His promise, but most people do not know
they only know the outer surface of this present life and are heedless of the life to come
Have they not thought about their own selves? God did not create the heavens and earth and everything between them without a serious purpose and an appointed time, yet many people deny that they will meet their Lord
Have they not travelled through the land and seen how their predecessors met their end? They were mightier than them: they cultivated the earth more and built more upon it. Their own mes-sengers also came to them with clear signs: God did not wrong them; they wronged themselves
Later the evildoers met a terrible end for rejecting and [repeatedly] mocking God’s revelations
God brings creation into being; in the end He will reproduce it and it is to Him you will be recalled
On the Day the Hour arrives, the guilty will despair
and they will have no intercessors among those partners they ascribed to God- they will deny these partners
When the Hour arrives, on that Day people will be separated
those who believed and did good deeds will delight in a Garden
while those who disbelieved and denied Our messages and the meeting of the Hereafter will be brought for punishment
So celebrate God’s glory in the evening, in the morning
praise is due to Him in the heavens and the earth- in the late afternoon, and at midday
He brings the living out of the dead and the dead out of the living. He gives life to the earth after death, and you will be brought out in the same way
One of His signs is that He created you from dust and- lo and behold!- you became human and scattered far and wide
Another of His signs is that He created spouses from among yourselves for you to live with in tranquillity: He ordained love and kindness between you. There truly are signs in this for those who reflect
Another of His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth, and the diversity of your languages and colours. There truly are signs in this for those who know
Among His signs are your sleep, by night and by day, and your seeking His bounty. There truly are signs in this for those who can hear
Among His signs, too, are that He shows you the lightning that terrifies and inspires hope; that He sends water down from the sky to restore the earth to life after death. There truly are signs in this for those who use their reason
Among His signs, too, is the fact that the heavens and the earth stand firm by His command. In the end, you will all emerge when He calls you from the earth
Everyone in the heavens and earth belongs to Him, and all are obedient to Him
He is the One who originates creation and will do it again- this is even easier for Him. He is above all comparison in the heavens and earth; He is the Almighty, the All Wise
He gives you this example, drawn from your own lives: do you make your slaves full partners with an equal share in what We have given you? Do you fear them as you fear each other? This is how We make Our messages clear to those who use their reason
And still the idolaters follow their own desires without any knowledge. Who can guide those God leaves to stray, who have no one to help them
So [Prophet] as a man of pure faith, stand firm and true in your devotion to the religion. This is the natural disposition God instilled in mankind- there is no altering God’s creation- and this is the right religion, though most people do not realize it
Turn to Him alone, all of you. Be mindful of Him; keep up the prayer; do not join those who ascribe partners to God
those who divide their religion into sects, with each party rejoicing in their own
When something bad happens to people, they cry to their Lord and turn to Him for help, but no sooner does He let them taste His blessing than- lo and behold!- some of them ascribe partners to their Lord
showing no gratitude for what We have given them. ‘Take your pleasure! You will come to know.’
Did We send them down any authority that sanctions the partners they ascribe to God
When We give people a taste of Our blessing, they rejoice, but when something bad happens to them- because of their own actions- they fall into utter despair
Do they not see that God gives abundantly to whoever He will and sparingly [to whoever He will]? There truly are signs in this for those who believe
So give their due to the near relative, the needy, and the wayfarer- that is best for those whose goal is God’s approval: these are the ones who will prosper
Whatever you lend out in usury to gain value through other people’s wealth will not increase in God’s eyes, but whatever you give in charity, in your desire for God’s approval, will earn multiple rewards
It is God who created you and provided for you, who will cause you to die and then give you life again. Which of your ‘partners’ can do any one of these things? Glory be to God, and exalted be He above the partners they attribute to Him
Corruption has flourished on land and sea as a result of people’s actions and He will make them taste the consequences of some of their own actions so that they may turn back
Say, ‘Travel through the land, and see how those before you met their end- most of them were idolaters.’
[Prophet], stand firm in your devotion to the upright religion, before an irresistible Day comes from God. On that Day, mankind will be divided
those who rejected the truth will bear the burden of that rejection, and those who did good deeds will have made good provision for themselves
From His bounty God will reward those who believe and do good deeds; He does not like those who reject the truth
Another of His signs is that He sends out the winds bearing good news, giving you a taste of His grace, making the ships sail at His command, enabling you to [journey in] search of His bounty so that you may be grateful
Before you [Muhammad], We sent mes-sengers, each to their own people: they brought them clear proofs and then We punished the evildoers. We make it Our duty to help the believers
It is God who sends out the winds; they stir up the clouds; He spreads them over the skies as He pleases; He makes them break up and you see the rain falling from them. See how they rejoice when He makes it fall upon whichever of His servants He wishes
though before it is sent they may have lost all hope
Look, then, at the imprints of God’s mercy, how He restores the earth to life after death: this same God is the one who will return people to life after death- He has power over all things
Yet they will continue in their disbelief, even if We send a [scorching] wind and they see their crops turn yellow
You [Prophet] cannot make the dead hear and you cannot make the deaf hear your call when they turn their backs and leave
you cannot lead the blind out of their error: the only ones you can make hear you are those who believe in Our revelations and devote themselves [to Us]
It is God who creates you weak, then gives you strength, then weakness after strength, together with your grey hair: He creates what He will; He is the All Knowing, the All Powerful
On the Day the Hour comes, the guilty will swear they lingered no more than an hour- they have always been deluded
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say, ‘In accordance with God’s decree, you actually lingered till the Day of Resurrection: this is the Day of Resurrection, yet you did not know.’
On that Day the evildoers’ excuses will be of no use to them: they will not be allowed to make amends
In this Quran We have set every kind of illustration before people, yet if you [Prophet] brought them a miracle, the disbelievers would still say, ‘You [prophets] deal only in falsehood.’
In this way God seals the hearts of those who do not know
so be patient, for God’s promise is true: do not let those with no firm beliefs discourage you
Alif Lam Mim
These are the verses of the wise Scripture
[with] guidance and mercy for those who do good
who keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and are certain of the Hereafter
these are rightly guided by their Lord, and it is they who will prosper
But there is the sort of person who pays for distracting tales, intending, without any knowledge, to lead others from God’s way, and to hold it up to ridicule. There will be humiliating torment for him
When Our verses are recited to him, he turns away disdainfully as if he had not heard them, as if there were heaviness in his ears. Tell him that there will be a painful torment
But for those who believe and do righteous deeds, there will be Gardens of bliss
where they will stay: that is God’s true promise, and He is the Almighty, the All Wise
He created the heavens without any visible support, and He placed firm mountains on the earth––in case it should shake under you––and He spread all kinds of animals around it. We sent down water from the sky, with which We made every kind of good plant grow on earth
all this is God’s creation. Now, show Me what your other gods have created. No, the disbelievers are clearly astray
We endowed Luqman with wisdom: ‘Be thankful to God: whoever gives thanks benefits his own soul, and as for those who are thankless––God is self-sufficient, worthy of all praise.’
Luqman counselled his son, ‘My son, do not attribute any partners to God: attributing partners to Him is a terrible wrong.’
We have commanded people to be good to their parents: their mothers carried them, with strain upon strain, and it takes two years to wean them. Give thanks to Me and to your parents- all will return to Me
If they strive to make you associate with Me anything about which you have no knowledge, then do not obey them. Yet keep their company in this life according to what is right, and follow the path of those who turn to Me. You will all return to Me in the end, and I will tell you everything that you have done
[And Luqman continued], ‘My son, if even the weight of a mustard seed were hidden in a rock or anywhere in the heavens or earth, God would bring it [to light], for He is all subtle and all aware
Keep up the prayer, my son; command what is right; forbid what is wrong; bear anything that happens to you steadfastly: these are things to be aspired to
Do not turn your nose up at people, nor walk about the place arrogantly, for God does not love arrogant or boastful people
Go at a moderate pace and lower your voice, for the ugliest of all voices is the braying of asses.’
[People], do you not see how God has made what is in the heavens and on the earth useful to you, and has lavished His bless-ings on you both outwardly and inwardly? Yet some people argue about God, without knowledge or guidance or an illuminating scripture
When they are told, ‘Follow what God has sent down,’ they say: ‘We shall follow what we saw our forefathers following.’ What! Even if Satan is calling them to the suffering of the Blazing Flame
Whoever directs himself wholly to God and does good work has grasped the surest handhold, for the outcome of everything is with God
As for those who refuse to do this, do not let their refusal sadden you [Prophet]- they will return to Us and We shall tell them what they have done: God knows all that hearts contain
We let them enjoy themselves for a little while, but We shall drive them to a harsh torment
If you ask them who created the heavens and earth, they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Praise belongs to God,’ but most of them do not understand
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God. God is self-sufficient and worthy of all praise
If all the trees on earth were pens and all the seas, with seven more seas besides, [were ink,] still God’s words would not run out: God is almighty and all wise
Creating and resurrecting all of you is only like creating or resurrecting a single soul: God is all hearing and all seeing
[Prophet], do you not see that God causes the night to merge into day and the day to merge into night; that He has subjected the sun and the moon, each to run its course for a stated term; that He is aware of everything you [people] do
This is because God is the Truth, and what they invoke beside Him is false. He is the Most High, Most Great
[Prophet], do you not see that ships sail through the sea, by the grace of God, to show you [people] some of His wonders? Truly there are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful person
When the waves loom over those on board like giant shadows they call out to God, devoting their religion entirely to Him. But, when He has delivered them safely to land, some of them waver- only a treacherous, thankless person refuses to acknowledge Our signs
People, be mindful of your Lord and fear a day when no parent will take the place of their child, nor a child take the place of their parent, in any way. God’s promise is true, so do not let the present life delude you, nor let the Deceiver delude you about God
Knowledge of the Hour [of Resurrection] belongs to God; it is He who sends down the relieving rain and He who knows what is hidden in the womb. No soul knows what it will reap tomorrow, and no soul knows in what land it will die; it is God who is all knowing and all aware
Alif Lam Mim
This scripture, free from all doubt, has been sent down from the Lord of the Worlds
Yet they say, ‘Muhammad has made it up.’ No indeed! It is the Truth from your Lord for you [Prophet], to warn a people who have had no one to warn them before, so that they may be guided
It is God who created the heavens and the earth and everything between them in six Days. Then He established Himself on the Throne. You [people] have no one but Him to protect you and no one to intercede for you, so why do you not take heed
He runs everything, from the heavens to the earth, and everything will ascend to Him in the end, on a Day that will measure a thousand years in your reckoning
Such is He who knows all that is unseen as well as what is seen, the Almighty, the Merciful
who gave everything its perfect form. He first created man from clay
then made his descendants from an extract of underrated fluid
Then He moulded him; He breathed from His Spirit into him; He gave you hearing, sight, and minds. How seldom you are grateful
They say, ‘What? When we have disappeared into the earth, shall we really be created anew?’ In fact, they deny the meeting with their Lord
Say, ‘The Angel of Death put in charge of you will reclaim you, and then you will be brought back to your Lord.’
[Prophet], if only you could see the wrongdoers hang their heads before their Lord: ‘Our Lord, now that we have seen and heard, send us back and we shall do good. [Now] we are convinced.’
‘If it had been Our will, We could certainly have given every soul its true guidance, but My words have come true. “I shall be sure to fill Hell with jinn and men together.”
So since you ignored the meeting on this Day of yours, now We shall ignore you: taste the lasting suffering for all you have done.’
The only people who truly believe in Our messages are those who, when they are reminded of them, bow down in worship, cele-brate their Lord’s praises, and do not think themselves above this
Their sides shun their beds in order to pray to their Lord in fear and hope; they give to others some of what We have given them
No soul knows what joy is kept hidden in store for them as a reward for what they have done
So, is someone who believes equal to someone who defies God? No, they are not equal
Those who believe and do good deeds will have Gardens awaiting them as their home and as a reward for what they have done
As for those who defy God, their home will be the Fire. Whenever they try to escape it, they will be driven back into it, and they will be told, ‘Taste the torment of the Fire, which you persistently denied.’
We shall certainly make them taste a nearer torment [in this life] prior to the greater torment, so that perhaps they may return [to the right path]
Who does more wrong than someone who, when messages from his Lord are recited to him, turns away from them? We shall inflict retribution on the guilty
We gave Moses the Scripture- so [Muhammad] do not doubt that you are receiving it- and We made it a guide for the Children of Israel
When they became steadfast and believed firmly in Our messages, We raised leaders among them, guiding them according to Our command
[Prophet], it is your Lord who will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning their differences
Is it not a lesson for them [to see] how many generations We destroyed before them, in whose homes they now walk? There truly are signs in this- do they not hear
Do they not consider how We drive rain to the barren land, and with it produce vegetation from which their cattle and they themselves eat? Do they not see
And they say, ‘When will this Decision be, if you are telling the truth?’
Say, ‘On the Day of Decision it will be no use for the disbelievers to believe; they will be granted no respite.’
So [Prophet], turn away from them and wait: they too are waiting
Prophet, be mindful of God and do not give in to the disbelievers and the hypocrites: God is all knowing, all wise
Follow what your Lord reveals to you: God is well aware of all your actions
Put your trust in God: God is enough to trust
God does not put two hearts within a man’s breast. He does not turn the wives you reject and liken to your mothers’ backs into your real mothers; nor does He make your adopted sons into real sons. These are only words from your mouths, while God speaks the truth and guides people to the right path
Name your adopted sons after their real fathers: this is more equitable in God’s eyes––if you do not know who their fathers are [they are your] ‘brothers-in-religion’ and proteges. You will not be blamed if you make a mistake, only for what your hearts deliberately intend; God is most forgiving and merciful
The Prophet is more protective towards the believers than they are themselves, while his wives are their mothers. In God’s Scripture, blood-relatives have a stronger claim than other believers and emigrants, though you may still bestow gifts on your proteges. All this is written in the Scripture
We took a solemn pledge from the prophets- from you [Muhammad], from Noah, from Abraham, from Moses, from Jesus, son of Mary- We took a solemn pledge from all of them
God will question [even] the truthful about their sincerity, and for those who reject the truth He has prepared a painful torment
You who believe, remember God’s goodness to you when mighty armies massed against you: We sent a violent wind and invisible forces against them. God sees all that you do
They massed against you from above and below; your eyes rolled [with fear], your hearts rose into your throats, and you thought [ill] thoughts of God
There the believers were sorely tested and deeply shaken
the hypocrites and the sick at heart said, ‘God and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusions!’
Some of them said, ‘People of Yathrib, you will not be able to withstand [the attack], so go back!’ Some of them asked the Prophet’s permission to leave, saying, ‘Our houses are exposed,’ even though they were not- they just wanted to run away
had the city been invaded from all sides, and the enemy invited them to rebel, they would have done so almost without hesitation
Yet they had already promised God that they would not turn tail and flee, and a promise to God will be answered for
[Prophet], say, ‘Running away will not benefit you. If you manage to escape death or slaughter, you will only be permitted to enjoy [life] for a short while.’
Say, ‘If God wishes to harm you, who can protect you? If God wishes to show you mercy, who can prevent Him?’ They will find no one but God to protect or help them
God knows exactly who among you hinder others, who [secretly] say to their brothers, ‘Come and join us,’ who hardly ever come out to fight
who begrudge you [believers] any help. When fear comes, you [Prophet] see them looking at you with eyes rolling like someone in their death throes; when fear has passed, they attack you with sharp tongues and begrudge you any good. Such men do not believe, and God brings their deeds to nothing- that is all too easy for God
They think the joint forces have not gone, and if the joint forces did come again they would wish they were in the desert, wandering among the Bedouin and seeking news about you [from a safe distance]. Even if they were with you [believers], they would hardly fight at all
The Messenger of God is an excellent model for those of you who put your hope in God and the Last Day and remember Him often
When the believers saw the joint forces, they said, ‘This is what God and His Messenger promised us: the promise of God and His Messenger is true,’ and this only served to increase their faith and submission to God
There are men among the believers who honoured their pledge to God: some of them have fulfilled it by death, and some are still waiting. They have not changed in the least
[Such trials are ordained] so that God may reward the truthful for their honesty and punish the hypocrites, if He so wills, or He may relent towards them, for God is forgiving and merciful
God sent back the disbelievers along with their rage- they gained no benefit–– and spared the believers from fighting. He is strong and mighty
He brought those People of the Book who supported them down from their strongholds and put panic into their hearts. Some of them you [believers] killed and some you took captive
He passed on to you their land, their houses, their possessions, and a land where you had not set foot: God has power over everything
Prophet, say to your wives,‘If your desire is for the present life and its finery, then come, I will make provision for you and release you with kindness
but if you desire God, His Messenger, and the Final Home, then remember that God has prepared great rewards for those of you who do good.’
Wives of the Prophet, if any of you does something clearly outrageous, she will be doubly punished- that is easy for God
but if any of you is obedient to God and His Messenger and does good deeds, know that We shall give her a double reward and have prepared a generous provision for her
Wives of the Prophet, you are not like any other woman. If you are truly mindful of God, do not speak too softly in case the sick at heart should lust after you, but speak in an appropriate manner
stay at home, and do not flaunt your finery as they used to in the pagan past; keep up the prayer, give the prescribed alms, and obey God and His Messenger. God wishes to keep uncleanness away from you, people of the [Prophet’s] House, and to purify you thoroughly
Remember what is recited in your houses of God’s revelations and wisdom, for God is all subtle, all aware
For men and women who are devoted to God- believing men and women, obedient men and women, truthful men and women, steadfast men and women, humble men and women, charitable men and women, fasting men and women, chaste men and women, men and women who remember God often- God has prepared forgiveness and a rich reward
When God and His Messenger have decided on a matter that concerns them, it is not fitting for any believing man or woman to claim freedom of choice in that matter: whoever disobeys God and His Messenger is far astray
When you [Prophet] said to the man who had been favoured by God and by you, ‘Keep your wife and be mindful of God,’ you hid in your heart what God would later reveal: you were afraid of people, but it is more fitting that you fear God. When Zayd no longer wanted her, We gave her to you in marriage so that there might be no fault in believers marrying the wives of their adopted sons after they no longer wanted them. God’s command must be carried out
the Prophet is not at fault for what God has ordained for him. This was God’s practice with those who went before- God’s command must be fulfilled
[and with all] those who deliver God’s messages and fear only Him and no other: God’s reckoning is enough
Muhammad is not the father of any one of you men; he is God’s Messenger and the seal of the prophets: God knows everything
Believers, remember God often
and glorify Him morning and evening
it is He who blesses you, as do His angels, in order to lead you out of the depths of darkness into the light. He is ever merciful towards the believers
when they meet Him they will be greeted with ‘Peace’- and He has prepared a generous reward for them
Prophet, We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of good news and warning
as one who calls people to God by His leave, as a light-giving lamp
Give the believers the good news that great bounty awaits them from God
Do not give in to the disbelievers and the hypocrites: ignore the harm they cause you and put your trust in God. God is enough to trust
Believers, you have no right to expect a waiting period when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them: make provision for them and release them in an honourable way
Prophet, We have made lawful for you the wives whose bride gift you have paid, and any slaves God has assigned to you through war, and the daughters of your uncles and aunts on your father’s and mother’s sides, who migrated with you. Also any believing woman who has offered herself to the Prophet and whom the Prophet wishes to wed- this is only for you [Prophet] and not the rest of the believers: We know exactly what We have made obligatory for them concerning their wives and slave-girls- so you should not be blamed: God is most forgiving, most merciful
You may make any of [your women] wait and receive any of them as you wish, but you will not be at fault if you invite one whose turn you have previously set aside: this way it is more likely that they will be satisfied and will not be distressed and will all be content with what you have given them. God knows what is in your hearts: God is all knowing, forbearing
You [Prophet] are not permitted to take any further wives, nor to exchange the wives you have for others, even if these attract you with their beauty. But this does not apply to your slave-girls: God is watchful over all
Believers, do not enter the Prophet’s apartments for a meal unless you are given permission to do so; do not linger until [a meal] is ready. When you are invited, go in; then, when you have taken your meal, leave. Do not stay on and talk, for that would offend the Prophet, though he would shrink from asking you to leave. God does not shrink from the truth. When you ask his wives for something, do so from behind a screen: this is purer both for your hearts and for theirs. It is not right for you to offend God’s Messenger, just as you should never marry his wives after him: that would be grievous in God’s eyes
God has full knowledge of all things, whether you reveal them or not
The Prophet’s wives are not to blame [if they are seen by] their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their women, or their slaves. [Wives of the Prophet], be mindful of God. God observes everything
God and His angels bless the Prophet- so, you who believe, bless him too and give him greetings of peace
Those who insult God and His Messenger will be rejected by God in this world and the next- He has prepared a humiliating torment for them
and those who undeservedly insult believing men and women will bear the guilt of slander and flagrant sin
Prophet, tell your wives, your daughters, and women believers to make their outer garments hang low over them so as to be recog-nized and not insulted: God is most forgiving, most merciful
If the hypocrites, the sick at heart, and those who spread lies in the city do not desist, We shall rouse you [Prophet] against them, and then they will only be your neighbours in this city for a short while
They will be rejected. Wherever they are found, they will be arrested and put to death
This has been God’s practice with those who went before. You will find no change in God’s practices
People ask you about the Hour. Say, ‘God alone has knowledge of it.’ How could you [Prophet] know? The Hour may well be near
God has rejected the disbelievers and prepared a blazing fire for them
There they will stay permanently, with no one to befriend or support them
On the Day when their faces are being turned about in the Fire, they will say, ‘If only we had obeyed God and the Messenger,’
and ‘Lord! We obeyed our masters and our chiefs, and they led us astray
Lord! Give them a double punishment and reject them completely.’
Believers, do not be like those who insulted Moses- God cleared him of their allegations and he was highly honoured in God’s eyes
Believers, be mindful of God, speak in a direct fashion and to good purpose
and He will put your deeds right for you and forgive you your sins. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger will truly achieve a great triumph
We offered the Trust to the heavens, the earth, and the mountains, yet they refused to undertake it and were afraid of it; mankind undertook it- they have always been inept and foolish
God will punish the hypocrites and the idolaters, both men and women, and turn with mercy to the believers, both men and women: God is most forgiving, most merciful
Praise be to God, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and earth, and praise be to Him in the life to come. He is the All Wise, the All Aware
He knows all that goes into the earth and all that comes out of it; He knows all that comes down from the heavens and all that goes up to them. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving
Still, the disbelievers say, ‘The Last Hour will never come upon us.’ Say, ‘Yes, by my Lord, [it will], by Him who knows the unseen! Not even the weight of a speck of dust in the heavens or earth escapes His knowledge, nor anything smaller or greater. It is all recorded in a clear Record
so that He can reward those who believe and do good deeds: they will have forgiveness and generous provision.’
But as for those who work against Our Revelations, seeking to undermine them, there will be a torment of painful suffering
[Prophet], those who have been given knowledge can see that what has been sent to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it leads to the path of the Almighty, worthy of all praise
But the disbelievers say, ‘Shall we show you a man who claims that, when you have been utterly torn to pieces, you will be raised in a new creation
Has he invented a lie about God? Is he mad?’ No! It is those who do not believe in the life to come who will suffer torment, for they are in gross error
Do they not think about what is in front of them and behind them in the heavens and earth? If We wished, We could make the earth swallow them, or make fragments from the heavens fall down upon them. There truly is a sign in this for every servant who turns back to God in repentance
We graced David with Our favour. We said, ‘You mountains, echo God’s praises together with him, and you birds, too.’ We softened iron for him
saying, ‘Make coats of chain mail and measure the links well.’ ‘Do good, all of you, for I see everything you do.’
And [We subjected] the wind for Solomon. Its outward journey took a month, and its return journey likewise. We made a fountain of molten brass flow for him, and some of the jinn worked under his control with his Lord’s permission. If one of them deviated from Our command, We let him taste the suffering of the blazing flame
They made him whatever he wanted- palaces, statues, basins as large as water troughs, fixed cauldrons. We said, ‘Work thankfully, family of David, for few of my servants are truly thankful.’
Then, when We decreed Solomon’s death, nothing showed the jinn he was dead, but a creature of the earth eating at his stick: when he fell down they realized- if they had known what was hidden they would not have continued their demeaning labour
There was a sign for the people of Sheba, too, in their dwelling place: two gardens, one on the right, one on the left: ‘Eat from what your Lord has provided for you and give Him thanks, for your land is good, and your Lord most forgiving.’
But they paid no heed, so We let loose on them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens with others that yielded bitter fruit, tamarisk bushes, and a few lote trees
In this way We punished them for their ingratitude- would We punish anyone but the ungrateful
Also, We had placed, between them and the towns We had blessed, other towns within sight of one another to which they could travel easily- ‘ Travel safely in this land by night and by day’
but [still] they complained, ‘Our Lord has made the distance between our staging posts so long!’They wronged themselves and, in the end, We made their fate a byword, and scattered them in countless fragments. There truly are signs in this for every patient, thankful person
Satan was proved right in his opinion of them, for they all followed him- except for a group of believers
even though he had no authority over them. But [We aim] to distinguish those who believe in the life to come from those who doubt it: [Prophet], your Lord observes everything
Say, ‘Pray to your so-called gods besides God: they do not control even the weight of a speck of dust in heaven or earth, nor do they have any share in them, nor are any of them any help to God
Intercession will not work with Him, except by those to whom He gives permission.’ They will be asked, after the terror is lifted from their hearts [on the Day of Judgement], ‘What did your Lord speak?’ and they will answer, ‘The Truth. He is the Most High, the Most Great.’
Say [Prophet], ‘Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and earth?’ Say, ‘God does,’ and ‘[One party of us] must be rightly guided and the other clearly astray.’
Say, ‘You will not be ques-tioned about our sins, nor will we be questioned about what you do.’
Say, ‘Our Lord will gather us together, then He will judge justly between us; He alone is the All Knowing Judge.’
Say, ‘Show me those you joined to Him as partners. No indeed! He alone is God, the Almighty, the All Wise.’
We have sent you [Prophet] only to bring good news and warning to all people, but most of them do not understand
And they say, ‘If what you say is true, when will this promise be fulfilled?’
Say, ‘You have an appointment for a Day which you cannot put off nor bring forward, even by a single moment.’
The disbelievers say, ‘We will believe neither this Qur an nor the Scriptures that came before it.’ If only you could see [Prophet] how the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, hurling reproaches at one another. Those who were oppressed will say to the oppressors, ‘If it were not for you, we would have been believers.’
The oppressors will say to them, ‘Was it we who prevented you from following right guidance after it had reached you? No! You yourselves were sinners.’
The oppressed will say to them, ‘No, it was your scheming, night and day, ordering us to disbelieve in God and set up rivals to Him.’ When they see the punishment, they will fall silent with regret, and We shall put iron collars on the disbelievers’ necks. Why should they be rewarded for anything other than what they have done
Never have We sent a warner to a community without those among them who were corrupted by wealth saying, ‘We do not believe in the message you have been sent with.’
They would say, ‘We have greater wealth and more children than you, and we shall not be punished.’
Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord gives in abundance to whoever He will and sparingly to whoever He will, though most people do not understand
Neither wealth nor children will bring you nearer to Us, but those who believe and do good deeds will have multiple rewards for what they have done, and will live safely in the lofty dwellings of Paradise
whereas those who work against Our messages, seeking to undermine them, will be summoned to punishment.’
Say, ‘My Lord gives in abundance to whichever of His servants He will, and sparingly to whichever He will; He will replace whatever you give in alms; He is the best of providers.’
On the Day He gathers them all together, He will say to the angels, ‘Was it you these people worshipped?’
They will reply, ‘May You be exalted! You are our supporter against them! Really, they worshipped the jinn- most of them believed in them.’
‘So today neither of you has any power to benefit or harm the other,’ We shall tell the evildoers, ‘Taste the torment of the fire which you called a lie.’
When Our messages are recited to them, clear as they are, they say, ‘This is only a man who wants to turn you away from what your forefathers worshipped,’ and, ‘This [Quran] is nothing but lies he has made up.’ When the Truth comes to the disbelievers, they say, ‘This is just plain sorcery,’
though We have not given them any books to study nor sent any warner before you
Those who lived before them also denied the truth- these people have not attained even a tenth of what We gave their predecessors- they, too, rejected My messengers, and how terrible My condemnation was
Say [Prophet], ‘I advise you to do one thing only: stand before God, in pairs or singly, and think: there is no sign of madness in your companion [the Prophet]- he is only warning you before severe suffering arrives.’
Say, ‘If I have asked you for any reward, you can keep it. It is God alone who will reward me: He is witness to everything.’
Say, ‘My Lord hurls the Truth down [before you]. He has full knowledge of all that is unseen.’
Say, ‘The Truth has come; falsehood is powerless.’
Say, ‘If I go astray, that is my loss, and if I am rightly guided, it is through what my Lord has revealed to me. He is all hearing, and ever near.’
[Prophet], if you could only see their terror! There will be no escape when they are seized from a nearby place
they will say, ‘Now we believe in it,’ but how can they reach it from such a distant place
they denied it all in the past, and threw conjecture from a faroff place
when a barrier has been placed between them and what they desire, just as was done with their kind before? They were deep in doubt and suspicion
Praise be to God, Creator of the heavens and earth, who made angels messengers with two, three, four [pairs of] wings. He adds to creation as He will: God has power over everything
No one can withhold the blessing God opens up for people, nor can anyone but Him release whatever He withholds: He is the Almighty, the All Wise
People, remember God’s grace towards you. Is there any creator other than God to give you sustenance from the heavens and earth? There is no god but Him. How can you be so deluded
If they call you a liar [Prophet], many messengers before you were also called liars: it is to God that all things will be returned
People! God’s promise is true, so do not let the present life deceive you. Do not let the Deceiver deceive you about God
Satan is your enemy––so treat him as an enemy––and invites his followers only to enter the blazing fire
Those who disbelieve will be punished severely; those who believe and do good deeds will be forgiven, and richly rewarded
What about those whose evil deeds are made alluring to them so that they think they are good? God leaves whoever He will to stray and guides whoever He will. [Prophet], do not waste your soul away with regret for them: God knows exactly what they do
It is God who sends forth the winds; they raise up the clouds; We drive them to a dead land and with them revive the earth after its death: such will be the Resurrection
If anyone desires power, all power belongs to God; good words rise up to Him and He lifts up the righteous deed, but a severe torment awaits those who plot evil and their plotting will come to nothing
It is God who created you from dust and later from a drop of fluid; then He made you into two sexes; no female conceives or gives birth without His knowledge; no person grows old or has his life cut short, except in accordance with a Record: all this is easy for God
The two bodies of water are not alike- one is palatable, sweet, and pleasant to drink, the other salty and bitter- yet from each you eat fresh fish and extract ornaments to wear, and in each you see the ships ploughing their course so that you may seek God’s bounty and be grateful
He makes the night merge into the day and the day into the night; He has subjected the sun and the moon- each runs for an appointed term. Such is God your Lord: all control belongs to Him. Those you invoke beside Him do not even control the skin of a date stone
if you call them they cannot hear you; if they could hear, they could not answer you; on the Day of Resurrection they will disown your idolatry. None can inform you [Prophet] like the One who is all aware
People, it is you who stand in need of God- God needs nothing and is worthy of all praise
if He wills, He can do away with you and bring in a new creation
that is not difficult for God
No burdened soul will bear the burden of another: even if a heavily laden soul should cry for help, none of its load will be carried, not even by a close relative. But you [Prophet] can only warn those who fear their Lord, though they cannot see Him, and keep up the prayer- whoever purifies himself does so for his own benefit–– everything returns to God
The blind and the seeing are not alike
nor are darkness and light
shade and heat are not alike
nor are the living and the dead. God makes anyone He wills hear [His message]: you cannot make those in their graves hear
You are only here to warn them
We have sent you with the Truth as a bearer of good news and warning- every community has been sent a warner
If they call you a liar, their predecessors did the same: messengers came to them with clear signs, scriptures, and enlightening revelation
and afterwards I seized the disbelievers- how terrible My punishment was
Have you [Prophet] not considered how God sends water down from the sky and that We produce with it fruits of varied colours; that there are in the mountains layers of white and red of various hues, and jet black
that there are various colours among human beings, wild animals, and livestock too? It is those of His servants who have knowledge who stand in true awe of God. God is almighty, most forgiving
Those who recite God’s scripture, keep up the prayer, give secretly and openly from what We have provided for them, may hope for a trade that will never decline
He will repay them in full, and give them extra from His bounty. He is most forgiving, most appreciative
The Scripture We have revealed to you [Prophet] is the Truth and confirms the scriptures that preceded it. God is well informed about His servants, He sees everything
We gave the Scripture as a heritage to Our chosen servants: some of them wronged their own souls, some stayed between [right and wrong], and some, by God’s leave, were foremost in good deeds. That is the greatest favour
they will enter lasting Gardens where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, where they will wear silk garments
They will say, ‘Praise be to God, who has separated us from all sorrow! Our Lord is truly most forgiving, most appreciative
He has, in His bounty, settled us in the everlasting Home where no toil or fatigue will touch us.’
But those who reject the truth will stay in Hellfire, where they will neither be finished off by death, nor be relieved from Hell’s torment: this is how We reward hardened disbelievers
They will cry out loud in Hell, ‘Lord, let us out, and we will do righteous deeds, not what we did before!’- ‘ Did We not give you a life long enough to take warning if you were going to? The warner came to you, now taste the punishment.’ The evildoers will have nobody to help them
God knows all that is hidden in the heavens and earth; He knows the thoughts contained in the heart
it is He who made you [people] successors to the land. Those who deny the truth will bear the consequences: their denial will only make them more odious to their Lord, and add only to their loss
Say, ‘Consider those “partners” of yours that you call upon beside God. Show me! What part of the earth did they create? What share of the heavens do they possess?’ Have We given them a book that contains clear evidence? No indeed! The idolaters promise each other only delusion
God keeps the heavens and earth from vanishing; if they did vanish, no one else could stop them. God is most forbearing, most forgiving
[The idolaters] swore their most solemn oath that, if someone came to warn them, they would be more rightly guided than any [other] community, but when someone did come they turned yet further away
became more arrogant in the land, and intensified their plotting of evil- the plotting of evil only rebounds on those who plot. Do they expect anything but what happened to earlier people? You will never find any change in God’s practice; you will never find any deviation there
Have they not travelled in the land and seen how those before them met their end, although they were superior to them in strength? God is not to be frustrated by anything in the heavens or on the earth: He is all knowing, all powerful
If God were to punish people [at once] for the wrong they have done, there would not be a single creature left on the surface of the earth. He gives them respite for a stated time and, whenever their time comes, God has been watching His servants
Ya Sin
By the wise Quran
you [Muhammad] are truly one of the mes-sengers sent
on a straight path
with a revelation from the Almighty, the Lord of Mercy
to warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, and so they are unaware
The verdict has been passed against most of them, for they refuse to believe
[It is as if] We had placed [iron] collars around their necks, right up to their chins so that their heads are forced up
and set barriers before and behind them, blocking their vision: they cannot see
It is all the same to them whether you warn them or not: they will not believe
You can warn only those who will follow the Quran and hold the Merciful One in awe, though they cannot see Him: give such people the glad news of forgiveness and a noble reward
We shall certainly bring the dead back to life, and We record what they send ahead of them as well as what they leave behind: We keep an account of everything in a clear Record
Give them the example of the people to whose town messengers came
We sent two messengers but they rejected both. Then We reinforced them with a third
They said, ‘Truly, we are messengers to you,’
but they answered, ‘You are only men like ourselves. The Lord of Mercy has sent nothing; you are just lying.’ They said, ‘Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you
Our duty is only to deliver the message to you,’
but they answered, ‘We think you are an evil omen. If you do not stop, we shall stone you, and inflict a painful torment on you.’
The messengers said, ‘The evil omen is within yourselves. Why do you take it as an evil omen when you are reminded of the Truth? You are going too far!’
Then, from the furthest part of the city, a man came running. He said, ‘My people, follow the messengers
Follow them: they are not asking you to reward them and they are rightly guided
Why should I not worship the One who created me? It is to Him that you will be returned
How could I take besides Him any other gods, whose intercession will not help me and who would not be able to save me if the Lord of Mercy wished to harm me
Then I would clearly be in the wrong
I believe in your Lord, so listen to me.’
He was told, ‘Enter the Garden,’ so he said, ‘If only my people knew
how my Lord has forgiven me and set me among the highly honoured.’
After him We did not send any army from heaven against his people, nor were We about to
there was just one blast, and they fell down lifeless
Alas for human beings! Whenever a messenger comes to them they ridicule him
Do they not see how many generations We have destroyed before them, none of whom will ever come back to them
[Yet] all of them will be brought before Us
There is a sign for them in the lifeless earth: We give it life and We produce grain from it for them to eat
We have put gardens of date palms and grapes in the earth, and We have made springs of water gush out of it
so that they could eat its fruit. It was not their own hands that made all this. How can they not give thanks
Glory be to Him who created all the pairs of things that the earth produces, as well as themselves and other things they do not know about
The night is also a sign for them: We strip the daylight from it, and- lo and behold!- they are in darkness
The sun, too, runs its determined course laid down for it by the Almighty, the All Knowing
We have determined phases for the moon until finally it becomes like an old date-stalk
The sun cannot overtake the moon, nor can the night outrun the day: each floats in [its own] orbit
Another sign for them is that We carried their seed in the laden Ark
and We have made similar things for them to ride in
If We wished, We could drown them, and there would be no one to help them: they could not be saved
Only by Our mercy could they be reprieved to enjoy life for a while
Yet when they are told, ‘Beware of what lies before and behind you, so that you may be given mercy,’
they ignore every single sign that comes to them from their Lord
and when they are told, ‘Give to others out of what God has provided for you,’ the disbelievers say to the believers, ‘Why should we feed those that God could feed if He wanted? You must be deeply misguided.’
And they say, ‘When will this promise be fulfilled, if what you say is true?’
But all they are waiting for is a single blast that will overtake them while they are still arguing with each other
They will have no time to make bequests, nor will they have the chance to return to their own people
The Trumpet will be sounded and- lo and behold!- they will rush out to their Lord from their graves
They will say, ‘Alas for us! Who has resurrected us from our resting places?’ [They will be told], ‘This is what the Lord of Mercy promised, and the messengers told the truth.’
It was just one single blast and then- lo and behold!- they were all brought before Us
‘Today, no soul will be wronged in the least: you will only be repaid for your deeds
The people of Paradise today are happily occupied
they and their spouses- seated on couches in the shade
There they have fruit and whatever they ask for
“Peace,” a word from the Lord of Mercy
But step aside today, you guilty ones
Children of Adam, did I not command you not to serve Satan, for he was your sworn enemy
but to serve Me? This is the straight path
He has led great numbers of you astray. Did you not use your reason
So this is the Fire that you were warned against
Enter it today, because you went on ignoring [my commands].’
On that Day We shall seal up their mouths, but their hands will speak to Us, and their feet bear witness to everything they have done
If it had been Our will, We could have taken away their sight. They would have struggled to find the way, but how could they have seen it
If it had been Our will, We could have paralysed them where they stood, so that they could not move forward or backward
If We extend anyone’s life, We reverse his development. Do they not use their reason
We have not taught the Prophet poetry, nor could he everhave been a poet
This is a revelation, an illuminating Quran to warn anyone who is truly alive, so that God’s verdict may be passed against the disbelievers
Can they not see how, among the things made by Our hands, We have created livestock they control
and made them obedient, so that some can be used for riding, some for food
some for other benefits, and some for drink? Will they not give thanks
Yet they have taken other gods besides God to help them
though these could not do so even if they called a whole army of them together
So [Prophet] do not be distressed at what they say: We know what they conceal and what they reveal
Can man not see that We created him from a drop of fluid? Yet- lo and behold!- he disputes openly
producing arguments against Us, forgetting his own creation. He says, ‘Who can give life back to bones after they have decayed?’
Say, ‘He who created them in the first place will give them life again: He has full knowledge of every act of creation
It is He who produces fire for you out of the green tree- lo and behold!- and from this you kindle fire
Is He who created the heavens and earth not able to create the likes of these people? Of course He is! He is the All Knowing Creator
when He wills something to be, His way is to say, “Be”- and it is
So glory be to Him in whose Hand lies control over all things. It is to Him that you will all be brought back.’
By those [angels] ranged in rows
who rebuke reproachfully
and recite God’s word
truly your God is One
Lord of the heavens and earth and everything between them, Lord of every sunrise
We have adorned the lowest heaven with stars
and made them a safeguard against every rebellious devil
they cannot eavesdrop on the Higher Assembly––pelted from every side
driven away, they will have perpetual torment––
if any [of them] stealthily snatches away a fragment, he will be pursued by a piercing flame
So [Prophet], ask the disbelievers: is it harder to create them than other beings We have created? We created them from sticky clay
You marvel as they scoff
take no heed when they are warned
and resort to ridicule when they see a sign
saying, ‘This is no more than blatant sorcery.’
‘What! After we have died and become dust and bones, shall we really be raised up again
along with our forefathers?’
Say, ‘Yes indeed, and you will be humiliated.’
Just one blast and––lo and behold!––they will look
and say, ‘Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgement.’
[It will be said], ‘This is the Day of Decision, which you used to deny
[Angels], gather together those who did wrong, and others like them, as well as whatever they worshipped
beside God, lead them all to the path of Hell
and halt them for questioning
“Why do you not support each other now?” ’––
no indeed! They will be in complete submission on that Day––
and they will turn on one another accusingly
They will say, ‘You came to us from a position of power.’
They will say, ‘No! It was you who would not believe
we had no power over you- and you were already exceeding all limits
Our Lord’s sentence on us is just and we must all taste the punishment
We led you astray as we ourselves were astray.’
On that Day they will all share the torment
this is how We deal with the guilty
Whenever it was said to them, ‘There is no deity but God,’ they became arrogant
and said, ‘Are we to forsake our gods for a mad poet?’
‘No: he brought the truth and confirmed the earlier messengers
you will taste the painful torment
and be repaid only according to your deeds.’
Not so God’s true servants
They will have familiar provisions––
fruits- and will be honoured
in gardens of delight
seated on couches, facing one another
A drink will be passed round among them from a flowing spring
white, delicious to those who taste it
causing no headiness or intoxication
With them will be spouses- modest of gaze and beautiful of eye
like protected eggs
They will turn to one another with questions
one will say, ‘I had a close companion on earth
who used to ask me, “Do you really believe that
after we die and become dust and bone, we shall be brought for judgement?”’
Then he will say, ‘Shall we look for him?’
He will look down and see him in the midst of the Fire
and say to him, ‘By God, you almost brought me to ruin
Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I too would have been taken to Hell.’
Then he will say [to his blessed companions], ‘Are we never to die again after our earlier death
Shall we never suffer
This truly is the supreme triumph!’
Everyone should strive to attain this
Is this the better welcome, or the tree of Zaqqum
which we have made a test for the evildoers
This tree grows in the heart of the blazing Fire
and its fruits are like devils’ heads
They will fill their bellies eating from it
then drink scalding water on top of it
then return to the blazing Fire
They found their forefathers astray
and rushed to follow in their footsteps- before the disbelievers [of Mecca]
most men in the past went astray
even though We sent messengers to warn them
See how those who were warned met their end
Not so the true servants of God
Noah cried to Us, and how excellent was Our response
We saved him and his people from great distress
We let his offspring remain on the earth
We let him be praised by later generations
‘Peace be upon Noah among all the nations!’
This is how We reward those who do good
he was truly one of Our faithful servants
We drowned the rest
Abraham was of the same faith
he came to his Lord with a devoted heart
He said to his father and his people, ‘What are you worshipping
How can you choose false gods instead of the true God
So what is your opinion about the Lord of all the Worlds?’
then he looked up to the stars
He said, ‘I am sick,’
so [his people] turned away from him and left
He turned to their gods and said
‘Do you not eat? Why do you not speak?’
then he turned and struck them with his right arm
His people hurried towards him
but he said, ‘How can you worship things you carve with your own hands
when it is God who has created you and all your handiwork?’
They said, ‘Build a pyre and throw him into the blazing fire.’
They wanted to harm him, but We humiliated them
He said, ‘I will go to my Lord: He is sure to guide me
Lord, grant me a righteous son,’
so We gave him the good news that he would have a patient son
When the boy was old enough to work with his father, Abraham said, ‘My son, I have seen myself sacrificing you in a dream. What do you think?’ He said, ‘Father, do as you are commanded and, God willing, you will find me steadfast.’
When they had both submitted to God, and he had laid his son down on the side of his face
We called out to him, ‘Abraham
you have fulfilled the dream.’ This is how We reward those who do good
it was a test to prove [their true characters]
We ransomed his son with a momentous sacrifice
and We let him be praised by succeeding generations
‘Peace be upon Abraham!’
This is how We reward those who do good
truly he was one of Our faithful servants
We gave Abraham the good news of Isaac- a prophet and a righteous man
and blessed him and Isaac too: some of their offspring were good, but some clearly wronged themselves
We also bestowed Our favour on Moses and Aaron
We saved them and their people from great distress
We helped them, so they were the ones to succeed
We gave them the Scripture that makes things clear
We guided them to the right path
We let them be praised by succeeding generations
‘Peace be upon Moses and Aaron!’
This is how We reward those who do good
truly they were among Our faithful servants
Elijah too was one of the messengers
He said to his people, ‘Have you no fear of God
How can you invoke Baal and forsake the Most Gracious Creator
God, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?’
but they rejected him. They will be brought to punishment as a consequence
not so the true servants of God
We let him be praised by succeeding generations
‘Peace be to Elijah!’
This is how We reward those who do good
truly he was one of Our faithful servants
Lot was also one of the messengers
We saved him and all his family
except for an old woman who stayed behind
and We destroyed the rest
You [people] pass by their ruins morning
and night: will you not take heed
Jonah too was one of the messengers
He fled to the overloaded ship
They cast lots, he suffered defeat
and a great fish swallowed him, for he had committed blameworthy acts
If he had not been one of those who glorified God
he would have stayed in its belly until the Day when all are raised up
but We cast him out, sick, on to a barren shore
and made a gourd tree grow above him
We sent him to a hundred thousand people or more
They believed, so We let them live out their lives
Now [Muhammad], ask the disbelievers: is it true that your Lord has daughters, while they choose sons for themselves
Did We create the angels as females while they were watching
No indeed! It is one of their lies when they say
‘God has begotten.’ How they lie
Did He truly choose daughters in preference to sons
What is the matter with you? How do you form your judgements
Do you not reflect
Do you perhaps have clear authority
Bring your scriptures, if you are telling the truth
They claim that He has kinship with the jinn, yet the jinn themselves know that they will be brought before Him
God is far above what they attribute to Him
the true servants of God do not do such things
and neither you nor what you worship
can lure away from God any
except those who will burn in Hell
[The angels say], ‘Every single one of us has his appointed place
we are ranged in ranks
We glorify God.’
[The disbelievers] used to say
‘If only we had a scripture like previous people
we would be true servants of God,’
yet now they reject [the Quran]. They will soon realize
Our word has already been given to Our servants the messengers
it is they who will be helped
and the ones who support Our cause will be the winners
So [Prophet] turn away from the disbelievers for a while
Watch them: they will soon see
Do they really wish to hasten Our punishment
When it descends on their courtyards, how ter-rible that morning will be for those who were warned
[Prophet], turn away from the disbelievers for a while
Watch them: they will soon see
Your Lord, the Lord of Glory, is far above what they attribute to Him
Peace be upon the messengers
and praise be to God the Lord of all the Worlds
Sad By the Quran with its reminding
Yet the disbelievers are steeped in arrogance and hostility
How many generations We have destroyed before them! They all cried out, once it was too late, for escape
The disbelievers think it strange that a prophet of their own people has come to warn them: they say, ‘He is just a lying sorcerer
How can he claim that all the gods are but one God? What an astonishing thing [to claim]!’
Their leaders depart, saying, ‘Walk away! Stay faithful to your gods! That is what you must do
We did not hear any such claim in the last religion: it is all an invention
Was the message sent only to him out of all of us?’ In fact they doubt My warning; in fact they have not tasted My punishment yet
Do they possess the treasures of your Lord’s bounty, the Mighty, the All Giving
Do they control the heavens and earth and everything between? Let them climb their ropes
their armed alliance is weak and will be crushed
The people of Noah, Ad, and firmly-supported Pharaoh rejected their prophets before them
Thamud, the people of Lot, and the Forest-Dwellers each formed opposition [against theirs]
They all rejected the mes-sengers and they were deservedly struck by My punishment
all the disbelievers here are waiting for is a single blast that cannot be postponed
They say, ‘Our Lord! Advance us our share of punishment before the Day of Reckoning!’
Bear their words patiently [Prophet]. Remember Our servant David, a man of strength who always turned to Us
We made the mountains join him in glorifying Us at sunset and sunrise
and the birds, too, in flocks, all echoed his praise
We strengthened his kingdom; We gave him wisdom and a decisive way of speaking
Have you heard the story of the two litigants who climbed into his private quarters
When they reached David, he took fright, but they said, ‘Do not be afraid. We are two litigants, one of whom has wronged the other: judge between us fairly- do not be unjust- and guide us to the right path
This is my brother. He had ninety-nine ewes and I just the one, and he said, “Let me take charge of her,” and overpowered me with his words.’
David said, ‘He has done you wrong by demanding to add your ewe to his flock. Many partners treat each other unfairly. Those who sincerely believe and do good deeds do not do this, but these are very few.’ [Then] David realized that We had been testing him, so he asked his Lord for forgiveness, fell down on his knees, and repented
We forgave him [his misdeed]. His reward will be nearness to Us, a good place to return to
‘David, We have given you mastery over the land. Judge fairly between people. Do not follow your desires, lest they divert you from God’s path: those who wander from His path will have a painful torment because they ignore the Day of Reckoning.’
It was not without purpose that We created the heavens and the earth and everything in between. That may be what the disbelievers assume- how they will suffer from the Fire
but would We treat those who believe and do good deeds and those who spread corruption on earth as equal? Would We treat those who are aware of God and those who recklessly break all bounds in the same way
This is a blessed Scripture which We sent down to you [Muhammad], for people to think about its messages, and for those with understanding to take heed
We gave David Solomon. He was an excellent servant who always turned to God
When well-bred light-footed horses were paraded before him near the close of day
he kept saying, ‘My love of fine things is part of my remembering my Lord!’ until [the horses] disappeared from sight
‘Bring them back!’ [he said] and started to stroke their legs and necks
We certainly tested Solomon, reducing him to a mere skeleton on his throne
He turned to Us and prayed: ‘Lord forgive me! Grant me such power as no one after me will have- You are the Most Generous Provider.’
So We gave him power over the wind, which at his request ran gently wherever he willed
and the jinn––every kind of builder and diver
and others chained in fetters
‘This is Our gift, so give or withhold as you wish without account.’
His reward will be nearness to Us, and a good place to return to
Bring to mind Our servant Job who cried to his Lord, ‘Satan has afflicted me with weariness and suffering.’
‘Stamp your foot! Here is cool water for you to wash in and drink,’
and We restored his family to him, with many more like them: a sign of Our mercy and a lesson to all who understand
‘Take a small bunch of grass in your hand, and strike [her] with that so as not to break your oath.’ We found him patient in adversity; an excellent servant! He, too, always turned to God
Remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all men of strength and vision
We caused them to be devoted to Us through their sincere remembrance of the Final Home
with Us they will be among the elect, the truly good
And remember Our servants Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhu ’l-Kifl, each of them truly good
This is a lesson. The devout will have a good place to return to
Gardens of lasting bliss with gates wide open
They will be comfortably seated; they will call for abundant fruit and drink
they will have well-matched [wives] with modest gaze
‘This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning
Our provision for you will never end.’
But the evildoers will have the worst place to return to
Hell to burn in, an evil place to stay
all this will be theirs: let them taste it- a scalding, dark, foul fluid
and other such torments
[It will be said], ‘Here is another crowd of people rushing headlong to join you.’ [The response will be], ‘They are not welcome! They will burn in the Fire.’
They will say to them, ‘You are not welcome! It was you who brought this on us, an evil place to stay,’
adding, ‘Our Lord, give double punishment to those who brought this upon us.’
They will say, ‘Why do we not see those we thought were bad
and took as a laughing-stock? Have our eyes missed them?’
This is how it will really be: the inhabitants of the Fire will blame one another in this way
[Prophet] say, ‘I am only here to give warning. There is no god but God the One, the All Powerful
Lord of the heavens and earth and everything between, the Almighty, the Most Forgiving.’
Say, ‘This message is a mighty one
yet you ignore it
I have no knowledge of what those on high discuss
it is only revealed to me that I am here to give clear warning.’
Your Lord said to the angels, ‘I will create a man from clay
When I have shaped him and breathed from My Spirit into him, bow down before him.’
The angels all bowed down together
but not Iblis, who was too proud. He became a rebel
God said, ‘Iblis, what prevents you from bowing down to the man I have made with My own hands? Are you too high and mighty?’
Iblis said, ‘I am better than him: You made me from fire, and him from clay.’
‘Get out of here! You are rejected
My rejection will follow you till the Day of Judgement!’
but Iblis said, ‘My Lord, grant me respite until the Day when they are raised from the dead,’
so He said, ‘You have respite
till the Appointed Day.’
Iblis said, ‘I swear by Your might! I will tempt all
but Your true servants.’
God said, ‘This is the truth- I speak only the truth
I will fill Hell with you and all those that follow you.’
[Prophet], say, ‘I ask no reward from you for this, nor do I claim to be what I am not
this is only a warning for all people
In time you will certainly come to know its truth.’
This Scripture is sent down from God the Mighty, the Wise
It is We who sent down the Scripture to you [Prophet] with the Truth, so worship God with your total devotion
true devotion is due to God alone. [As for] those who choose other protectors beside Him, saying, ‘We only worship them because they bring us nearer to God,’ God Himself will judge between them regarding their differences. God does not guide any ungrateful liar
God could have chosen any of His creation He willed for offspring, but He is far above this! He is the One, the Almighty
He created the heavens and earth for a true purpose; He wraps the night around the day and the day around the night; He has subjected the sun and moon to run their courses for an appointed time; He is truly the Mighty, the Forgiving
He created you all from a single being, from which He made its mate; He gave you four kinds of livestock in pairs; He creates you in your mothers’ wombs, in one stage after another, in threefold depths of darkness. Such is God, your Lord; He holds control, there is no god but Him. How can you turn away
If you are ungrateful, remember God has no need of you, yet He is not pleased by ingrati-tude in His servants; if you are grateful, He is pleased [to see] it in you. No soul will bear another’s burden. You will return to your Lord in the end and He will inform you of what you have done: He knows well what is in the depths of [your] hearts
When man suffers some affliction, he prays to his Lord and turns to Him, but once he has been granted a favour from God, he forgets the One he had been praying to and sets up rivals to God, to make others stray from His path. Say, ‘Enjoy your ingratitude for a little while: you will be one of the inhabitants of the Fire.’
What about someone who worships devoutly during the night, bowing down, standing in prayer, ever mindful of the life to come, hoping for his Lord’s mercy? Say, ‘How can those who know be equal to those who do not know?’ Only those who have understanding will take heed
Say, ‘[God says], believing servants, be mindful of your Lord! Those who do good in this world will have a good reward- God’s earth is wide––and those who persevere patiently will be given a full and unstinting reward.’
Say, ‘I have been commanded to serve God, dedicating my worship entirely to Him
I have been commanded to be the first to submit.’
Say, ‘I fear the torment of a terrible Day if I disobey my Lord.’
Say, ‘It is God I serve, dedicating my worship entirely to Him
you may serve whatever you please beside Him.’ Say, ‘The true losers are the ones who will lose themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection: that is the most obvious loss
They will have layers of Fire above them and below.’ This is how God puts fear into His servants: My servants, beware of Me
There is good news for those who shun the worship of false gods and turn to God, so [Prophet] give good news to My servants
who listen to what is said and follow what is best. These are the ones God has guided; these are the people of understanding
What about the one who has been sentenced to punishment? Can you [Prophet] rescue those already in the Fire
But those who are mindful of their Lord will have lofty dwellings built for them, one above the other, graced with flowing streams. This is a promise from God: God does not break His promise
Have you not considered that God sends water down from the sky, guides it along to form springs in the earth, and then, with it, brings forth vegetation of various colours, which later withers, turns yellow before your eyes, and is crumbled to dust at His command? There is truly a reminder in this for those who have understanding
What about the one whose heart God has opened in devotion to Him, so that he walks in light from his Lord? Alas for those whose hearts harden at the mention of God! They have clearly lost their way
God has sent down the most beautiful of all teachings: a Scripture that is consistent and draws comparisons; that causes the skins of those in awe of their Lord to shiver. Then their skins and their hearts soften at the mention of God: such is God’s guidance. He guides with it whoever He will; no one can guide those God leaves to stray
What about the one who will only have his bare face to protect him from his terrible suffering on the Day of Resurrection? It will be said to the evildoers, ‘Taste what you have earned.’
Others before them also disbelieved, and the punishment fell on them unawares
God gave them the punishment of disgrace in this world to taste; the punishment will be even harder in the Hereafter, if only they knew
In this Quran, We have put forward all kinds of illustration for people, so that they may take heed
an Arabic Quran, free from any distortion- so that people may be mindful
God puts forward this illustration: can a man who has for his masters several partners at odds with each other be considered equal to a man devoted wholly to one master? All praise belongs to God, though most of them do not know
You [Prophet] will certainly die, and so will they
and, on the Day of Resurrection, you will dispute with one another in the presence of your Lord
So who could be more wrong than the person who invents a lie about God and rejects the truth when it comes to him? Is there not ample punishment for the disbelievers in Hell
It is the one who brings the truth and the one who accepts it as true who are mindful of God
they will have everything they wish for with their Lord. Such is the reward of those who do good
God will absolve them even of their worst deeds and will reward them according to their best
Is God not enough for His servant? Yet they threaten you [Prophet] with those they worship other than Him. If God allows someone to stray he has no one to guide him
if God guides someone no one can lead him astray. Is God not mighty and capable of retribution
If you [Prophet] ask them, ‘Who created the heavens and earth?’ they are sure to answer, ‘God,’ so say, ‘Consider those you invoke beside Him: if God wished to harm me, could they undo that harm? If God wished to show me mercy, could they withhold that mercy?’ Say, ‘God is enough for me: all those who trust should put their trust in Him.’
Say, ‘My people, do whatever is in your power- and so will I. You will find out
who will suffer humiliation, and on whom a lasting torment will descend.’
We have sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with the Truth for people. Whoever follows the guidance does so for his own benefit, whoever strays away from it does so at his own peril: you are not in charge of them
God takes the souls of the dead and the souls of the living while they sleep- He keeps hold of those whose death He has ordained and sends the others back until their appointed time- there truly are signs in this for those who reflect
Yet they take intercessors besides God! Say, ‘Even though these have no power or understanding?’
Say, ‘All intercession belongs to God alone; He holds control of the heavens and the earth; in the end you will all return to Him.’
Whenever God is mentioned on His own, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink with aversion, but they rejoice when gods other than Him are mentioned
Say, ‘God! Creator of the heavens and earth! Knower of all that is hidden and all that is open, You will judge between Your servants regarding their differences.’
If the evildoers possessed the earth’s assets twice over they would offer them to ransom themselves from the terrible suffering on the Day of Resurrection: God will show them something they had not reckoned with
the evil of their deeds will become plain to them, and they will be overwhelmed by that at which they used to laugh
When man suffers some affliction, he cries out to Us, but when We favour him with Our blessing, he says, ‘All this has been given to me because of my knowledge’- it is only a test, though most of them do not know it
Those who lived before them said the same. What they did was of no use to them
they suffered its evil effects. Today’s wrongdoers will also suffer the evil effects of their deeds: they will not escape
Do they not know that God provides abun-dantly for anyone He will and gives sparingly to anyone He will? There truly are signs in this for those who believe
Say, ‘[God says], My servants who have harmed yourselves by your own excess, do not despair of God’s mercy. God forgives all sins: He is truly the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful
Turn to your Lord. Submit to Him before the punishment overtakes you and you can no longer be helped
Follow the best teaching sent down to you from your Lord, before the punishment suddenly takes you, unawares
and your soul says, “Woe is me for having neglected what is due to God, and having been one of those who scoffed!”
Or it says, “If God had guided me, I would have joined the righteous!”
Or, faced by punishment, it says, “If only I could have another chance, I would join those who do good!”
No indeed! My messages came to you and you rejected them: you were arrogant and rejected the truth.’
On the Day of Resurrection, you [Prophet] will see those who told lies against God, their faces darkened. Is there not ample punishment for the arrogant in Hell
But God will deliver those who took heed of Him to their place of safety: no harm will touch them, nor will they grieve
God is the Creator of all things; He has charge of everything
the keys of the heavens and earth are His. Those who have rejected the revelations of God will be the losers
Say, ‘Do you order me to worship someone other than God, you foolish people?’
It has already been revealed to you [Prophet] and to those before you: ‘If you ascribe any partner to God, all your work will come to nothing: you will be one if the losers
No! Worship God alone and be one of those who are grateful to Him.’
These people have no grasp of God’s true measure. On the Day of Resurrection, the whole earth will be in His grip. The heavens will be rolled up in His right hand- Glory be to Him! He is far above the partners they ascribe to Him
the Trumpet will be sounded, and everyone in the heavens and earth will fall down senseless except those God spares. It will be sounded once again and they will be on their feet, looking on
The earth will shine with the light of its Lord; the Record of Deeds will be laid open; the prophets and witnesses will be brought in. Fair judgement will be given between them: they will not be wronged
and every soul will be repaid in full for what it has done. He knows best what they do
Those who rejected the Truth will be led to Hell in their throngs. When they arrive, its gates will open and its keepers will say to them, ‘Were you not sent your own messengers to recite the revelations of your Lord to you and warn you that you would meet this Day?’ and they will say, ‘Yes indeed we were.’ But the sentence of punishment will have been passed against those who rejected the truth
It will be said, ‘Enter the gates of Hell: there you will remain. How evil is the abode of the arrogant!’
Those who were mindful of their Lord will be led in throngs to the Garden. When they arrive, they will find its gates wide open, and its keepers will say to them, ‘Peace be upon you. You have been good. Come in: you are here to stay,’
and they will say, ‘Praise be to God who has kept His promise to us and given us this land as our own. Now we may live wherever we please in the Garden.’ How excellent is the reward of those who labour
You [Prophet] will see the angels surrounding the Throne, glorifying their Lord with praise. True judgement will have been passed between them, and it will be said, ‘Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.’
Ha Mim
This Scripture is sent down from God, the Almighty, the All Knowing
Forgiver of sins and Accepter of repentance, severe in punishment, infinite in bounty. There is no god but Him; to Him is the ultimate return
It is only the disbelievers who dispute God’s revelations. [Prophet], do not be dazzled by their movements back and forth across the land
Before them the people of Noah rejected the truth and so did those who formed opposition after them: every community schemed to destroy its messenger and strove to refute truth with falsehood; but it was I who destroyed them. How terrible My punishment was
In this way your Lord’s sentence was passed against the disbelievers that they would be the inhabitants of the Fire
Those [angels] who carry the Throne and those who surround it celebrate the praise of their Lord and have faith in Him. They beg forgiveness for the believers: ‘Our Lord, You embrace all things in mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who turn to You and follow Your path. Save them from the pains of Hell
and admit them, Lord, to the lasting Gardens You have promised to them, together with their righteous ancestors, spouses, and offspring: You alone are the Almighty, the All Wise
Protect them from all evil deeds: those You protect on that Day from [the punishment for] evil deeds will receive Your mercy- that is the supreme triumph.’
But those who disbelieved will be told, ‘When you were called to the faith and rejected it, God’s disgust with you was even greater then than the self-disgust you feel [today].’
They will say, ‘Our Lord, twice You have caused us to be lifeless and twice You have brought us to life. Now we recognize our sins. Is there any way out?’
[They will be told], ‘This is all because when God alone was invoked you rejected this, yet when others were associated with Him you believed [in them].’ Judgement belongs to God the Most High, the Most Great
It is He who shows you [people] His signs and sends water down from the sky to sustain you, though only those who turn to God will take heed
So call upon God and dedicate your religion to Him alone, however hateful this may be to the disbelievers
He is exalted in rank, the Lord of the Throne. He sends revelations with His teachings to whichever of His servants He will, in order to warn of the Day of Meeting
the Day when they will come out and nothing about them will be concealed from God. ‘Who has control today?’ ‘God, the One, the All Powerful
Today each soul will be rewarded for whatever it has done; today no injustice will be done. God is swift in reckoning.’
Warn them [Prophet] of the ever-approaching Day, when hearts are at throats, choking them. The evildoer will have no friends, nor any intercessor to be heeded
God is aware of the most furtive of glances, and of all that hearts conceal
God will judge with truth, while those they invoke besides Him will not judge at all. God is the All Hearing, the All Seeing
Have they not travelled through the land and seen how those who lived before them met their end? They were stronger than them and made a more impressive mark on the land, yet God destroyed them for their sins- they had no one to defend them against Him
because messengers repeatedly came to them with clear signs and still they rejected them. God destroyed them: He is truly full of strength, severe in punishment
We sent Moses with Our signs and clear authority
to Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah and they said, ‘Sorcerer! Liar!’
When he brought the truth to them from Us, they said, ‘Kill the sons of those who believe with him; spare only their women’- the scheming of those who reject the truth can only go wrong
and Pharaoh said, ‘Leave me to kill Moses- let him call upon his Lord!- for I fear he may cause you to change your religion, or spread disorder in the land.’
Moses said, ‘I seek refuge with my Lord and yours from every tyrant who refuses to believe in the Day of Reckoning.’
A secret believer from Pharaoh’s family said, ‘How can you kill a man just for saying, “My Lord is God”? He has brought you clear signs from your Lord- if he is a liar, on his own head be it- and if he is truthful, then at least some of what he has threatened will happen to you. God does not guide any rebellious, outrageous liar
My people, as masters in the land you have the power today, but who will help us against God’s might if it comes upon us?’ But Pharaoh said, ‘I have told you what I think; I am guiding you along the right path.’
The believer said, ‘My people, I fear your fate will be the fate of those others who opposed [their prophets]
the fate of the people of Noah, Ad, Thamud, and those who came after them- God never wills injustice on His creatures
My people, I fear for you on the Day you will cry out to one another
the Day you will turn tail and flee with no one to defend you from God! Whoever God leaves to stray will have no one to guide him
Joseph came to you before with clear signs, but you never ceased to doubt the message he brought you. When he died, you said, “God will not send another messenger.”’ In this way God leaves the doubting rebels to stray
those who dispute God’s messages, with no authority given to them, are doing something that is loathed by God and by those who believe. In this way God seals up the heart of every arrogant tyrant
Pharaoh said, ‘Haman, build me a tall tower so that I may reach the ropes that lead
to the heavens to look for this God of Moses. I am convinced that he is lying.’ In this way the evil of Pharaoh’s deed was made alluring to him and he was barred from the right path- his scheming led only to ruin
The believer said, ‘My people, follow me! I will guide you to the right path
My people, the life of this world is only a brief enjoyment; it is the Hereafter that is the lasting home
Whoever does evil will be repaid with its like; whoever does good and believes, be it a man or a woman, will enter Paradise and be provided for without measure
My people, why do I call you to salvation when you call me to the Fire
You call me to disbelieve in God and to associate with Him things of which I have no knowledge; I call you to the Mighty, the Forgiving One
There is no doubt that what you call me to serve is not fit to be invoked either in this world or the Hereafter: our return is to God alone, and it will be the rebels who will inhabit the Fire
[One Day] you will remember what I am saying to you now, so I commit my case to God: God is well aware of His servants.’
So God saved him from the harm they planned. A terrible punishment engulfed Pharaoh’s people
they will be brought before the Fire morning and evening. On the Day the Hour comes, it will be said, ‘Throw Pharaoh’s people into the worst torment.’
In the Fire they will quarrel with one another: the weak will say to the haughty, ‘We were your followers, so can you now relieve us from some share of the Fire?’
but they will say, ‘We are all in this together. God has judged between His creatures.’
Those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, ‘Ask your Lord to lessen our suffering for one day,’
but they will say, ‘Did your messengers not come to you with clear evidence of the truth?’ They will say, ‘Yes they did,’ and the keeper will say, ‘You can plead, then, but the pleas of disbelievers will always be in vain.’
We support Our messengers and the believers, in the present life and on the Day when witnesses arise
On the Day when excuses will not profit the evildoers, their fate will be rejection and they will have the worst of homes
We gave Moses guidance and passed down the Scripture to the Children of Israel
as a guide and a reminder to people of understanding
So be patient, Prophet, for what God has promised is sure to come. Ask forgiveness for your sins; praise your Lord morning and evening
As for those who, with no authority to do so, dispute God’s messages, there is nothing in their hearts but a thirst for a greatness they will never attain. Seek refuge in God, for He is the All Hearing, the All Seeing
The creation of the heavens and earth is greater by far than the creation of mankind, though most people do not know it
The blind and the sighted are not equal, just as those who believe and do good works and those who do evil are not equal: how seldom you reflect
The Final Hour is sure to come, without doubt, but most people do not believe
Your Lord says, ‘Call on Me and I will answer you; those who are too proud to serve Me will enter Hell humiliated.’
It is God who has given you the night in which to rest and the day in which to see. God is truly bountiful to people, but most people do not give thanks
Such is God your Lord, the Creator of all things: there is no god but Him. How can you be so deluded
This is how deluded those who deny God’s messages are
It is God who has given you the earth for a dwelling place and the heavens for a canopy. He shaped you, formed you well, and provided you with good things. Such is God your Lord, so glory be to Him, the Lord of the Worlds
He is the Living One and there is no god but Him, so call on Him, and dedicate your religion entirely to Him. Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds
Say [Prophet], ‘Since clear evidence has come to me from my Lord I am forbidden to serve those you call upon besides God: I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the Worlds.’
It is He who created you from dust, then from a drop of fluid, then from a tiny, clinging form, then He brought you forth as infants, then He allowed you to reach maturity, then He let you grow old- though some of you die sooner- and reach your appointed term so that you may reflect
It is He who gives life and death, and when He ordains a thing, He says only ‘Be’ and it is
[Prophet], do you see how deluded those who dispute God’s messages are
those who reject the Scripture and the messages We have sent through Our messengers? They will find out
when, with iron collars and chains around their necks, they are dragged
into scalding water, and then burned in the Fire
and asked, ‘Where now are those you called upon
besides God?’ They will say, ‘They have abandoned us: those we called upon before were really nothing at all.’ ‘This is how God lets disbelievers go astray
all because on earth you revelled in untruth and ran wild
Enter the gates of Hell, there to remain- an evil home for the arrogant.’
So be patient [Prophet], for God’s promise is sure: whether We show you part of what We have promised them in this life or whether We take your soul back to Us first, it is to Us that they will be returned
We have sent other messengers before you- some We have mentioned to you and some We have not- and no messenger could bring about a sign except with God’s permission. When [the Day] God ordained comes, just judgement will be passed between them: there and then, those who followed falsehood will be lost
It is God who provides livestock for you, some for riding and some for your food
you have other benefits in them too. You can reach any destination you wish on them: they carry you, as ships carry you [on the sea]
He shows you His signs: which of God’s signs do you still ignore
Have they not travelled through the land and seen how those who lived before them met their end? They were more numerous than them, stronger than them, and made a more impressive mark on the land, yet what they achieved was of no use to them at all
When messengers came to them with clear signs, they revelled in the knowledge they had, and so they were engulfed by the very punishment they mocked
when they saw Our punishment, they said, ‘We believe in God alone; we reject any partner we ascribed to Him,’
but believing after seeing Our punishment did not benefit them at all- this has always been God’s way of dealing with His creatures- there and then the disbelievers were lost
Ha Mim
A revelation from the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
a Scripture whose verses are made distinct as a Quran in Arabic for people who understand
giving good news and warning. Yet most of them turn away and so do not hear
They say, ‘Our hearts are encased against [the faith] you call us to; our ears are heavy; there is a barrier between us and you. So you do whatever you want, and so shall we.’
Say [Prophet], ‘I am only a mortal like you, [but] it has been revealed to me that your God is One. Take the straight path to Him and seek His forgiveness. Woe to the idolaters
who do not pay the prescribed alms and refuse to believe in the world to come
Those who believe and do good deeds will have a reward that never fails.’
Say, ‘How can you disregard the One who created the earth in two Days? How can you set up other gods as His equals? He is the Lord of all the worlds!’
He placed solid mountains on it, blessed it, measured out its varied provisions for all who seek them––all in four Days
Then He turned to the sky, which was smoke––He said to it and the earth, ‘Come into being, willingly or not,’ and they said, ‘We come willingly’––
and in two Days He formed seven heavens, and assigned an order to each. We have made the nearest one beautifully illuminated and secure. Such is the design of the Almighty, the All Knowing
If they turn away, say, ‘I have warned you about a blast like the one which struck 'Ad and Thamud
when their messengers came to them, from all angles, saying, “Serve no one but God,” they said, “If our Lord had wished, He would have sent down angels. We do not believe in the message with which you have been sent.”
The people of 'Ad behaved arrogantly throughout the land without any right, saying, “Who could be stronger than us?” Did they not realize that God, who created them, was stronger than them?’ They continued to reject Our message
so We let a roaring wind loose on them for a few disastrous days to make them taste the punishment of shame in this world; more shameful still will be the punishment of the life to come, and they will not be helped
As for Thamud, We gave them guidance but they preferred blindness, so they were struck by a blast of humiliating punishment for their misdeeds
We saved those who believed and were mindful of God
On the Day when God’s enemies are gathered up for the Fire and driven onward
their ears, eyes, and skins will, when they reach it, testify against them for their misdeeds
They will say to their skins, ‘Why did you testify against us?’ and their skins will reply, ‘God, who gave speech to everything, has given us speech- it was He who created you the first time and to Him you have been returned
yet you did not try to hide yourselves from your ears, eyes, and skin to prevent them from testifying against you. You thought that God did not know about much of what you were doing
so it was the thoughts you entertained about your Lord that led to your ruin, and you became losers.’
The Fire will still be their home, even if they resign themselves to patience, and if they pray to be allowed to make amends, they will not be given permission to do so
We have appointed, for the disbelievers, companions who make their past and present seem fair and right to them, but the sentence has already been passed on them, along with generations of jinn and men before them: they were losers
The disbelievers say, ‘Do not listen to this Quran; drown it in frivolous talk: you may gain the upper hand.’
We shall certainly give the disbelievers a taste of severe punishment. We shall repay them according to their worst deeds
that is the reward of the enemies of God- the Fire will be their lasting home, a payment for their rejection of Our revelations
The disbelievers will say, ‘Our Lord, show us those jinn and men who misled us and we shall trample them underfoot, so that they may be among the lowest of the low.’
As for those who say, ‘Our Lord is God,’ and take the straight path towards Him, the angels come down to them and say, ‘Have no fear or grief, but rejoice in the good news of Paradise, which you have been promised
We are your allies in this world and in the world to come, where you will have everything you desire and ask for
as a welcoming gift from the Most Forgiving, Most Merciful One.’
Who speaks better than someone who calls people to God, does what is right, and says, ‘I am one of those devoted to God’
Good and evil cannot be equal. [Prophet], repel evil with what is better and your enemy will become as close as an old and valued friend
but only those who are steadfast in patience, only those who are blessed with great righteousness, will attain to such goodness
If a prompting from Satan should stir you, seek refuge with God: He is the All Hearing and the All Knowing
The night, the day, the sun, the moon, are only a few of His signs. Do not bow down in worship to the sun or the moon, but bow down to God who created them, if it is truly Him that you worship
If the disbelievers are too arrogant, [remember, Prophet, that] those who are with your Lord glorify Him tirelessly night and day
Another of His signs is this: you see the earth lying desolate, but when We send water down on to it, it stirs and grows. He who gives it life will certainly give life to the dead. He has power over everything
Those who distort the meaning of Our message are not hidden from Us. Is he who is hurled into the Fire better, or he who comes through safely on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you want, God certainly sees everything you do
Those who reject the Quran when it comes to them- though it is an unassailable Scripture
which falsehood cannot touch from any angle, a Revelation sent down from the Wise One, Worthy of All Praise
[should remember that] you [Prophet] are not told anything that the previous messengers were not told: your Lord is a Lord of forgiveness, but also of painful punishment
If We had made it a foreign Quran, they would have said, ‘If only its verses were clear! What? Foreign speech to an Arab?’ Say, ‘It is guidance and healing for those who have faith, but the ears of the disbelievers are heavy, they are blind to it, it is as if they are being called from a distant place.’
We gave the Scripture to Moses but disputes arose about it- if it were not for a decree that had already been issued from your Lord, they would already have been judged- and still they are doubtful and suspicious of it
Whoever does good does it for his own soul and whoever does evil does it against his own soul: your Lord is never unjust to His creatures
Knowledge of the Hour belongs solely to Him and no crop comes out of its sheath, nor does any female conceive or give birth, without His knowledge. On the Day He asks them, ‘Where are My partners?’ they will answer, ‘We admit to You that none of us can see [them]’
the gods they invoked before will have vanished away; they will know that there is no escape
Man never tires of asking for good, but if evil touches him he loses all hope and becomes despondent
Whenever We let him taste some of Our mercy after he has been afflicted, he is sure to say, ‘This is all my own doing: I do not think the Hour will ever come, but even if I were to be taken back to my Lord, the best reward would await me with Him.’ We shall most certainly inform the disbelievers of what they have done and give them a taste of severe torment
Whenever We are gracious to man, he goes away haughtily, but, as soon as evil touches him, he turns to prolonged prayer
Say [Prophet], ‘Have you ever thought, what if this revelation really is from God and you still reject it? Who could be more astray than someone who cuts himself off so far [from God]?’
We shall show them Our signs in every region of the earth and in themselves, until it becomes clear to them that this is the Truth. Is it not enough that your Lord witnesses everything
Truly, they doubt that they will meet their Lord; truly He encompasses everything
Ha Mim
Ayn Sin Qaf
This is how God, the Mighty, the Wise, sends revelation to you [Prophet] as He did to those before you
All that is in the heavens and earth belongs to Him: He is the Exalted, the Almighty
The heavens are almost broken apart from above as the angels proclaim the praises of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth. God is indeed the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful
As for those who take protectors other than Him, God is watching them; you are not responsible for them
So We have revealed an Arabic Quran to you, in order that you may warn the capital city and all who live nearby. And warn [especially] about the Day of Gathering, of which there is no doubt, when some shall be in the Garden and some in the blazing Flame
If God had so pleased, He could have made them a single community, but He admits to His mercy whoever He will; the evildoers will have no one to protect or help them
How can they take protectors other than Him? God alone is the Protector; He gives life to the dead; He has power over all things
Whatever you may differ about is for God to judge. [Say], ‘Such is God, my Lord. In Him I trust and to Him I turn
the Creator of the heavens and earth.’ He made mates for you from among yourselves––and for the animals too––so that you may multiply. There is nothing like Him: He is the All Hearing, the All Seeing
The keys of the heavens and the earth are His; He provides abundantly or sparingly for whoever He will; He has full knowledge of all things
In matters of faith, He has laid down for you [people] the same commandment that He gave Noah, which We have revealed to you [Muhammad] and which We enjoined on Abraham and Moses and Jesus: ‘Uphold the faith and do not divide into factions within it’- what you [Prophet] call upon the idolaters to do is hard for them; God chooses whoever He pleases for Himself and guides towards Himself those who turn to Him
They divided, out of rivalry, only after knowledge had come to them, and, if it had not been for a decree already passed by your Lord to reprieve them until an appointed time, they would already have been judged. Those after them, who inherited the Scripture, are in disquieting doubt about it
So [Prophet] call people to that faith and follow the straight path as you have been commanded. Do not go by what they desire, but say, ‘I believe in whatever Scripture God has sent down. I am commanded to bring justice between you. God is our Lord and your Lord- to us our deeds and to you yours, so let there be no argument between us and you- God will gather us together, and to Him we shall return.’
As for those who argue about God after He has been acknowledged, their argument has no weight with their Lord: anger will fall upon them and agonizing torment awaits them
It is God who has sent down the Scripture with Truth and the Balance. How can you tell? The Last Hour may well be near
those who do not believe in it seek to hasten it, but the believers stand in awe of it. They know it to be the Truth; those who argue about the Hour are far, far astray
God is most subtle towards His creatures; He provides [bounti-fully] for whoever He will; He is the Powerful, the Almighty
If anyone desires a harvest in the life to come, We shall increase it for him; if anyone desires a harvest in this world, We shall give him a share of it, but in the Hereafter he will have no share
How can they believe in others who ordain for them things which God has not sanctioned in the practice of their faith? If it were not for God’s decree concerning the final Decision, judgement would already have been made between them. The evildoers will have a grievous punishment
you will see them fearful because of what they have done: punishment is bound to fall on them- but those who believe and do good deeds will be in the flowering meadows of the Gardens. They will have whatever they wish from their Lord: this is the great bounty
it is of this that God gives good news to His servants who believe and do good deeds. Say [Prophet], ‘I ask no reward from you for this, only the affection due to kin.’ If anyone does good, We shall increase it for him; God is most forgiving and most appreciative
How can they say, ‘He has invented a lie about God’? If God so willed, He could seal your heart and blot out lies: God confirms the Truth with His words. He has full knowledge of what is in the heart
it is He who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons bad deeds- He knows everything you do
He responds to those who believe and do good deeds, and gives them more of His bounty; agonizing torment awaits the disbelievers
If God were to grant His plentiful provision to [all] His creatures, they would act insolently on earth, but He sends down in due measure whatever He will, for He is well aware of His servants and watchful over them
it is He who sends relief through rain after they have lost hope, and spreads His mercy far and wide. He is the Protector, Worthy of All Praise
Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and all the living creatures He has scattered throughout them: He has the power to gather them all together whenever He will
Whatever misfortune befalls you [people], it is because of what your own hands have done- God forgives much
you cannot escape Him anywhere on earth: you have no protector or helper other than God
Among His signs are the ships, sailing like floating mountains
if He willed, He could bring the wind to a standstill and they would lie motionless on the surface of the sea- there truly are signs in this for anyone who is steadfast and thankful
or He could cause them to be wrecked on account of what their passengers have done- God pardons much
to let those who argue about Our messages know that there is no escape for them
What you have been given is only the fleeting enjoyment of this world. Far better and more lasting is what God will give to those who believe and trust in their Lord
who shun great sins and gross indecencies; who forgive when they are angry
respond to their Lord; keep up the prayer; conduct their affairs by mutual consultation; give to others out of what We have provided for them
and defend themselves when they are oppressed
Let harm be requited by an equal harm, though anyone who forgives and puts things right will have his reward from God Himself––He does not like those who do wrong
There is no cause to act against anyone who defends himself after being wronged
but there is cause to act against those who oppress people and transgress in the land against all justice- they will have an agonizing torment
though if a person is patient and forgives, this is one of the greatest things
Anyone God allows to stray will have no one else to protect him: you [Prophet] will see the wrongdoers, when they face the punishment, exclaiming, ‘Is there any way of going back?’
You will see them exposed to the Fire, abject in humiliation, glancing furtively, while those who believed exclaim, ‘The losers are the ones who have lost themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection.’ Truly the evildoers will remain in lasting torment
they will have no allies to help them against God. There is no way [forward] for those God allows to stray
So [people] respond to your Lord before there comes a Day that cannot, against God’s will, be averted- you will have no refuge on that Day, and no possibility of denying [your sins]. If they still turn away [remember that]
We have not sent you [Prophet] to be their guardian: your only duty is to deliver the message. When We give man a taste of Our mercy, he rejoices in it, but if some harm befalls him on account of what he has done with his own hands, then he is ungrateful
God has control of the heavens and the earth; He creates whatever He will- He grants female offspring to whoever He will
male to whoever He will, or both male and female, and He makes whoever He will barren: He is all knowing and all powerful
It is not granted to any mortal that God should speak to him except through revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger to reveal by His command what He will: He is exalted and wise
So We have revealed a spirit to you [Prophet] by Our command: you knew neither the Scripture nor the faith, but We made it a light, guiding with it whoever We will of Our servants. You give guidance to the straight path
the path of God, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and earth: truly everything will return to God
Ha Mim
By the Scripture that makes things clear
We have made it a Quran in Arabic so that you [people] may understand
It is truly exalted in the Source of Scripture kept with Us, and full of wisdom
Should We ignore you and turn this revelation away from you because you are insolent people
We have sent many a prophet to earlier people
and they mocked every one of them
so We have destroyed mightier people than [the disbelievers of Mecca] and their example has gone down in history
If you [Prophet] ask them, ‘Who created the heavens and earth?’ they are sure to say, ‘They were created by the Almighty, the All Knowing.’
It is He who smoothed out the earth for you and traced out routes on it for you to find your way
who sends water down from the sky in due measure––We resurrect dead land with it, and likewise you will be resurrected from the grave––
who created every kind of thing, who gave you ships and animals to ride on
so that you may remember your Lord’s grace when you are seated on them and say, ‘Glory be to Him who has given us control over this; we could not have done it by ourselves
Truly it is to our Lord that we are returning.’
Yet they assign some of His own servants to Him as offspring!Man is clearly ungrateful
Has He taken daughters for Himself and favoured you with sons
When one of them is given news of the birth of a daughter, such as he so readily ascribes to the Lord of Mercy, his face grows dark and he is filled with gloom
‘Someone who is brought up amongst trinkets, who cannot put together a clear argument?’
They consider the angels- God’s servants- to be female. Did they witness their creation? Their claim will be put on record and they will be questioned about it
They say, ‘If the Lord of Mercy had willed it, we would not have worshipped them,’ but they do not know that- they are only guessing
or have We perhaps given them a book before this one, to which they hold fast
No indeed! They say, ‘We saw our fathers following this tradition; we are guided by their footsteps.’
When-ever We sent a messenger before you to warn a township, those corrupted by wealth said, in the same way, ‘We saw our fathers following this tradition; we are only following in their footsteps.’
The messenger said, ‘Even though I bring you a truer religion than what you saw your fathers following?’ and they replied, ‘But we do not believe the message you bring.’
We punished them: think about how those who rejected the Truth met their end
Abraham said to his father and his people, ‘I renounce what you worship
I worship only Him who created me, and it is He who will guide me,’
and he bequeathed these words to his descendants so that they might return [to God]
I have let these people and their fathers enjoy long lives, and now I have given them the Truth and a messenger to make things clear
yet when the Truth came to them, they said, ‘This is sorcery. We do not believe in it,’
and they said, ‘Why was this Quran not sent down to a distinguished man, from either of the two cities?’
Are they the ones who share out your Lord’s grace? We are the ones who give them their share of livelihood in this world and We have raised some of them above others in rank, so that some may take others into service: your Lord’s grace is better than anything they accumulate
If it were not that all mankind might have become a single nation [of disbelievers], We could have given all those who disbelieve in the Lord of Mercy houses with roofs of silver, sweeping staircases to ascend
massive gates, couches to sit on
and golden ornaments. All of these are mere enjoyments of this life; your Lord reserves the next life for those who take heed of Him
We assign an evil one as a comrade for whoever turns away from the revelations of the Lord of Mercy
evil ones bar people from the right path, even though they may think they are well guided
When such a person comes to Us, he will say [to his comrade], ‘If only you had been as far away from me as east is from west. What an evil comrade!’
[It will be said to them], ‘You have done wrong. Having partners in punishment will not console you today.’
Can you [Prophet] make the deaf hear? Or guide either the blind or those who are in gross error
Either We shall take you away and punish them- indeed We will
or We shall let you witness the punishment We threatened them with; We have full power over them
Hold fast to what has been revealed to you- you truly are on the right path
for it is a reminder for you and your people: you will all be questioned
Ask the prophets We sent before you: ‘Did We ever appoint any gods to be worshipped besides the Lord of Mercy?’
We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his courtiers and he said, ‘I am truly a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds,’
but when he presented Our signs to them, they laughed
even though each sign We showed them was greater than the previous one. We inflicted torment on them so that they might return to the right path
They said, ‘Sorcerer, call on your Lord for us, by virtue of His pledge to you: we shall certainly accept guidance,’
but as soon as We relieved their torment they broke their word
Pharaoh proclaimed to his people, ‘My people, is the Kingdom of Egypt not mine? And these rivers that flow at my feet, are they not mine? Do you not see
Am I not better than this contemptible wretch who can scarcely express himself
Why has he not been given any gold bracelets? Why have no angels come to accompany him?’
In this way he moved his people to accept and they obeyed him- they were perverse people
When they provoked Us, We punished and drowned them all
We made them a lesson and an example for later people
When the son of Mary is cited as an example, your people [Prophet] laugh and jeer
saying, ‘Are our gods better or him?’- they cite him only to challenge you: they are a contentious people
but he is only a servant We favoured and made an example for the Children of Israel
if it had been Our will, We could have made you angels, succeeding one another on earth
This [Quran] gives knowledge of the Hour: do not doubt it. Follow Me for this is the right path
do not let Satan hinder you, for he is your sworn enemy
When Jesus came with clear signs he said, ‘I have brought you wisdom; I have come to clear up some of your differences for you. Be mindful of God and obey me
God is my Lord and your Lord. Serve Him: this is the straight path.’
Yet still the different factions among them disagreed- woe to the evildoers: they will suffer the torment of a grievous day
what are they waiting for but the Hour, which will come upon them suddenly and take them unawares
On that Day, friends will become each other’s enemies. Not so the righteous
‘My servants, there is no fear for you today, nor shall you grieve’––
those who believed in Our revelations and devoted themselves to Us
‘Enter Paradise, you and your spouses: you will be filled with joy.’
Dishes and goblets of gold will be passed around them with all that their souls desire and their eyes delight in. ‘There you will remain
this is the Garden you are given as your own, because of what you used to do
and there is abundant fruit in it for you to eat.’
But the evildoers will remain in Hell’s punishment
from which there is no relief: they will remain in utter despair
We never wronged them; they were the ones who did wrong
They will cry, ‘Malik, if only your Lord would finish us off,’ but he will answer, ‘No! You are here to stay.’
We have brought you the Truth but most of you despise it
Have these disbelievers thought up some scheme? We too have been scheming
Do they think We cannot hear their secret talk and their private counsel? Yes we can: Our messengers are at their sides, recording everything
Say [Prophet], ‘If the Lord of Mercy [truly] had offspring I would be the first to worship [them], but
exalted be the Lord of the heavens and earth, the Lord of the Throne- He is far above their false descriptions.’
Leave them to wade in deeper and play about, until they face the Day they have been promised
It is He who is God in heaven and God on earth; He is the All Wise, the All Knowing
Exalted is He who has control of the heavens and earth and everything between them; He has knowledge of the Hour; you will all be returned to Him
Those gods they invoke besides Him have no power of intercession, unlike those who bore witness to the truth and recognized it
If you [Prophet] ask them who created them they are sure to say, ‘God,’ so why are they so deluded
The Prophet has said, ‘My Lord, truly these are people who do not believe,’
but turn away from them and say, ‘Peace’: they will come to know
Ha Mim
By the Scripture that makes things clear
truly We sent it down on a blessed night––We have always sent warnings––
a night when every matter of wisdom was made distinct
at Our command––We have always sent messages to man––
as a mercy [Prophet] from your Lord who sees and knows all
Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between––if only you people were firm believers––
there is no god but Him: He gives life and death––He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers––
yet in [their state of] doubt they take nothing seriously
[Prophet], watch out for the Day when the sky brings forth clouds of smoke for all to see
It will envelop the people. They will cry, ‘This is a terrible torment
Lord relieve us from this torment! We believe!’
How will this [sudden] faith benefit them? When a prophet came to warn them plainly
they turned their backs on him, saying, ‘He is tutored! He is possessed!’
We shall hold the torment back for a while ––you are sure to return [to Us]––
and on the Day We seize [them] mightily We shall exact retribution
We tested the people of Pharaoh before them: a noble messenger was sent to them
saying, ‘Hand the servants of God over to me! I am a faithful messenger who has been sent to you
Do not consider yourselves to be above God! I come to you with clear authority
I seek refuge in my Lord and yours against your insults
If you do not believe me, just let me be.’
[Moses] cried to his Lord, ‘These people are evildoers!’
[God replied], ‘Escape in the night with My servants, for you are sure to be pursued
Leave the sea behind you parted and their army will be drowned.’
Many a garden and spring they left behind
many a cornfield and noble building
many a thing in which they had delighted
We gave these to another people to inherit
Neither heavens nor earth shed a tear for them, nor were they given any time
We saved the Children of Israel from their degrading suffering
at the hands of Pharaoh: he was a tyrant who exceeded all bounds
We chose them knowingly above others
We gave them revelations in which there was a clear test
These people here assert
‘There is nothing beyond our one death: we will not be resurrected
Bring back our forefathers, if what you say is true.’
Are they better than the people of Tubbaand those who flourished before them? We destroyed them all- they were guilty
We were not playing a pointless game when We created the heavens and earth and everything in between
We created them for a true purpose, but most people do not comprehend
The Day of Decision is the time appointed for all
a Day when no friend can take another’s place
No one will receive any help except for those to whom God shows mercy: He is the Mighty, the Merciful Lord
The tree of Zaqqum
will be food for the sinners
[hot] as molten metal, it boils in their bellies
like seething water
‘Take him! Thrust him into the depths of Hell
Pour scalding water over his head as punishment!’
‘Taste this, you powerful, respected man
This is what you doubted.’
But those mindful of God will be in a safe place
amid Gardens and springs
clothed in silk and fine brocade, facing one another
so it will be. We shall wed them to maidens with large, dark eyes
Secure and contented, they will call for every kind of fruit
After the one death they will taste death no more. God will guard them from the torment of Hell
a bounty from your Lord. That is the supreme triumph
We have made this Quran easy to understand- in your own language [Prophet]- so that they may take heed
So wait; the disbelievers too are waiting
Ha Mim
This Scripture is sent down from God, the Mighty, the Wise
There are signs in the heavens and the earth for those who believe
in the creation of you, in the creatures God scattered on earth, there are signs for people of sure faith
in the alternation of night and day, in the rain God provides, sending it down from the sky and reviving the dead earth with it, and in His shifting of the winds there are signs for those who use their reason
These are God’s signs that We recount to you [Prophet, to show] the Truth. If they deny God and His revelations, what message will they believe in
Woe to every lying sinful person
who hears God’s revelations being recited to him, yet persists in his arrogance as if he had never heard them––[Prophet] bring him news of a painful torment!––
who, if he knows anything about Our revelations, ridicules it! Such people will have a humiliating torment
Hell lurks behind them and their gains will not benefit them, nor will those beings they took as protectors beside God––a tremendous torment awaits them
This is true guidance; those who reject their Lord’s revelations will have a woeful torment
It is God who subjected the sea for you––ships sail on it by His command so that you can seek His bounty and give Him thanks––
He has subjected all that is in the heavens and the earth for your benefit, as a gift from Him. There truly are signs in this for those who reflect
Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear God’s days [of punishment]––He will requite people for what they have done
Whoever does good benefits himself, and whoever does evil harms himself: you will all be returned to your Lord
We gave scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to the Children of Israel; We provided them with good things and favoured them above others
We gave them clear proof in matters [of religion]. They differed among themselves out of mutual rivalry, only after knowledge came to them: on the Day of Resurrection your Lord will judge between them regarding their differences
Now We have set you [Muhammad] on a clear religious path, so follow it. Do not follow the desires of those who lack [true] knowledge
they cannot help you against God in any way. Wrongdoers only have each other to protect them; the righteous have God Himself as their protector
This [revelation] is a means of insight for people, a source of guidance and mercy for those of sure faith
Do those who commit evil deeds really think that We will deal with them in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds, that they will be alike in their living and their dying? How badly they judge
God created the heavens and earth for a true purpose: to reward each soul according to its deeds. They will not be wronged
[Prophet], consider the one who has taken his own desire as a god, whom God allows to stray in the face of knowledge, sealing his ears and heart and covering his eyes- who can guide such a person after God [has done this]? Will you [people] not take heed
They say, ‘There is only our life in this world: we die, we live, nothing but time destroys us.’ They have no knowledge of this; they only follow guesswork. Their only argument
when Our clear revelations are recited to them, is to say, ‘Bring back our forefathers if what you say is true.’
[Prophet], say, ‘It is God who gives you life, then causes you to die, and then He gathers you all to the Day of Resurrection of which there is no doubt, though most people do not comprehend.’
Control of everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to God. When the Hour comes, those who follow falsehood will be the losers on that Day
You will see every community kneeling. Every community will be summoned to its record: ‘Today you will be repaid for what you did
Here is Our record that tells the truth about you: We have been recording everything you do.’
Those who believed and did good deeds will be admitted by their Lord into His mercy- that is the clearest triumph
but those who disbelieved [will be asked]: ‘When My revelations were recited to you, were you not arrogant and persistent in wicked deeds
When it was said to you, “God’s promise is true: there is no doubt about the Hour,” did you not reply, “We know nothing of the Hour. This is only conjecture in our opinion. We are not convinced”?’
The evil of their actions will [then] become clear to them. The punishment they mocked will engulf them
It will be said, ‘Today We shall ignore you just as you ignored your appointment with this Day. The Fire will be your home and no one will help you
because you received God’s revelations with ridicule and were deceived by worldly life.’ They will not be brought out of the Fire on that Day, nor will they be given the chance to make amends
So praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and earth, Lord of the worlds
True greatness in the heavens and the earth is rightfully His: He is the Mighty, the Wise
Ha Mim
This Scripture is sent down from God, the Almighty, the Wise
It was for a true purpose and a specific term that We created heaven and earth and everything in between, yet those who deny the truth ignore the warning they have been given
Say [Prophet], ‘Consider those you pray to other than God: show me which part of the earth they created or which share of the heavens they own; bring me a previous scripture or some vestige of divine knowledge––if what you say is true.’
Who could be more wrong than a person who calls on those other than God, those who will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection, those who are unaware of his prayers
those who, when all mankind is gathered, will become his enemies and disown his worship
When Our revelations are recited to them in all their clarity, the disbelievers say of the Truth that has reached them, ‘This is clearly sorcery,’
or they say, ‘He has invented it himself.’ Say [Prophet], ‘If I have really invented it, there is nothing you can do to save me from God. He knows best what you say amongst yourselves about it; He is sufficient as a witness between me and you; He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.’
Say, ‘I am nothing new among God’s messengers. I do not know what will be done with me or you; I only follow what is revealed to me; I only warn plainly.’
Say, ‘Have you thought: what if this Quran really is from God and you reject it? What if one of the Children of Israel testifies to its similarity [to earlier scripture] and believes in it, and yet you are too proud to [do the same]? God certainly does not guide evildoers.’
Those who disbelieve say of the believers, ‘If there were any good in this Quran, they would not have believed in it before we did,’and, since they refuse to be guided by it, they say, ‘This is an ancient fabrication.’
Yet the scripture of Moses was revealed before it as a guide and a mercy, and this is a scripture confirming it in the Arabic language to warn those who do evil and bring good news for those who do good
For those who say, ‘Our lord is God,’ and then follow the straight path there is no fear, nor shall they grieve
they are the people of Paradise, there to remain as a reward for what they were doing
We have commanded man to be good to his parents: his mother struggled to carry him and struggled to give birth to him- his bearing and weaning took a full thirty months. When he has grown to manhood and reached the age of forty he [may] say, ‘Lord, help me to be truly grateful for Your favours to me and to my parents; help me to do good work that pleases You; make my offspring good. I turn to You; I am one of those who devote themselves to You.’
We accept from such people the best of what they do and We overlook their bad deeds. They will be among the people of Paradise- the true promise that has been given to them
But some say to their parents, ‘What? Are you really warning me that I shall be raised alive from my grave, when so many generations have already passed and gone before me?’ His parents implore God for help; they say, ‘Alas for you! Believe! God’s promise is true,’ but still he replies, ‘These are nothing but ancient fables.’
The verdict has been passed on such people, along with all the communities that went before them, jinn and human: they are lost
Everyone will be ranked according to their deeds and God will repay them in full for what they have done: they will not be wronged
On the Day when those who deny the truth are brought before the Fire, it will be said to them, ‘You squandered the good things you were given in your earthly life, you took your fill of pleasure there, so on this Day a punishment of shame is yours: you were arrogant on earth without any right, and exceeded all limits.’
Mention [Hud] of the tribe of Ad: he warned his people among the sand dunes- other warners have come and gone both before and after him- ‘ Worship no one but God: I fear for you, that you will be punished on a terrible Day,’
but they said, ‘Have you come to turn us away from our gods? If what you say is true, bring down that punishment you threaten us with!’
He said, ‘Only God knows when it will come: I simply convey to you the message I am sent with but I can see you are an insolent people.’
When they saw a cloud approaching their valley, they said, ‘This cloud will give us rain!’ ‘No indeed! It is what you wanted to hasten: a storm-wind bearing a painful punishment
which will destroy everything by its Lord’s command.’ In the morning there was nothing to see except their [ruined] dwellings: this is how We repay the guilty
We had established them in a way we have not established you [people of Mecca]; We gave them hearing, sight, and hearts, yet their hearing, sight, and hearts were of no use to them, since they denied God’s revelations. They were overwhelmed by the punishment they had mocked
We have also destroyed other communities that once flourished around you- We had given them various signs so that they might return to the right way
so why did their gods not help them, those they set up as gods besides God to bring them nearer to Him? No indeed! They failed them utterly: it was all a lie of their own making
We sent a group of jinn to you [Prophet] to listen to the Quran. When they heard it, they said to one another, ‘Be quiet!’ Then when it was finished they turned to their community and gave them warning
They said, ‘Our people, we have been listening to a Scripture that came after Moses, confirming previous scriptures, giving guidance to the truth and the straight path
Our people, respond to the one who calls you to God. Believe in Him: He will forgive you your sins and protect you from a painful torment.’
Those who fail to respond to God’s call cannot escape God’s power anywhere on earth, nor will they have any protector against Him: such people have clearly gone far astray
Do the disbelievers not understand that God, who created the heavens and earth and did not tire in doing so, has the power to bring the dead back to life? Yes indeed! He has power over everything
On the Day the disbelievers are brought before Hell [it will be said to them], ‘Is this not real?’ ‘Yes, by our Lord,’ they will reply and He will say, ‘Then taste the punishment for having denied the truth.’
Be steadfast [Muhammad], like those messengers of firm resolve. Do not seek to hasten the punishment for the disbelievers: on the Day they see what they had been warned about, it will seem to them that they lingered no more than a single hour of a single day [in this life]. This is a warning. Shall any be destroyed except the defiant
God will bring to nothing the deeds of those who disbelieve and bar others from the way of God
but He will overlook the bad deeds of those who have faith, do good deeds, and believe in what has been sent down to Muhammad––the truth from their Lord––and He will put them into a good state
This is because the disbelievers follow falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. In this way God shows people their true type
When you meet the disbelievers in battle, strike them in the neck, and once they are defeated, bind any captives firmly––later you can release them by grace or by ransom––until the toils of war have ended. That [is the way]. God could have defeated them Himself if He had willed, but His purpose is to test some of you by means of others. He will not let the deeds of those who are killed for His cause come to nothing
He will guide them and put them into a good state
He will admit them into the Garden He has already made known to them
You who believe! If you help God, He will help you and make you stand firm
As for the disbelievers, how wretched will be their state! God has brought their deeds to nothing
It is because they hate what God has sent down that He has caused their deeds to go to waste
Have they not travelled the earth and seen how those before them met their end? God destroyed them utterly: a similar fate awaits the disbelievers
That is because God protects the believers while the disbelievers have no one to protect them
God will admit those who believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with flowing streams; the disbelievers may take their fill of pleasure in this world, and eat as cattle do, but the Fire will be their home
We have destroyed many a town stronger than your own [Prophet]- the town which [chose to] expel you- and they had no one to help them
Can those who follow clear proof from their Lord be compared to those whose foul deeds are made to seem alluring to them, those who follow their own desires
Here is a picture of the Garden promised to the pious: rivers of water forever pure, rivers of milk forever fresh, rivers of wine, a delight for those who drink, rivers of honey clarified and pure, [all] flow in it; there they will find fruit of every kind; and they will find forgiveness from their Lord. How can this be compared to the fate of those stuck in the Fire, given boiling water to drink that tears their bowels
Some of these people listen to you [Prophet], but, once they leave your presence, they sneer at those who have been given knowledge, saying, ‘What was that he just said?’ These are the ones whose hearts God has sealed, those who follow their own desires
God has increased the guidance of those who follow the right path, and given them their awareness [of Him]
What are the disbelievers waiting for, other than the Hour which will come upon them unawares? Its signs are already here, but once the Hour has actually arrived, what use will it be then to take heed
So [Prophet], bear in mind that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for your sins and for the sins of believing men and women. God knows whenever any of you move, and whenever any of you stay still
Those who believe ask why no sura [about fighting] has been sent down. Yet when a decisive sura [that mentions fighting] is sent down, you can see the sick at heart looking at you [Prophet] and visibly fainting at the prospect of death- better for them
would be obedience and fitting words; it would also be better for them to be true to God when the decision to fight has been made
‘If you turn away now, could it be that you will go on to spread corruption all over the land and break your ties of kinship?’
These are the ones God has rejected, making their ears deaf and their eyes blind
Will they not contemplate the Quran? Do they have locks on their hearts
Those who turn on their heels after being shown guidance are duped and tempted by Satan
they say to those who hate what God has sent down, ‘We will obey you in some matters’––God knows their secret schemes
How will they feel when the angels take them in death and beat their faces and their backs
because they practised things that incurred God’s wrath, and disdained to please Him? He makes their deeds go to waste
Do the corrupt at heart assume that God will not expose their malice
We could even point them out to you [Prophet] if We wished, and then you could identify them by their marks, but you will know them anyway by the tone of their speech. God knows everything you [people] do
We shall test you to see which of you strive your hardest and are steadfast; We shall test the sincerity of your assertions
Those who disbelieve, bar others from God’s path, and oppose the Messenger when they have been shown guidance, do not harm God in any way. He will make their deeds go to waste
believers, obey God and the Messenger: do not let your deeds go to waste
God will not forgive those who disbelieve, bar others from God’s path, and die as disbelievers
So [believers] do not lose heart and cry out for peace. It is you who have the upper hand: God is with you. He will not begrudge you the reward for your [good] deeds
the life of this world is only a game, a pastime, but if you believe and are mindful of God, He will recompense you. He does not ask you to give up [all] your posses-sions
you would be grudging if He were to ask you and press you for them, and He would bring your ill-will to light
though now you are called upon to give [a little] for the sake of God, some of you are grudging. Whoever is grudging is so only towards himself: God is the source of wealth and you are the needy ones. He will substitute other people for you if you turn away, and they will not be like you
Truly We have opened up a path to clear triumph for you [Prophet]
so that God may forgive you your past and future sins, complete His grace upon you, guide you to a straight path
and help you mightily
It was He who made His tranquillity descend into the hearts of the believers, to add faith to their faith––the forces of the heavens and earth belong to God; He is all knowing and all wise––
so as to admit believing men and women into Gardens graced with flowing streams, there to remain, absolving their bad deeds––a great triumph in God’s eyes––
and to torment the hypocritical and idolatrous men and women who harbour evil thoughts about God––it is they who will be encircled by evil!––who carry the burden of God’s anger, whom God has rejected and for whom He has prepared Hell, an evil destination
The forces of heaven and earth belong to God; He is almighty and all wise
We have sent you [Prophet] to bring good news and to give warning
so that you[people] may believe in God and His Messenger, support Him, honour Him, and praise Him morning and evening
Those who pledge loyalty to you [Prophet] are actually pledging loyalty to God Himself- God’s hand is placed on theirs––and anyone who breaks his pledge does so to his own detriment: God will give a great reward to the one who fulfils his pledge to Him
The desert Arabs who stayed behind will say to you, ‘We were busy with our property and our families: ask forgiveness for us,’ but they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, ‘Whether it is God’s will to do you harm or good, who can intervene for you?’ No! God is fully aware of everything you [people] do
No! You thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families and this thought warmed your hearts. Your thoughts are evil, for you are corrupt people
We have prepared a blazing Fire for those who do not believe in God and His Messenger
Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God and He forgives whoever He will and punishes whoever He will: God is most forgiving and merciful
When you [believers] set off for somewhere that promises war gains, those who [previously] stayed behind will say, ‘Let us come with you.’ They want to change God’s words, but tell them [Prophet], ‘You may not come with us: God has said this before.’ They will reply, ‘You begrudge us out of jealousy.’ How little they understand
Tell the desert Arabs who stayed behind, ‘You will be called to face a people of great might in war and to fight them, unless they surrender: if you obey, God will reward you well, but if you turn away, as you have done before, He will punish you heavily
the blind, the lame, and the sick will not be blamed.’ God will admit anyone who obeys Him and His Messenger to Gardens graced with flowing streams; He will painfully punish anyone who turns away
God was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you [Prophet] under the tree: He knew what was in their hearts and so He sent tranquillity down to them and rewarded them with a speedy triumph
and with many future gains. God is mighty and wise
He has promised you [people] many future gains: He has hastened this gain for you. He has held back the hands of hostile people from you as a sign for the faithful and He will guide you to a straight path
There are many other gains [to come], over which you have no power. God has full control over them: God has power over all things
If the disbelievers had fought against you, they would have taken flight and found no one to protect or support them
such was God’s practice in the past and you will find no change in God’s practices
In the valley of Mecca it was He who held their hands back from you and your hands back from them after He gave you the advantage over them––God sees all that you do
They were the ones who disbelieved, who barred you from the Sacred Mosque, and who prevented the offering from reaching its place of sacrifice. If there had not been among them, unknown to you, believing men and women whom you would have trampled underfoot, inadvertently incurring guilt on their account- God brings whoever He will into His mercy- if the [believers] had been clearly separated, We would have inflicted a painful punishment on the disbelievers
While the disbelievers had fury in their hearts- the fury of ignorance- God sent His tranquillity down on to His Messenger and the believers and made binding on them [their] promise to obey God, for that was more appropriate and fitting for them. God has full knowledge of all things
God has truly fulfilled His Messenger’s vision: ‘God willing, you will most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque in safety, shavenheaded or with cropped hair, without fear!’- God knew what you did not- and He has granted you a speedy triumph
It was He who sent His Messenger, with guidance and the religion of Truth, for him to show that it is above all [false] religion. God suffices as a witness
Muhammad is the Messenger of God. Those who follow him are harsh towards the disbelievers and compassionate towards each other. You see them kneeling and prostrating, seeking God’s bounty and His good pleasure: on their faces they bear the marks of their prostrations. This is how they are pictured in the Torah and the Gospel: like a seed that puts forth its shoot, becomes strong, grows thick, and rises on its stem to the delight of its sowers. So God infuriates the disbelievers through them; God promises forgiveness and a great reward to those who believe and do righteous deeds
Believers, do not push yourselves forward in the presence of God and His Messenger––be mindful of God: He hears and knows all––
believers, do not raise your voices above the Prophet’s, do not raise your voice when speaking to him as you do to one another, or your [good] deeds may be cancelled out without you knowing
It is those who lower their voices in the presence of God’s Messenger whose hearts God has proved to be aware––they will have forgiveness, and a great reward––
but most of those who shout to you [Prophet] from outside your private rooms lack understanding
It would have been better for them if they had waited patiently for you to come out to them but God is all forgiving and merciful
Believers, if a troublemaker brings you news, check it first, in case you wrong others unwittingly and later regret what you have done
and be aware that it is God’s Messenger who is among you: in many matters you would certainly suffer if he were to follow your wishes. God has endeared faith to you and made it beautiful to your hearts; He has made disbelief, mischief, and disobedience hateful to you. It is people like this who are rightly guided
through God’s favour and blessing: God is all knowing and all wise
If two groups of the believers fight, you [believers] should try to reconcile them; if one of them is [clearly] oppressing the other, fight the oppressors until they submit to God’s command, then make a just and even-handed reconciliation between the two of them: God loves those who are even-handed
The believers are brothers, so make peace between your two brothers and be mindful of God, so that you may be given mercy
Believers, no one group of men should jeer at another, who may after all be better than them; no one group of women should jeer at another, who may after all be better than them; do not speak ill of one another; do not use offensive nicknames for one another. How bad it is to be called a mischief-maker after accepting faith! Those who do not repent of this behaviour are evildoers
Believers, avoid making too many assumptions- some assumptions are sinful- and do not spy on one another or speak ill of people behind their backs: would any of you like to eat the flesh of your dead brother? No, you would hate it. So be mindful of God: God is ever relenting, most merciful
People, We created you all from a single man and a single woman, and made you into races and tribes so that you should recognize one another. In God’s eyes, the most honoured of you are the ones most mindful of Him: God is all knowing, all aware
The desert Arabs say, ‘We have faith.’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘You do not have faith. What you should say instead is, “We have submitted,” for faith has not yet entered your hearts.’ If you obey God and His Messenger, He will not diminish any of your deeds: He is most forgiving and most merciful
The true believers are the ones who have faith in God and His Messenger and leave all doubt behind, the ones who have struggled with their possessions and their persons in God’s way: they are the ones who are true
Say, ‘Do you presume to teach God about your religion, when God knows everything in the heavens and earth, and He has full knowledge of all things?’
They think they have done you [Prophet] a favour by submitting. Say, ‘Do not consider your submission a favour to me; it is God who has done you a favour, by guiding you to faith, if you are truly sincere.’
God knows the secrets of the heavens and earth: He sees everything you do
Qaf By the glorious Quran
But the disbelievers are amazed that a warner has come from among them and they say, ‘How strange
To come back [to life] after we have died and become dust? That is too farfetched.’
We know very well what the earth takes away from them: We keep a comprehensive record
But the disbelievers deny the truth when it comes to them; they are in a state of confusion
Do they not see the sky above them––how We have built and adorned it, with no rifts in it
how We spread out the earth and put solid mountains on it, and caused every kind of joyous plant to grow in it
as a lesson and reminder for every servant who turns to God
and how We send blessed water down from the sky and grow with it gardens, the harvest grain
and tall palm trees laden with clusters of dates
as a provision for everyone; how with water We give [new] life to a land that is dead? This is how the dead will emerge [from their graves]
The people of Noah disbelieved long before these disbelievers, as did the people of Rass, Thamud
Ad, Pharaoh, Lot
the Forest-Dwellers, Tubba: all of these people disbelieved their messengers, and so My warning was realized
So were We incapable of the first creation? No indeed! Yet they doubt a second creation
We created man––We know what his soul whispers to him: We are closer to him than his jugular vein––
with two receptors set to record, one on his right side and one on his left
he does not utter a single word without an ever-present watcher
The trance of death will bring the Truth with it: ‘This is what you tried to escape.’
The Trumpet will be sounded: ‘This is the Day [you were] warned of.’
Each person will arrive attended by an [angel] to drive him on and another to bear witness
‘You paid no attention to this [Day]; but today We have removed your veil and your sight is sharp.’
The person’s attendant will say, ‘Here is what I have prepared’
‘Hurl every obstinate disbeliever into Hell
everyone who hindered good, was aggressive, caused others to doubt
and set up other gods alongside God. Hurl him into severe punishment!’
and his [evil] companion will say, ‘Lord, I did not make him transgress; he had already gone far astray himself.’
God will say, ‘Do not argue in My presence. I sent you a warning
and My word cannot be changed: I am not unjust to any creature.’
We shall say to Hell on that day, ‘Are you full?’ and it will reply, ‘Are there no more?’
But Paradise will be brought close to the righteous and will no longer be distant
‘This is what you were promised––this is for everyone who turned often to God and kept Him in mind
who held the Most Gracious in awe, though He is unseen, who comes before Him with a heart turned to Him in devotion
so enter it in peace. This is the Day of everlasting Life.’
They will have all that they wish for there, and We have more for them
We have destroyed even mightier generations before these disbelievers, who travelled through [many] lands- was there any escape
There truly is a reminder in this for whoever has a heart, whoever listens attentively
We created the heavens, the earth, and everything between, in six Days without tiring
So [Prophet], bear everything they say with patience; celebrate the praise of your Lord before the rising and setting of the sun
proclaim His praise in the night and at the end of every prayer
listen out for the Day when the caller will call from a nearby place
They will come out [from their graves] on that Day, the Day when they hear the mighty blast in reality
It is We who give life and death; the final return will be to Us
on the Day when the earth will be torn apart, letting them rush out- that gathering will be easy for Us
We know best what the disbelievers say. You [Prophet] are not there to force them, so remind, with this Quran, those who fear My warning
By those [winds] that scatter far and wide
and those that are heavily laden
that speed freely
that distribute [rain] as ordained
What you [people] are promised is true
the Judgement will come––
by the sky with its pathways
you differ in what you say––
those who turn away from it are [truly] deceived
Perish the liars
those steeped in error and unaware
They ask, ‘When is this Judgement Day coming?’
On a Day when they will be punished by the Fire
‘Taste the punishment! This is what you wished to hasten.’
The righteous will be in Gardens with [flowing] springs
They will receive their Lord’s gifts because of the good they did before
sleeping only little at night
praying at dawn for God’s forgiveness
giving a rightful share of their wealth to the beggar and the deprived
On earth there are signs for those with sure faith––
and in yourselves too, do you not see?––
in the sky is your sustenance and all that you are promised
By the Lord of the heavens and earth! All this is as real as your speaking
[Muhammad], have you heard the story of the honoured guests of Abraham
They went in to see him and said, ‘Peace.’ ‘Peace,’ he said, [adding to himself] ‘These people are strangers.’
He turned quickly to his household, brought out a fat calf
and placed it before them. ‘Will you not eat?’ he said
beginning to be afraid of them, but they said, ‘Do not be afraid.’ They gave him good news of a son who would be gifted with knowledge
His wife then entered with a loud cry, struck her face, and said, ‘A barren old woman?’
but they said, ‘It will be so. This is what your Lord said, and He is the Wise, the All Knowing.’
Abraham said, ‘What is your errand, messengers?’
They said, ‘We are sent to a people lost in sin
to bring down rocks of clay
marked by your Lord for those who exceed all bounds.’
We brought out such believers as were there
We found only one household devoted to God
and left the town to be a sign for those who fear the painful punishment
There is another sign in Moses: We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority
Pharaoh turned away with his supporters, saying, ‘This is a sorcerer, or maybe a madman,’
so We seized him and his forces and threw them into the sea: he was to blame
There is another sign in the Ad: We sent the life-destroying wind against them
and it reduced everything it came up against to shreds
And also in the Thamud: it was said to them, ‘Make the most of your lives for a while,’
but they rebelled against their Lord’s command, so the blast took them. They looked on helplessly
they could not even remain standing, let alone defend themselves
Before that We destroyed the people of Noah. They were a truly sinful people
We built the heavens with Our power and made them vast
We spread out the earth- how well We smoothed it out
and We created pairs of all things so that you [people] might take note
[So, say to them, Prophet], ‘Quickly, turn to God- I am sent by Him to give you clear warning
and do not set up any other god alongside Him. I am sent by Him to give you clear warning!’
Every previous people to whom a messenger was sent also said, ‘A sor-cerer, or maybe a madman!’
Did they tell one another to do this? No! They are a people who exceed all bounds
so ignore them [Prophet]- you are not to blame
and go on reminding [people], it is good for those who believe to be reminded
I created jinn and mankind only to worship Me
I want no provision from them, nor do I want them to feed Me
God is the Provider, the Lord of Power, the Ever Mighty
The evildoers, like their predecessors, will have a share of punishment- they need not ask Me to hasten it
and woe betide those who deny the truth on the Day they have been promised
By the mountain
by a Scripture inscribed
in unrolled parch-ment
by the much-visited House
by the raised canopy
by the ocean ever filled
[Prophet], your Lord’s punishment is coming––
it cannot be put off––
on the Day when the sky sways back and forth
and the mountains float away
Woe on that Day to those who deny the Truth
who amuse themselves with idle chatter
on that Day they will be thrust into the Fire of Hell
‘This is the Fire you used to deny
So is this sorcery? Do you still not see it
Burn in it––it makes no difference whether you bear it patiently or not–– you are only being repaid for what you have done.’
Those who were mindful of God are in Gardens and in bliss
rejoicing in their Lord’s gifts: He has saved them from the torment of the Blaze
‘Eat and drink with healthy enjoyment as a reward for what you have done.’
They are comfortably seated on couches arranged in rows; We pair them with beautiful-eyed maidens
We unite the believers with their offspring who followed them in faith–– We do not deny them any of the rewards for their deeds: each person is in pledge for his own deeds––
We provide them with any fruit or meat they desire
They pass around a cup which does not lead to any idle talk or sin
Devoted youths like hidden pearls wait on them
They turn to one another and say
‘When we were still with our families [on earth] we used to live in fear––
God has been gracious to us and saved us from the torment of intense heat
We used to pray to Him: He is the Good, the Merciful One.’
So [Prophet] remind [people]. By the grace of your Lord [Prophet], you are neither oracle nor madman
If they say, ‘He is only a poet: we shall await his fate,’
say, ‘Wait if you wish; I too am waiting’
does their reason really tell them to do this, or are they simply insolent people
If they say, ‘He has made it up himself’- they certainly do not believe
let them produce one like it, if what they say is true
Were they created without any agent? Were they the creators
Did they create the heavens and the earth? No! They do not have faith
Do they possess your Lord’s treasures or have control over them
Do they have a ladder to climb, in order to eavesdrop [on Heaven’s secrets]? Let their eavesdropper produce clear proof
Does God have daughters while you have sons
Do you [Prophet] demand a payment from them that would burden them with debt
Do they have [access to] the unseen? Could they write it down
Do they think they can ensnare you? It is the disbelievers who have been ensnared
Do they really have another god besides God? God is far above anything they set alongside Him
Even if they saw a piece of heaven falling down on them, they would say, ‘Just a heap of clouds,’
so leave them, Prophet, until they face the Day when they will be thunderstruck
the Day when their snares will be of no use to them, when they will get no help
Another punishment awaits the evildoers, though most of them do not realize it
Wait patiently [Prophet] for your Lord’s judgement: you are under Our watchful eye. Celebrate the praise of your Lord when you rise
Glorify Him at night and at the fading of the stars
By the star when it sets
Your companion has not strayed; he is not deluded
he does not speak from his own desire
The Quran is nothing less than a revelation that is sent to him
It was taught to him by [an angel] with mighty powers
and great strength, who stood
on the highest horizon
and then approached––coming down
until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer––
and revealed to God’s servant what He revealed
[The Prophet’s] own heart did not distort what he saw
Are you going to dispute with him what he saw with his own eyes
A second time he saw him
by the lote tree beyond which none may pass
near the Garden of Restfulness
when the tree was covered in nameless [splendour]
His sight never wavered, nor was it too bold
and he saw some of the greatest signs of his Lord
[Disbelievers], consider al-Lat and al-Uzza
and the third one, Manat––
are you to have the male and He the female
That would be a most unjust distribution!––
these are nothing but names you have invented yourselves, you and your forefathers. God has sent no authority for them. These people merely follow guesswork and the whims of their souls, even though guidance has come to them from their Lord
Is man to have everything he wishes for
when the present life and the life to come belong only to God
There are many angels in heaven whose intercession will be of no use until God gives permission to those He will, whose words He will accept
Those who deny the life to come give the angels female names
They have no knowledge to base this on: they merely follow guesswork. Guesswork is of no value against the Truth
So [Prophet] ignore those who turn away from Our revelation, who want only the life of this world
Their knowledge does not go beyond that. Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and who follows guidance
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God. He will repay those who do evil according to their deeds, and reward, with what is best, those who do good
As for those who avoid grave sins and foul acts, though they may commit small sins, your Lord is ample in forgiveness. He has been aware of you from the time He produced you from the earth and from your hiding places in your mothers’ wombs, so do not assert your own goodness:He knows best who is mindful of Him
[Prophet], consider that man who turned away
he only gave a little and then he stopped
Does he have knowledge of the Unseen? Can he see [the Hereafter]
Has he not been told what was written in the Scriptures of Moses
and of Abraham, who fulfilled his duty
that no soul shall bear the burden of another
that man will only have what he has worked towards
that his labour will be seen
and that in the end he will be repaid in full for it
that the final goal is your Lord
that it is He who makes people laugh and weep
that it is He who gives death and life
that He Himself created the two sexes, male and female
from an ejected drop of sperm
that He will undertake the second Creation
that it is He who gives wealth and possessions
that He is the Lord of Sirius
that it was He who destroyed, in their entirety, ancient 'Ad
and Thamud
and before them the people of Noah who were even more unjust and insolent
that it was He who brought down the ruined cities
and enveloped them in the punishment He ordained for them
Which then of your Lord’s blessings do you deny
This is a warning just like the warnings sent in former times
The imminent Hour draws near
and only God can disclose it
Do you [people] marvel at this
Why do you laugh instead of weeping
Why do you pay no heed
Bow down before God and worship
The Hour draws near; the moon is split in two
Whenever the disbelievers see a sign, they turn away and say, ‘Same old sorcery!’
They reject the truth and follow their own desires––everything is recorded––
although warning tales that should have restrained them have come down to them––
farreaching wisdom––but these warnings do not help
so [Prophet] turn away from them. On the Day the Summoner will summon them to a horrific event
eyes downcast, they will come out of their graves like swarming locusts
rushing towards the Summoner. The disbelievers will cry, ‘This is a stern day!’
The people of Noah rejected the truth before them: they rejected Our servant, saying, ‘He is mad!’ Noah was rebuked
and so he called upon his Lord, ‘I am defeated: help me!’
So We opened the gates of the sky with torrential water
burst the earth with gushing springs: the waters met for a preordained purpose
We carried him along on a vessel of planks and nails
that floated under Our watchful eye, a reward for the one who had been rejected
We have left this as a sign: will anyone take heed
How [terrible] was My punishment and [the fulfilment of] My warnings
We have made it easy to learn lessons from the Quran: will anyone take heed
The people of 'Ad also rejected the truth. How [terrible] was My punishment and [the fulfilment of] My warnings
We released a howling wind against them on a day of terrible disaster
it swept people away like uprooted palm trunks
How [terrible] was My punishment and [the fulfilment of] My warnings
We have made it easy to learn lessons from the Quran: will anyone take heed
The people of Thamud also rejected the warnings
they said, ‘What? A man? Why should we follow a lone man from amongst ourselves? That would be misguided; quite insane
Would a mes-sage be given to him alone out of all of us? No, he is an insolent liar!’
‘Tomorrow they will know who is the insolent liar
for We shall send them a she-camel to test them: so watch them [Salih] and be patient
Tell them the water is to be shared between them: each one should drink in turn.’
But they called their companion, who took a sword and hamstrung the camel
How [terrible] was My punishment and [the fulfilment of] My warnings
We released a single mighty blast against them and they ended up like a fencemaker’s dry sticks
We have made it easy to learn lessons from the Quran: will anyone take heed
The people of Lot rejected the warnings
We released a stonebearing wind against them, all except the family of Lot. We saved them before dawn
as a favour from Us: this is how We reward the thankful
He warned them of Our onslaught, but they dismissed the warning
they even demanded his guests from him- so We sealed their eyes- ‘ Taste My [terrible] punishment and [the fulfilment of] My warnings!’
and early in the morning a punishment seized them that still remains
‘Taste My [terrible] punishment and [the fulfilment of] My warnings!’
We have made it easy to learn lessons from the Quran: will anyone take heed
The people of Pharaoh also received warnings
They rejected all Our signs so We seized them with all Our might and power
‘Are your disbelievers any better than these? Were you given an exemption in the Scripture?’
Do they perhaps say, ‘We are a great army and we shall be victorious’
Their forces will be routed and they will turn tail and flee
But the Hour is their appointed time- the Hour is more severe and bitter
truly the wicked are misguided and quite insane––
on the Day when they are dragged on their faces in Hell. ‘Feel the touch of Hell.’
We have created all things in due measure
when We ordain something it happens at once, in the blink of an eye
We have destroyed the likes of you in the past. Will anyone take heed
Everything they do is noted in their records
every action, great or small, is recorded
The righteous will live securely among Gardens and rivers
secure in the presence of an all-powerful Sovereign
It is the Lord of Mercy
who taught the Quran
He created man
and taught him to communicate
The sun and the moon follow their calculated courses
the plants and the trees submit to His designs
He has raised up the sky. He has set the balance
so that you may not exceed in the balance
weigh with justice and do not fall short in the balance
He set down the Earth for His creatures
with its fruits, its palm trees with sheathed clusters
its husked grain, its fragrant plants
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
He created mankind out of dried clay, like pottery
the jinn out of smokeless fire
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
He is Lord of the two risings and Lord of the two settings
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
He released the two bodies of [fresh and salt] water. They meet
yet there is a barrier between them they do not cross
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Pearls come forth from them: large ones, and small, brilliant ones
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
His are the moving ships that float, high as mountains, on the sea
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Everyone on earth perishes
all that remains is the Face of your Lord, full of majesty, bestowing honour
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Everyone in heaven and earth entreats Him; every day He is at work
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
We shall attend to you two huge armies [of jinn and mankind]
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Jinn and mankind, if you can pass beyond the regions of heaven and earth, then do so: you will not pass without Our authority
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
A flash of fire and smoke will be released upon you and no one will come to your aid
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
When the sky is torn apart and turns crimson, like red hide
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
On that Day neither mankind nor jinn will be asked about their sins
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
The guilty will be known by their mark and will be seized by their foreheads and their feet
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
This is the Hell the guilty deny
but they will go round between its flames and scalding water
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
For those who fear [the time when they will] stand before their Lord there are two gardens
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
With shading branches
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
With a pair of flowing springs
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
With every kind of fruit in pairs
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
They will sit on couches upholstered with brocade, the fruit of both gardens within easy reach
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
There will be maidens restraining their glances, untouched beforehand by man or jinn
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Like rubies and brilliant pearls
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Shall the reward of good be anything but good
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
There are two other gardens below these two
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Both of deepest green
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
With a pair of gushing springs
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
With fruits- date palms and pomegranate trees
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
There are good-natured, beautiful maidens
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Dark-eyed, sheltered in pavilions
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Untouched beforehand by man or jinn
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
They will all sit on green cushions and fine carpets
Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny
Blessed is the name of your Lord, full of majesty, bestowing honour
When that which is coming arrives
no one will be able to deny it has come
bringing low and raising high
When the earth is shaken violently
and the mountains are ground to powder
and turn to scattered dust
then you will be sorted into three classes
Those on the Right––what people they are
Those on the Left––what people they are
And those in front––ahead indeed
For these will be the ones brought nearest to God
in Gardens of Bliss
many from the past
and a few from later generations
On couches of well-woven cloth
they will sit facing each other
everlasting youths will go round among them
with glasses, flagons, and cups of a pure drink
that causes no headache or intoxication
[there will be] any fruit they choose
the meat of any bird they like
and beautiful companions
like hidden pearls
a reward for what they used to do
They will hear no idle or sinful talk there
only clean and wholesome speech
Those on the Right, what people they are
They will dwell amid thornless lote trees
and clustered acacia
with spreading shade
constantly flowing water
abundant fruits
unfailing, unforbidden
with incomparable companions
We have specially created––
virginal
loving, of matching age––
for those on the Right
many from the past
and many from later generations
But those on the Left, what people they are
They will dwell amid scorching wind and scalding water
in the shadow of black smoke
neither cool nor refreshing
Before, they overindulged in luxury
and persisted in great sin
always saying, ‘What? When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then be raised up
And our earliest forefathers too?’
Say [Prophet], ‘The earliest and latest generations
will all be gathered on a predetermined Day
and you who have gone astray and denied the truth
will eat from the bitter tree of Zaqqum
filling your bellies with it
and drink scalding water
lapping it like thirsty camels.’
This will be their welcome on the Day of Judgement
It was We who created you: will you not believe
Consider [the semen] you eject
do you create it yourselves or are We the Creator
We ordained death to be among you. Nothing could stop Us
if We intended to change you and recreate you in a way unknown to you
You have learned how you were first created: will you not reflect
Consider the seeds you sow in the ground
is it you who make them grow or We
If We wished, We could turn your harvest into chaff and leave you to wail
‘We are burdened with debt
we are bereft.’
Consider the water you drink
was it you who brought it down from the rain-cloud or We
If We wanted, We could make it bitter: will you not be thankful
Consider the fire you kindle
is it you who make the wood for it grow or We
We made it a reminder, and useful to those who kindle it
so [Prophet] glorify the name of your Lord, the Supreme
I swear by the positions of the stars
a mighty oath, if you only knew
that this is truly a noble Quran
in a protected Record
that only the purified can touch
sent down from the Lord of all being
How can you scorn this statement
And how, in return for the livelihood you are given, can you deny it
When the soul of a dying man comes up to his throat
while you gaze on
We are nearer to him than you, though you do not see Us
why, if you are not to be judged
do you not restore his soul to him, if what you say is true
If that dying person is one of those who will be brought near to God
he will have rest, ease, and a Garden of Bliss
if he is one of those on the Right
[he will hear], ‘Peace be on you,’ from his companions on the Right
but if he is one of those who denied the truth and went astray
he will be welcomed with scalding water
He will burn in Hell
This is the certain truth
[Prophet], glorify the name of your Lord the Supreme
Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies God––He is the Almighty, the Wise
Control of the heavens and earth belongs to Him; He gives life and death; He has power over all things
He is the First and the Last; the Outer and the Inner; He has knowledge of all things
It was He who created the heavens and earth in six Days and then established Himself on the throne. He knows what enters the earth and what comes out of it; what descends from the sky and what ascends to it. He is with you wherever you are; He sees all that you do
control of the heavens and earth belongs to Him. Everything is brought back to God
He makes night merge into day and day into night. He knows what is in every heart
Believe in God and His Messenger, and give out of what He has made pass down to you: those of you who believe and give will have a great reward
Why should you not believe in God when the Mes-senger calls you to believe in your Lord, and He has already made a pledge with you, if you have faith
It is He who has sent down clear revelations to His Servant, so that He may bring you from the depths of darkness into light; God is truly kind and merciful to you
Why should you not give for God’s cause when God alone will inherit what is in the heavens and earth? Those who gave and fought before the triumph are not like others: they are greater in rank than those who gave and fought afterwards. But God has promised a good reward to all of them: God is fully aware of all that you do
Who will make God a good loan? He will double it for him and reward him generously
On the Day when you [Prophet] see the believers, both men and women, with their light streaming out ahead of them and to their right, [they will be told], ‘The good news for you today is that there are Gardens graced with flowing streams where you will stay: that is truly the supreme triumph!’
On the same Day, the hypocrites, both men and women, will say to the believers, ‘Wait for us! Let us have some of your light!’ They will be told, ‘Go back and look for a light.’ A wall with a door will be erected between them: inside it lies mercy, outside lies torment
The hypocrites will call out to the believers, ‘Were we not with you?’ They will reply, ‘Yes. But you allowed yourselves to be tempted, you were hesitant, doubtful, deceived by false hopes until God’s command came- the Deceiver tricked you about God
Today no ransom will be accepted from you or from the disbelievers: your home is the Fire- that is where you belong––a miserable destination!’
Is it not time for believers to humble their hearts to the remembrance of God and the Truth that has been revealed, and not to be like those who received the Scripture before them, whose time was extended but whose hearts hardened and many of whom were lawbreakers
Remember that God revives the earth after it dies; We have made Our revelation clear to you so that you may use your reason
Charitable men and women who make a good loan to God will have it doubled and have a generous reward
Those who believe in God and His messengers are the truthful ones who will bear witness before their Lord: they will have their reward and their light. But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations are the inhabitants of Hell
Bear in mind that the present life is just a game, a diversion, an attraction, a cause of boasting among you, of rivalry in wealth and children. It is like plants that spring up after the rain: their growth at first delights the sowers, but then you see them wither away, turn yellow, and become stubble. There is terrible punishment in the next life as well as forgiveness and approval from God; the life of this world is only an illusory pleasure
So race for your Lord’s forgiveness and a Garden as wide as the heavens and earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers: that is God’s bounty, which He bestows on whoever He pleases. God’s bounty is infinite
No misfortune can happen, either in the earth or in yourselves, that was not set down in writing before We brought it into being- that is easy for God
so you need not grieve for what you miss or gloat over what you gain
God does not love the conceited, the boastful, those who are miserly, and who tell other people to be miserly. If anyone turns away, remember that God is self-sufficient and worthy of praise
We sent Our messengers with clear signs, the Scripture and the Balance, so that people could uphold justice: We also sent iron, with its mighty strength and many uses for mankind, so that God could mark out those who would help Him and His messengers though they cannot see Him. Truly God is powerful, almighty
We sent Noah and Abraham, and gave prophethood and scripture to their offspring: among them there were some who were rightly guided, but many were lawbreakers
We sent other messengers to follow in their footsteps. After those We sent Jesus, son of Mary: We gave him the Gospel and put compassion and mercy into the hearts of his followers. But monasticism was something they invented- We did not ordain it for them- only to seek God’s pleasure, and even so, they did not observe it properly. So We gave a reward to those of them who believed, but many of them were lawbreakers
Believers, be mindful of God and have faith in His Messenger: He will give you a double share of His mercy; He will provide a light to help you walk; He will forgive you- God is most forgiving, most merciful
The People of the Book should know that they have no power over any of God’s grace and that grace is in the hand of God alone: He gives it to whoever He will. God’s grace is truly immense
God has heard the words of the woman who disputed with you [Prophet] about her husband and complained to God: God has heard what you both had to say. He is all hearing, all seeing
Even if any of you say to their wives, ‘You are to me like my mother’s back,’they are not their mothers; their only mothers are those who gave birth to them. What they say is certainly blameworthy and false, but God is pardoning and forgiving
Those of you who say such a thing to their wives, then go back on what they have said, must free a slave before the couple may touch one another again––this is what you are commanded to do, and God is fully aware of what you do––
but anyone who does not have the means should fast continuously for two months before they touch each other, and anyone unable to do this should feed sixty needy people. This is so that you may [truly] have faith in God and His Messenger. These are the bounds set by God: grievous torment awaits those who ignore them
Those who oppose God and His Messenger will be brought low, like those before them: We have revealed clear messages, and humiliating torment awaits those who ignore them
on the Day when God will raise everyone and make them aware of what they have done. God has taken account of it all, though they may have forgotten: He witnesses everything
Do you not see [Prophet] that God knows everything in the heavens and earth? There is no secret conversation between three people where He is not the fourth, nor between five where He is not the sixth, nor between less or more than that without Him being with them, wherever they may be. On the Day of Resurrection, He will show them what they have done: God truly has full knowledge of everything
Have you not seen how those who have been forbidden to hold secret conversations go back afterwards and hold them, and conspire with one another in what is sinful, hostile, and disobedient to the Messenger? When they come to you they greet you with words God has never used to greet you, and say inwardly, ‘Why does God not punish us for what we say?’ Hell will be punishment enough for them: they will burn there- an evil destination
You who believe, when you converse in secret, do not do so in a way that is sinful, hostile, and disobedient to the Messenger, but in a way that is good and mindful [of God]. Be mindful of God, to whom you will all be gathered
[Any other kind of] secret conversation is the work of Satan, designed to cause trouble to the believers, though it cannot harm them in the least unless God permits it. Let the believers put their trust in God
You who believe, if you are told to make room for one another in your assemblies, then do so, and God will make room for you, and if you are told to rise up, do so: God will raise up, by many degrees, those of you who believe and those who have been given knowledge: He is fully aware of what you do
You who believe, when you come to speak privately with the Messenger, offer something in charity before your conversation: that is better for you and purer. If you do not have the means, God is most forgiving and merciful
Were you afraid to give charity before consulting the Prophet? Since you did not give charity, and God has relented towards you, you should [at least] observe your prayers, pay the prescribed alms, and obey God and His Messenger: God is well aware of your actions
Have you not seen [Prophet] those who give their loyalty to people with whom God is angry? They are neither with you nor with them, and knowingly swear to lies
God has prepared a severe torment for them: what they do is truly evil
They have used their oaths to cover up [their false deeds], and barred others from the path of God. A humiliating torment awaits them
neither their wealth nor their children will be of any use to them against God- they will be the inhabitants of Hell, where they will remain
On the Day God raises them all from the dead, they will swear before Him as they swear before you now, thinking that it will help them. What liars they are
Satan has gained control over them and made them forget God. They are on Satan’s side, and Satan’s side will be the losers
those who oppose God and His Messenger will be among the most humiliated
God has written, ‘I shall most certainly win, I and My messengers.’ God is powerful and almighty
[Prophet], you will not find people who truly believe in God and the Last Day giving their loyalty to those who oppose God and His Messenger, even though they may be their fathers, sons, brothers, or other relations: these are the people in whose hearts God has inscribed faith, and whom He has strengthened with His spirit. He will let them enter Gardens graced with flowing streams, where they will stay: God is well pleased with them, and they with Him. They are on God’s side, and God’s side will be the one to prosper
Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies God; He is the Almighty, the Wise
It was He who drove those of the People of the Book who broke faith out from their homes at the first gathering of forces––you [believers] never thought they would go, and they themselves thought their fortifications would protect them against God. God came up on them from where they least expected and put panic into their hearts: their homes were destroyed by their own hands, and the hands of the believers. Learn from this, all of you with insight
If God had not decreed exile for them, He would have tormented them [even more severely] in this world. In the Hereafter they will have the torment of the Fire
because they set themselves against God and His Messenger: God is stern in punishment towards anyone who sets himself against Him
Whatever you [believers] may have done to [their] palm trees–– cutting them down or leaving them standing on their roots––was done by God’s leave, so that He might disgrace those who defied Him
You [believers] did not have to spur on your horses or your camels for whatever gains God turned over to His Messenger from them. God gives authority to His messengers over whoever He will: God has power over all things
Whatever gains God has turned over to His Messenger from the inhabitants of the villages belong to God, the Messenger, kinsfolk, orphans, the needy, the traveller in need- this is so that they do not just circulate among those of you who are rich––so accept whatever the Messenger gives you, and abstain from whatever he forbids you. Be mindful of God: God is severe in punishment
The poor emigrants who were driven from their homes and possessions, who seek God’s favour and approval, those who help God and His Messenger- these are the ones who are true- [shall have a share]
Those who were already firmly established in their homes [in Medina], and firmly rooted in faith, show love for those who migrated to them for refuge and harbour no desire in their hearts for what has been given to them. They give them preference over themselves, even if they too are poor: those who are saved from their own souls’ greed are truly successful
Those who came after them say, ‘Lord, forgive us our sins and the sins of our brothers who believed before us, and leave no malice in our hearts towards those who believe. Lord, You are truly compassionate and merciful.’
Have you [Prophet] considered the hypocrites who say to their fellows, the faithless among the People of the Book, ‘If you are driven out, we shall go with you- we would never listen to anyone who sought to harm you- and if you are attacked, we shall certainly come to your aid’? God bears witness that they are in fact liars
if they are driven out, they will never leave with them; if they are attacked, they will never help them. Even if they did come to their aid, they would soon turn tail and flee- in the end they would have no help
Fear of you [believers] is more intense in their hearts than fear of God because they are people devoid of understanding
Even united they would never fight you, except from within fortified strongholds or behind high walls. There is much hostility between them: you think they are united but their hearts are divided because they are people devoid of reason
Like those who went just before them, they have tasted the result of their conduct and a painful punishment awaits them
Like Satan, who says to man, ‘Do not believe!’ but when man disbelieves, says, ‘I disown you; I fear God, the Lord of the Worlds,’
both will end up in the Fire, there to remain. That is the reward of evildoers
You who believe! Be mindful of God, and let every soul consider carefully what it sends ahead for tomorrow; be mindful of God, for God is well aware of everything you do
Do not be like those who forget God, so God causes them to forget their own souls: they are the rebellious ones
there is no comparison between the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise- and the inhabitants of Paradise are the successful ones
If We had sent this Quran down to a mountain, you [Prophet] would have seen it humbled and split apart in its awe of God: We offer people such illustrations so that they may reflect
He is God: there is no god other than Him. It is He who knows what is hidden as well as what is in the open, He is the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
He is God: there is no god other than Him, the Controller, the Holy One, Source of Peace, Granter of Security, Guardian over all, the Almighty, the Compeller, the Truly Great; God is far above anything they consider to be His partner
He is God: the Creator, the Originator, the Shaper. The best names belong to Him. Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies Him: He is the Almighty, the Wise
You who believe, do not take My enemies and yours as your allies, showing them friendship when they have rejected the truth you have received, and have driven you and the Messenger out simply because you believe in God, your Lord––not if you truly emigrated in order to strive for My cause and seek My good pleasure. You secretly show them friendship––I know all you conceal and all you reveal–– but any of you who do this are straying from the right path
If they gain the upper hand over you, they will revert to being your enemies and stretch out their hands and tongues to harm you; it is their dearest wish that you may renounce your faith
Neither your kinsfolk nor your children will be any use to you on the Day of Resurrection: He will separate you out. God sees everything you do
You have a good example in Abraham and his companions, when they said to their people, ‘We disown you and what you worship besides God! We renounce you! Until you believe in God alone, the enmity and hatred that has arisen between us will endure!’––except when Abraham said to his father, ‘I will pray for forgiveness for you though I cannot protect you from God’––[they prayed]
‘Lord, we have put our trust in You; we turn to You; You are our final destination. Lord, do not expose us to mistreatment [at the hands of] the disbelievers. Forgive us, Lord, for You are the Almighty, the All Wise.’
Truly, they are a good example for you [believers] to follow, a good example for those who fear God and the Last Day. If anyone turns away, [remember] God is self-sufficing and worthy of all praise
God may still bring about affection between you and your present enemies- God is all powerful, God is most forgiving and merciful
and He does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with anyone who has not fought you for your faith or driven you out of your homes: God loves the just
But God forbids you to take as allies those who have fought against you for your faith, driven you out of your homes, and helped others to drive you out: any of you who take them as allies will truly be wrongdoers
You who believe, test the believing women when they come to you as emigrants- God knows best about their faith- and if you are sure of their belief, do not send them back to the disbelievers: they are not lawful wives for them, nor are the disbelievers their lawful husbands. Give the disbelievers whatever bride-gifts they have paid- if you choose to marry them, there is no blame on you once you have paid their bride-gifts- and do not yourselves hold on to marriage ties with disbelieving women. Ask for repayment of the bride-gifts you have paid, and let the disbelievers do the same. This is God’s judgement: He judges between you, God is all knowing and wise
If any of you have wives who leave you for the disbelievers, and if your community subsequently acquires [gains] from them, then pay those whose wives have deserted them the equivalent of whatever bride-gift they paid. Be mindful of God, in whom you believe
Prophet, when believing women come and pledge to you that they will not ascribe any partner to God, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor kill their children, nor lie about who has fathered their children, nor disobey you in any righteous thing, then you should accept their pledge of allegiance and pray to God to forgive them: God is most forgiving and merciful
You who believe, do not take as allies those with whom God is angry: they despair of the life to come as the disbelievers despair of those buried in their graves
Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies God––He is the Almighty, the Wise
You who believe, why do you say things and then do not do them
It is most hateful to God that you say things and then do not do them
God truly loves those who fight in solid lines for His cause, like a well-compacted wall
Moses said to his people, ‘My people, why do you hurt me when you know that I am sent to you by God?’ When they went astray, God left their hearts to stray: God does not guide rebellious people
Jesus, son of Mary, said, ‘Children of Israel, I am sent to you by God, confirming the Torah that came before me and bringing good news of a messenger to follow me whose name will be Ahmad.’ Yet when he came to them with clear signs, they said, ‘This is obviously sorcery.’
Who could be more wrong than someone who invents lies against God when called to submit to Him? God does not guide the wrongdoers
they wish to put His light out with their mouths. But He will perfect His light, even though the disbelievers hate it
it is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to show that it is above all [other] religions, even though the idolaters hate it
You who believe, shall I show you a bargain that will save you from painful torment
Have faith in God and His Messenger and struggle for His cause with your possessions and your persons––that is better for you, if only you knew
and He will forgive your sins, admit you into Gardens graced with flowing streams, into pleasant dwellings in the Gardens of Eternity. That is the supreme triumph
And He will give you something else that will really please you: His help and an imminent breakthrough. [Prophet], give the faithful the good news
You who believe, be God’s helpers. As Jesus, son of Mary, said to the disciples, ‘Who will come with me to help God?’ The disciples said, ‘We shall be God’s helpers.’ Some of the Children of Israel believed and some disbelieved: We supported the believers against their enemy and they were the ones who came out on top
Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies God, the Controller, the Holy One, the Almighty, the Wise
It is He who raised a mes-senger, among the people who had no Scripture, to recite His revelations to them, to make them grow spiritually and teach them the Scripture and wisdom––before that they were clearly astray––
to them and others yet to join them. He is the Almighty, the Wise
such is God’s favour that He grants it to whoever He will; God’s favour is immense
Those who have been charged to obey the Torah, but do not do so, are like asses carrying books: how base such people are who disobey God’s revelations! God does not guide people who do wrong
Say [Prophet], ‘You who follow the Jewish faith, if you truly claim that out of all people you alone are friends of God, then you should be hoping for death.’
But because of what they have stored up for themselves with their own hands they would never hope for death––God knows the wrongdoers very well––
so say, ‘The death you run away from will come to meet you and you will be returned to the One who knows the unseen as well as the seen: He will tell you everything you have done.’
Believers! When the call to prayer is made on the day of congregation, hurry towards the reminder of God and leave off your trading––that is better for you, if only you knew––
then when the prayer has ended, disperse in the land and seek out God’s bounty. Remember God often so that you may prosper
Yet they scatter towards trade or entertainment whenever they observe it, and leave you [Prophet] standing there. Say, ‘God’s gift is better than any entertainment or trade: God is the best provider.’
When the hypocrites come to you [Prophet], they say, ‘We bear witness that you are the Messenger of God.’ God knows that you truly are His Messenger and He bears witness that the hypocrites are liars––
they use their oaths as a cover and so bar others from God’s way: what they have been doing is truly evil––
because they professed faith and then rejected it, so their hearts have been sealed and they do not understand
When you see them [Prophet], their outward appearance pleases you; when they speak, you listen to what they say. But they are like propped-up tim-bers––they think every cry they hear is against them––and they are the enemy. Beware of them. May God confound them! How devious they are
They turn their heads away in disdain when they are told, ‘Come, so that the Messenger of God may ask forgiveness for you,’ and you see them walking away arrogantly
It makes no difference whether you ask forgiveness for them or not, God will not forgive them: God does not guide such treacherous people
They are the ones who say, ‘Give nothing to those who follow God’s Messenger, until they abandon him’, but to God belong the treasures of the heavens and earth, though the hypocrites do not understand this
They say, ‘Once we return to Medina the powerful will drive out the weak,’ but power belongs to God, to His Messenger, and to the believers, though the hypocrites do not know this
Believers, do not let your wealth and your children distract you from remembering God: those who do so will be the ones who lose
Give out of what We have provided for you, before death comes to one of you and he says, ‘My Lord, if You would only reprieve me for a little while, I would give in charity and become one of the righteous.’
God does not reprieve a soul when its turn comes: God is fully aware of what you do
Everything that is in the heavens and earth glorifies God; all control and all praise belong to Him; He has power over everything
It is He who created you, yet some of you disbelieve and some believe: God sees everything you do
He created the heavens and earth for a true purpose; He formed you and made your forms good: you will all return to Him
He knows what is in the heavens and earth; He knows what you conceal and what you reveal; God knows very well the secrets of every heart
[Disbelievers], have you not heard about those who disbelieved before you? They tasted the evil consequences of their conduct, and a painful torment awaits them
That is because their messengers came to them with clear signs, yet they said, ‘Should we take guidance from mere mortals?’, rejected the message, and turned away. But God had no need for them: He is all sufficient, worthy of all praise
The disbelievers claim they will not be raised from the dead. Say [Prophet], ‘Yes indeed! I swear by my Lord! You will be raised and then you will be informed about everything you have done: an easy matter for God.’
So believe in God, in His Messenger, and in the light We have sent down: God is fully aware of what you do
When He gathers you for the Day of Gathering, the Day of mutual neglect, He will cancel the sins of those who believed in Him and acted righteously: He will admit them into Gardens graced with flowing streams, there to remain for ever- the supreme triumph
But those who disbelieved and rejected Our signs will be the inhabitants of the Fire, there to remain- a miserable destination
Misfortunes can only happen with God’s permission––He will guide the heart of anyone who believes in Him: God knows all things––
so obey God and the Messenger. If you turn away, remember that Our Messenger’s duty is only to make plain his message
God! There is no god but Him, so let the faithful put their trust in Him
Believers, even among your spouses and your children you have some enemies- beware of them- but if you overlook their offences, forgive them, pardon them, then God is all forgiving, all merciful
Your wealth and your children are only a test for you. There is great reward with God
be mindful of God as much as you can; hear and obey; be charitable- it is for your own good. Those who are saved from their own meanness will be the prosperous ones
if you make a generous loan to God He will multiply it for you and forgive you. God is ever thankful and forbearing
He knows the unseen, as well as the seen; He is the Almighty, the Wise
Prophet, when any of you intend to divorce women, do so at a time when their prescribed waiting period can properly start, and calculate the period carefully: be mindful of God, your Lord. Do not drive them out of their homes––nor should they themselves leave––unless they commit a flagrant indecency. These are the limits set by God–– whoever oversteps God’s limits wrongs his own soul––for you cannot know what new situation God may perhaps bring about
When they have completed their appointed term, either keep them honourably, or part with them honourably. Call two just witnesses from your people and establish witness for the sake of God. Anyone who believes in God and the Last Day should heed this: God will find a way out for those who are mindful of Him
and will provide for them from an unexpected source; God will be enough for those who put their trust in Him. God achieves His purpose; God has set a due measure for everything
If you are in doubt, the period of waiting will be three months for those women who have ceased menstruating and for those who have not [yet] menstruated; the waiting period of those who are pregnant will be until they deliver their burden: God makes things easy for those who are mindful of Him
This is God’s command, which He has sent down to you. God will wipe out the sinful deeds and increase the rewards of anyone who is mindful of Him
House the wives you are divorcing according to your means, wherever you house yourselves, and do not harass them so as to make their lives difficult. If they are pregnant, maintain them until they are delivered of their burdens; if they suckle your infants, pay them for it. Consult together in a good way- if you make difficulties for one another, another woman may suckle the child for the father––
and let the wealthy man spend according to his wealth. But let him whose provision is restricted spend according to what God has given him: God does not burden any soul with more than He has given it- after hardship, God will bring ease
Many a town that insolently opposed the command of its Lord and His messengers We have brought sternly to account: We punished them severely
to make them taste the ill effect of their conduct- the result of their conduct was ruin
God has prepared a severe torment for them. So, you who have understanding, you who believe, beware of God. He has sent you the Quran
and a messenger- reciting to you God’s revelations that make things clear- to bring those who believe and do righteous deeds from darkness into light. God will admit those who believe in Him and do righteous deeds into Gardens graced with flowing streams, where they will remain for ever––He has made good provision for them
It is God who created seven heavens and a similar [number] of earths. His command descends throughout them. So you should realize that He has power over all things and that His knowledge encompasses everything
Prophet, why do you prohibit what God has made lawful to you in your desire to please your wives? Yet God is forgiving and merciful
He has ordained a way for you [believers] to release you from [such] oaths––God is your helper: He is the All Knowing, the Wise
The Prophet told something in confidence to one of his wives. When she disclosed it [to another wife] and God made this known to him, he confirmed part of it, keeping the rest to himself. When he confronted her with what she had done, she asked, ‘Who told you about this?’ and he replied, ‘The All Knowing, the All Aware told me.’
If both of you [wives] repent to God––for your hearts have deviated––[all will be well]; if you collaborate against him, [be warned that] God will aid him, as will Gabriel and all righteous believers, and the angels too will back him
His Lord may well replace you with better wives if the Prophet decides to divorce any of you: wives who are devoted to God, true believers, devout, who turn to Him in repentance and worship Him, given to fasting, whether previously married or virgins
Believers, guard yourselves and your families against a Fire fuelled by people and stones, over which stand angels, stern and strong; angels who never disobey God’s commands to them, but do as they are ordered
‘You who disbelieve, make no excuses today: you are only being repaid for what you used to do.’
Believers, turn to God in sincere repentance. Your Lord may well cancel your bad deeds for you and admit you into Gardens graced with flowing streams, on a Day when God will not disgrace the Prophet or those who have believed with him. With their lights streaming out ahead of them and to their right, they will say, ‘Lord, perfect our lights for us and forgive us: You have power over everything.’
Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Deal with them sternly. Hell will be their home, an evil destination
God has given examples of disbelievers: the wives of Noah and Lot who married two of Our righteous servants but betrayed them. Their husbands could not help them against God: it was said, ‘Both of you enter the Fire with the others.’
God has also given examples of believers: Pharaoh’s wife, who said, ‘Lord, build me a house near You in the Garden. Save me from Pharaoh and his actions; save me from the evildoers,’
and Mary, daughter of Imran. She guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her from Our spirit. She accepted the truth of her Lord’s words and Scriptures: she was truly devout
Exalted is He who holds all control in His hands; who has power over all things
who created death and life to test you [people] and reveal which of you does best––He is the Mighty, the Forgiving
who created the seven heavens, one above the other. You will not see any flaw in what the Lord of Mercy creates. Look again! Can you see any flaw
Look again! And again! Your sight will turn back to you, weak and defeated
We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and made them [missiles] for stoning devils for whom We have also prepared the torment of a blazing fire
For those who defy their Lord We have prepared the torment of Hell: an evil destination
They will hear it drawing in its breath when they are thrown in. It blazes forth
almost bursting with rage. Its keepers will ask every group that is thrown in, ‘Did no one come to warn you?’
They will reply, ‘Yes, a warner did come to us, but we did not believe him. We said, “God has revealed nothing: you are greatly misguided”.’
They will say, ‘If only we had listened, or reasoned, we would not be with the inhabitants of the blazing fire,’ and
they will confess their sins. Away with the inhabitants of the blazing fire
But there is forgiveness and a great reward for those who fear their Lord though they cannot see Him
Whether you keep your words secret or state them openly, He knows the contents of every heart
How could He who created not know His own creation, when He is the Most Subtle, the All Aware
It is He who has made the earth manageable for you––travel its regions; eat His provision- and to Him you will be resurrected
Are you sure that He who is in Heaven will not make the earth swallow you up with a violent shudder
Are you sure that He who is in Heaven will not send a whirlwind to pelt you with stones? You will come to know what My warning means
Those who went before them also disbelieved- how terrible was My condemnation
Do they not see the birds above them spreading and closing their wings? It is only the Lord of Mercy who holds them up: He watches over everything
What force can help you if the Lord of Mercy does not? The disbelievers are truly deluded
Who can provide for you if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist in their insolence and their avoidance of the Truth
Who is better guided: someone who falls on his face, or someone who walks steadily on a straight path
Say [Prophet], ‘It is He who brought you into being, He who endowed you with hearing, sight, and understanding- what small thanks you give!’
Say, ‘It is He who scattered you throughout the earth, He to whom you will be gathered.’
They say, ‘If what you say is true, when will this promise be fulfilled?’
Say, ‘God alone has knowledge of this: my only duty is to give clear warning.’
When they see it close at hand, the disbelievers’ faces will be gloomy, and it will be said, ‘This is what you were calling for.’
Say, ‘Just think- regardless of whether God destroys me and my followers or has mercy on us- who will protect the disbelievers from an agonizing torment?’
Say, ‘He is the Lord of Mercy; we believe in Him; we put our trust in Him. You will come to know in time who is in obvious error.’
Say, ‘Just think: if all your water were to sink deep into the earth who could give you flowing water in its place?’
Nun By the pen! By all they write
Your Lord’s grace does not make you [Prophet] a madman
you will have a never-ending reward––
truly you have a strong character––
and soon you will see, as will they
which of you is afflicted with madness
Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and who is rightly guided
So do not yield to those who deny the truth––
they want you to compromise with them and then they will compromise with you––
do not yield to any contemptible swearer
to any backbiter, slander-monger
or hinderer of good, to anyone who is sinful, aggressive
coarse, and on top of all that, an imposter
Just because he has wealth and sons
when our revelations are recited to him, he says, ‘These are just ancient fables.’
We shall brand him on the snout
We have tried them as We tried the owners of a certain garden, who swore that they would harvest its fruits in the morning
and made no allowance [for the Will of God]
a disaster from your Lord struck the garden as they slept
and by morning it was stripped bare, a desolate land
Still they called each other at daybreak
‘Go early to your field if you wish to gather all its fruits,’
and went off, whispering
‘Make sure no poor person enters the garden today!’––
they left early, bent on their purpose
but when they saw the garden, they said, ‘We must have lost our way
No- we are ruined!’
The wisest of them said, ‘Did I not say to you, “Will you not glorify God?”’
they said, ‘Glory be to God, Our Lord! Truly, we were doing wrong!’
and then they turned to each other in mutual reproach
They said, ‘Alas for us! We have done terrible wrong
but maybe our Lord will give us something better in its place: we truly turn to Him in hope.’
Such is the punishment [in this life], but greater still is the punishment in the Hereafter, if only they knew
There will be Gardens of bliss for those who are mindful of God
Should We treat those who submit to Us as We treat those who do evil
What is the matter with you? On what basis do you judge
Do you have a Scripture that tells you
that you will be granted whatever you choose
Have you received from Us solemn oaths, binding to the Day of Resurrection, that you will get whatever you yourselves decide
Ask them [Prophet] which of them will guarantee this
Do they have ‘partners’ [besides God]? Let them produce their ‘partners’, if what they say is true
On the Day when matters become dire, they will be invited to prostrate themselves but will be prevented from doing so
and their eyes will be downcast and they will be overwhelmed with shame: they were invited to prostrate themselves when they were safe [but refused]
So [Prophet] leave those who reject this revelation to Me: We shall lead them on, step by step, in ways beyond their knowledge
I will allow them more time, for My plan is powerful
Do you demand some reward from them that would burden them with debt
Do they have knowledge of the unseen that enables them to write it down
Wait patiently [Prophet] for your Lord’s judgement: do not be like the man in the whale who called out in distress
if his Lord’s grace had not reached him, he would have been left, abandoned and blameworthy, on the barren shore
but his Lord chose him and made him one of the Righteous
The disbelievers almost strike you down with their looks when they hear the Quran. They say, ‘He must be mad!’
but truly it is nothing other than a Reminder for all peoples
The Inevitable Hour
What is the Inevitable Hour
What will explain to you what the Inevitable Hour is
The people of Thamud and 'Ad denied that the crashing blowwould come
Thamud was destroyed by a deafening blast
Ad was destroyed by a furious wind
that God let loose against them for seven consecutive nights, eight consecutive days, so that you could have seen its people lying dead like hollow palm-trunks
Can you see any trace of them now
Pharaoh, too, and those before him, and the ruined cities: these people committed grave sins
and disobeyed the messenger of their Lord, so He seized them with an ever-tightening grip
But when the Flood rose high, We saved you in the floating ship
making that event a reminder for you: attentive ears may take heed
When the Trumpet is sounded a single time
when the earth and its mountains are raised high and then crushed with a single blow
on that Day the Great Event will come to pass
The sky will be torn apart on that Day, it will be so frail
The angels will be on all sides of it and, on that Day, eight of them will bear the throne of your Lord above them
On that Day you will be brought to judgement and none of your secrets will remain hidden
Anyone who is given his Record in his right hand will say, ‘Here is my Record, read it
I knew I would meet my Reckoning,’
and so he will have a pleasant life
in a lofty Garden
with clustered fruit within his reach
It will be said, ‘Eat and drink to your heart’s content as a reward for what you have done in days gone by.’
But anyone who is given his Record in his left hand will say, ‘If only I had never been given any Record
and knew nothing of my Reckoning
How I wish death had been the end of me
My wealth has been no use to me
and my power has vanished.’
‘Take him, put a collar on him
lead him to burn in the blazing Fire
and [bind him] in a chain seventy metres long
he would not believe in Almighty God
he never encouraged feeding the hungry
so today he has no real friend here
and the only food he has is the filth
that only sinners eat.’
So I swear by what you can see
and by what you cannot see
this [Quran] is the speech of an honoured messenger
not the words of a poet- how little you believe
nor the words of a soothsayer- how little you reflect
This [Quran] is a message sent down from the Lord of the Worlds
if [the Prophet] had attributed some fabrication to Us
We would certainly have seized his right hand
and cut off his lifeblood
and none of you could have defended him
This [Quran] is a reminder for those who are aware of God
We know that some of you consider it to be lies
this will be a source of bitter regret for the disbelievers
but it is in fact the certain Truth
So [Prophet] glorify the name of your Lord, the Almighty
A man [mockingly] demanded the punishment
It will fall on the disbelievers––none can deflect it––
from God, the Lord of the Ways of Ascent
by which the angels and the Spirit ascend to Him, on a Day whose length is fifty thousand years
So be patient, [Prophet], as befits you
The disbelievers think it is distant
but We know it to be close
On a Day when the heavens will be like molten brass
and the mountains like tufts of wool
when no friend will ask about his friend
even when they are within sight of one another. The guilty person will wish he could save himself from the suffering of that Day by sacrificing his sons
his spouse, his brother
the kinsfolk who gave him shelter
and everyone on earth, if it could save him
But no! There is a raging flame
that strips away the skin
and it will claim everyone who rejects the truth, turns away
amasses wealth and hoards it
Man was truly created anxious
he is fretful when misfortune touches him
but tight-fisted when good fortune comes his way
Not so those who pray
and are constant in their prayers
who give a due share of their wealth
to beggars and the deprived
who believe in the Day of Judgement
and fear the punishment of their Lord––
none may feel wholly secure from it––
who guard their chastity
from all but their spouses or their slave-girls––there is no blame attached to [relations with] these
but those whose desires exceed this limit are truly transgressors––
who are faithful to their trusts and their pledges
who give honest testimony
and are steadfast in their prayers
They will be honoured in Gardens of bliss
What is wrong with the disbelievers? Why do they rush to peer at you [Prophet]
from right and left, in crowds
Does every one of them expect to enter a Garden of bliss
No! We created them from the substance they know
and, by the Lord of every sunrise and sunset, We have the power
to substitute for them others better than they are- nothing can prevent Us from doing this
So leave them to wallow in idle talk, until they come face to face with their promised Day
the Day they will rush out of their graves as if rallying to a flag
eyes downcast and covered in shame: that is the Day of which they were warned
We sent Noah to his people: ‘Warn your people, before a painful punishment comes to them.’
And so he said, ‘My people, I am here to warn you plainly
Serve God, be mindful of Him and obey me
He will forgive you your sins and spare you until your appointed time––when God’s appointed time arrives it cannot be postponed. If only you understood!’
He said, ‘My Lord, I have called my people night and day
but the more I call them, the further they run away
every time I call them, so that You may forgive them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, cover their heads with their garments, persist in their rejection, and grow more insolent and arrogant
I have tried calling them openly
I have tried preaching to them in public and speaking to them in private
I said, “Ask forgiveness of your Lord: He is ever forgiving
He will send down abundant rain from the sky for you
He will give you wealth and sons; He will provide you with gardens and rivers
What is the matter with you? Why will you not fear God’s majesty
when He has created you stage by stage
Have you ever wondered how God created seven heavens, one above the other
placed the moon as a light in them and the sun as a lamp
how God made you spring forth from the earth like a plant
how He will return you into it and then bring you out again
and how He has spread the Earth out for you
to walk along its spacious paths?” ’
Noah said, ‘My Lord, they have disobeyed me and followed those whose riches and children only increase their ruin
who have made a grand plan
saying, “Do not renounce your gods
Do not renounce Wadd, Suwa, Yaghuth, Yauq, or Nasr!” They have led many astray. Lord, bring nothing but destruction down on the evildoers!’
They were drowned and sent to Hell for their evildoings: they found no one to help them against God
And Noah said, ‘Lord, do not leave any of the disbelievers on the earth
if you leave them they will lead Your servants astray and beget only sinners and disbelievers
Lord, forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my house as a believer. Forgive believing men and women but bring nothing but ruin down on the evildoers!’
Say [Prophet], ‘It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn once listened in and said, “We have heard a wondrous Quran
that gives guidance to the right path, and we have come to believe it––We shall never set up partners with our Lord––
and that He––exalted be the glory of our Lord!––has neither spouse nor child
Outrageous things have been said about God by the foolish among us
although we had thought that no man or jinn would [dare to] tell a lie about Him
Men have sought refuge with the jinn in the past, but they only misguided them further
They thought, as you did, that God would never raise anyone from the dead
We tried to reach heaven, but discovered it to be full of stern guards and shooting stars––
we used to sit in places there, listening, but anyone trying to listen now will find a shooting star lying in wait for him––
[so now] we do not know whether those who live on earth are due for misfortune, or whether their Lord intends to guide them
Some of us are righteous and others less so: we follow different paths
We know we can never frustrate God on earth; we can never escape Him
When we heard the guidance we came to believe: whoever believes in his Lord need fear no loss nor injustice
Some of us submit to Him and others go the wrong way: those who submit to God have found wise guidance
but those who go wrong will be fuel for Hellfire.” ’
If they had taken to the right way, We would have given them abundant water to drink
a test for them––but anyone who turns away from his Lord’s Revelation will be sent by Him to spiralling torment
Places of worship are for God alone- so do not pray to anyone other than God
yet when God’s Servant stood up to pray to Him, they pressed in on him
Say, ‘I pray to my Lord alone; I set up no partner with Him.’
Say, ‘I have no control over any harm or good that may befall you.’
Say, ‘No one can protect me from God: I have no refuge except in Him
I only deliver [what I receive] from God- only His messages.’ Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger will have Hell’s Fire as his permanent home
when they are confronted by what they have been warned about, they will realize who has the weaker protector and the smaller number
Say, ‘I do not know whether what you have been warned about is near, or whether a distant time has been appointed for it by my Lord.’
He is the One who knows what is hidden
He does not disclose it except to a messenger of His choosing. He sends watchers to go in front and behind
to ensure that each of His messengers delivers his Lord’s message: He knows all about them, and He takes account of everything
You [Prophet], enfolded in your cloak
Stay up throughout the night, all but a small part of it
half, or a little less
or a little more; recite the Quran slowly and distinctly
We shall send a momentous message down to you
Night prayer makes a deeper impression and sharpens words––
you are kept busy for long periods of the day––
so celebrate the name of your Lord and devote yourself wholeheart-edly to Him
He is Lord of the east and west, there is no god but Him, so take Him as your Protector
patiently endure what they say, ignore them politely
and leave to Me those who deny the truth and live in luxury. Bear with them for a little while
We have fetters, a blazing fire
food that chokes, and agonizing torment in store for them
on the Day when the earth and the mountains will shake. The mountains will become a heap of loose sand
We have sent a messenger to you [people] to be your witness, just as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh
but Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger and so We inflicted a heavy punishment on him
So if you disbelieve, how can you guard yourselves against a Day that will turn children’s hair grey
a Day when the sky will be torn apart? God’s promise will certainly be fulfilled
This is a reminder. Let whoever wishes take the way to his Lord
[Prophet], your Lord is well aware that you sometimes spend nearly two-thirds of the night at prayer––sometimes half, sometimes a third––as do some of your followers. God determines the division of night and day. He knows that you will not be able to keep a measure of it and He has relented towards all of you, so recite as much of the Quran as is easy for you. He knows that some of you will be sick, some of you travelling through the land seeking God’s bounty, some of you fighting in God’s way: recite as much as is easy for you, keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and make God a good loan. Whatever good you store up for yourselves will be improved and increased for you. Ask God for His forgiveness, He is most forgiving, most merciful
You, wrapped in your cloak
arise and give warning
Proclaim the greatness of your Lord
cleanse yourself
keep away from all filth
do not be overwhelmed and weaken
be steadfast in your Lord’s cause
When the Trumpet sounds
that will be a Day of anguish for the disbelievers
They will have no ease
[Prophet], leave Me to deal with the one I created helpless
then gave vast wealth
and sons by his side
making everything easy for him––
yet he still hopes I will give him more
No! He has been stubbornly hostile to Our revelation
I will inflict a spiralling torment on him
He planned and plotted––
devilishly he plotted
ferociously he plotted!––
and looked
and frowned and scowled
and turned away and behaved arrogantly
and said, ‘This is just old sorcery
just the talk of a mortal!’
I will throw him into the scorching Fire
What will explain to you what the scorching Fire is
It spares nothing and leaves nothing
it scorches the flesh of humans
there are nineteen in charge of it––
none other than angels appointed by Us to guard Hellfire- and We have made their number a test for the disbelievers. So those who have been given the Scripture will be certain and those who believe will have their faith increased: neither those who have been given the Scripture nor the believers will have any doubts, but the sick at heart and the disbelievers will say, ‘What could God mean by this description?’ God leaves whoever He will to stray and guides whoever He will- no one knows your Lord’s forces except Him- this [description] is a warning to mortals
Yes––by the moon
By the departing night
By the shining dawn
It is one of the mightiest things
a warning to all mortals
to those of you who choose to go ahead and those who lag behind
Every soul is held in pledge for its deeds
but the Companions of the Right will stay
in Gardens and ask
about the guilty
‘What drove you to the Scorching Fire?’ [they will ask]
and they will answer, ‘We did not pray
we did not feed the poor
we indulged with others [in mocking the believers]
we denied the Day of Judgement
until the Certain End came upon us.’
No intercessor’s plea will benefit them now
What is the matter with them? Why do they turn away from the warning
like frightened asses
fleeing from a lion
Each one of them demands that a scripture be sent down to him and unrolled before his very eyes
No! Truly they have no fear of the life to come
but truly this is a reminder
Let whoever wishes to take heed do so
they will only take heed if God so wishes. He is the Lord who should be heeded, the Lord of forgiveness
By the Day of Resurrection
and by the self-reproaching soul
Does man think We shall not put his bones back together
In fact, We can reshape his very fingertips
Yet man wants to deny what is ahead of him
he says, ‘So, when will this Day of Resurrection be?’
When eyes are dazzled
and the moon eclipsed
when the sun and the moon are brought together
on that Day man will say, ‘Where can I escape?’
Truly, there is no refuge
they will all return to your Lord on that Day
On that Day, man will be told what he put first and what he put last
Truly, man is a clear witness against himself
despite all the excuses he may put forward
[Prophet], do not rush your tongue in an attempt to hasten [your memorization of] the Revelation
We shall make sure of its safe collection and recitation
When We have recited it, repeat the recitation
and We shall make it clear
Truly you [people] love this fleeting world
and neglect the life to come
On that Day there will be radiant faces
looking towards their Lord
and on that Day there will be the sad and despairing faces
of those who realize that a great calamity is about to befall them
Truly, when the soul reaches the collarbone
when it is said, ‘Could any charm-healer save him now?’
when he knows it is the final parting
when his legs are brought together
on that day he will be driven towards your Lord
He neither believed nor prayed
but denied the truth and turned away
walking back to his people with a conceited swagger
Closer and closer it comes to you
Closer and closer still
Does man think he will be left alone
Was he not just a drop of spilt-out sperm
which became a clinging form, which God shaped in due proportion
fashioning from it the two sexes, male and female
Does He who can do this not have the power to bring the dead back to life
Was there not a period of time when man was nothing to speak of
We created man from a drop of mingled fluid to put him to the test; We gave him hearing and sight
We guided him to the right path, whether he was grateful or not
We have prepared chains, iron collars, and blazing Fire for the disbelievers, but
the righteous will have a drink mixed with kafur
a spring for God’s servants, which flows abundantly at their wish
They fulfil their vows; they fear a day of widespread woes
they give food to the poor, the orphan, and the captive, though they love it themselves
saying, ‘We feed you for the sake of God alone: We seek neither recompense nor thanks from you
We fear the Day of our Lord––a woefully grim Day.’
So God will save them from the woes of that Day, give them radiance and gladness
and reward them, for their steadfastness, with a Garden and silken robes
They will sit on couches, feeling neither scorching heat nor biting cold
with shady [branches] spread above them and clusters of fruit hanging close at hand
They will be served with silver plates
and gleaming silver goblets according to their fancy
and they will be given a drink infused with ginger
from a spring called Salsabil
Everlasting youths will attend them––if you could see them, you would think they were scattered pearls––
and if you were to look around, you would see bliss and great wealth
they will wear garments of green silk and brocade; they will be adorned with silver bracelets; their Lord will give them a pure drink
[It will be said], ‘This is your reward. Your endeavours are appreciated.’
We Ourself have sent down this Quran to you [Prophet] in gradual revelation
Await your Lord’s Judgement with patience; do not yield to any of these sinners or disbelievers
remember the name of your Lord at dawn and in the evening
bow down before Him, and glorify Him at length by night
These people love the fleeting life. They put aside [all thoughts of] a Heavy Day
Yet We created them; We strengthened their constitution; if We please, We can replace such people completely
This is a reminder. Let whoever wishes, take the way to his Lord
But you will only wish to do so if God wills- God is all knowing, all wise
He admits whoever He will into His Mercy and has prepared a painful torment for the disbelievers
By the [winds] sent forth in swift succession
violently storming
scattering far and wide
separating forcefully
delivering a reminder
as a proof or a warning
what you are promised will come to pass
When the stars are dimmed
and the sky is torn apart
when the mountains are turned to dust
and the messengers given their appointed time––
for what Day has all this been set
The Day of Decision
What will explain to you what the Day of Decision is
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
Did We not destroy the first [of them]
We shall make the last follow them
this is how We deal with the guilty
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
Did We not make you from an underrated fluid
which We housed in a safe lodging
for a determined period
We determine [it]: how excellently We determine
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
Did We not make the earth a home
for the living and the dead
Did We not place firm, lofty mountains on it and provide you with sweet water
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
They will be told, ‘Go to that which you used to deny
Go to a shadow of smoke!’ It rises in three columns
no shade does it give, nor relief from the flame
it shoots out sparks as large as treetrunks
and as bright as copper
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
On that Day they will be speechless
and they will be given no chance to offer any excuses
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
[They will be told], ‘This is the Day of Decision: We have gathered you and earlier generations
If you have any plots against Me, try them now.’
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
But those who took heed of God will enjoy cool shade, springs
and any fruit they desire
[they will be told], ‘Eat and drink to your hearts’ content as a reward for your deeds
this is how We reward those who do good.’
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
[You may] eat and enjoy yourselves for a short while, evildoers that you are
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
When they are told, ‘Bow down in prayer,’ they do not do so
Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth
In what revelation, after this, will they believe
What are they asking about
The momentous announcement
about which they differ
They will find out
In the end they will find out
Did We not make the earth smooth
and make the mountains to keep it stable
Did We not create you in pairs
give you sleep for rest
the night as a cover
and the day for your livelihood
Did We not build seven strong [heavens] above you
and make a blazing lamp
Did We not send water pouring down from the clouds
to bring forth with it grain, plants
and luxuriant gardens
A time has been appointed for the Day of Decision
a Day when the Trumpet will sound and you will come forward in crowds
when the sky will open up like wide portals
when the mountains will vanish like a mirage
Hell lies in wait
a home for oppressors
to stay in for a long, long time
where they will taste no coolness nor drink
except one that is scalding and dark––
a fitting requital
for they did not fear a reckoning
and they rejected Our messages as lies
We have recorded everything in a Record
‘Taste this: all you will get from Us is more torment.’
For those who were aware of God there is supreme fulfilment
private gardens, vineyards
nubile, well-matched companions
and an overflowing cup
There they will hear no vain or lying talk
a reward from your Lord, a fitting gift
from the Lord of the heavens and earth and everything between, the Lord of Mercy. They will have no authority from Him to speak
On the Day when the Spirit and the angels stand in rows, they will not speak except for those to whom the Lord of Mercy gives permission, who will say only what is right
That is the Day of Truth. So whoever wishes to do so should take the path that leads to his Lord
We have warned you of imminent torment, on the Day when every person will see what their own hands have sent ahead for them, when the disbeliever will say, ‘If only I were dust!’
By the forceful chargers
raring to go
sweeping ahead at full stretch
overtaking swiftly
to bring the matter to an end
on the Day when the blast reverberates
and the second blast follows
hearts will tremble
and eyes will be downcast
They say, ‘What? shall we be brought back to life
after we have turned into decayed bones?’ and they say
‘Such a return is impossible!’
But all it will take is a single blast
and they will be back above ground
Have you [Prophet] heard the story of Moses
His Lord called out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa
‘Go to Pharaoh, for he has exceeded all bounds
and ask him, “Do you want to purify yourself [of sin]
Do you want me to guide you to your Lord, so that you may hold Him in awe?” ’
Moses showed him the great sign
but he denied it and refused [the faith]
He turned away and hastily
gathered his people, proclaiming
‘I am your supreme lord,’
so God condemned him to punishment in the life to come as well as in this life
there truly is a lesson in this for anyone who stands in awe of God
Which is harder to create: you people or the sky that He built
raising it high and perfecting it
giving darkness to its night and bringing out its morning brightness
and the earth, too, He spread out
bringing waters and pastures out of it
and setting firm mountains [in it]
for you and your animals to enjoy
When the great overwhelming event arrives
on the Day that man remembers what he has done
and Hell is there for all to see
for anyone who has transgressed
and preferred the present life
Hell will be home
for anyone who feared the meeting with his Lord and restrained himself from base desires
Paradise will be home
They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour
saying, ‘When will it arrive?’, but how can you tell [them that]
Its time is known only to your Lord
you are only sent to warn those who fear it
On the Day they see it, it will seem they lingered [in this life] an evening [at most,] or its morning
He frowned and turned away
when the blind man came to him––
for all you know, he might have grown in spirit
or taken note of something useful to him
For the self-satisfied one
you go out of your way––
though you are not to be blamed for his lack of spiritual growth––
but from the one who has come to you full of eagerness
and awe
you allow yourself to be distracted
No indeed! This [Quran] is a lesson
from which those who wish to be taught should learn
[written] on honoured
exalted, pure pages
by the hands of
noble and virtuous scribes
Woe to man! How ungrateful he is
From what thing does God create him
He creates him from a droplet, He proportions him
He makes the way easy for him
then He causes him to die and be buried
When He wills, He will raise him up again
Yet mandoes not fulfil God’s commands
Let man consider the food he eats
We pour down abundant water
and cause the soil to split open
We make grain grow
and vines, fresh vegetation
olive trees, date palms
luscious gardens
fruits, and fodder
all for you and your livestock to enjoy
When the Deafening Blast comes––
the Day man will flee from his own brother
his mother, his father
his wife, his children
each of them will be absorbed in concerns of their own on that Day
on that Day some faces will be beaming
laughing, and rejoicing
but some faces will be dust-stained
and covered in darkness
those are the disbelievers, the licentious
When the sun is shrouded in darkness
when the stars are dimmed
when the mountains are set in motion
when pregnant camels are abandoned
when wild beasts are herded together
when the seas boil over
when souls are sorted into classes
when the baby girl buried alive is asked
for what sin she was killed
when the records of deeds are spread open
when the sky is stripped away
when Hell is made to blaze
and Paradise brought near
then every soul will know what it has brought about
I swear by the planets
that recede, move, and hide
by the night that descends
by the dawn that softly breathes
this is the speech of a noble messenger
who possesses great strength and is held in honour by the Lord of the Throne––
he is obeyed there and worthy of trust
Your companion is not mad
he did see him on the clear horizon
He does not withhold what is revealed to him from beyond
This is not the word of an outcast devil
So where are you [people] going
This is a message for all people
for those who wish to take the straight path
But you will only wish to do so by the will of God, the Lord of all people
When the sky is torn apart
when the stars are scattered
when the seas burst forth
when graves turn inside out
each soul will know what it has done and what it has left undone
Mankind, what has lured you away from God
your generous Lord, who created you, shaped you, proportioned you
in whatever form He chose
Yet you still take the Judgement to be a lie
Over you stand
watchers, noble recorders
who know what you do
the good will live in bliss
and the wicked will burn in the Fire
They will enter it on the Day of Judgement
and they will find no escape
What will explain to you what the Day of Judgement is
Yes! What will explain to you what the Day of Judgement is
The Day when no soul will be able to do anything for another; on that Day, command will belong to God
Woe to those who give short measure
who demand of other people full measure for themselves
but give less than they should when it is they who weigh or measure for others
Do these people not realize that they will be raised up
on a mighty Day
a Day when everyone will stand before the Lord of the Worlds
No indeed! The list of the wicked is in Sijjin––
what will explain to you what Sijjin is?––
a clearly numbered list
Woe on that day to the deniers
those who deny the Day of Judgement
Only the evil aggressor denies it
when Our revelations are recited to him, he says, ‘Ancient fables!’
No indeed! Their hearts are encrusted with what they have done
No indeed! On that Day they will be screened offfrom their Lord
they will burn in Hell
and they will be told, ‘This is what you called a lie.’
No indeed! The list of the truly good is in 'Illiyyin––
what will explain to you what 'Illiyyin is?––
a clearly written list
witnessed by those brought near
The truly good will live in bliss
seated on couches, gazing around
You will recognize on their faces the radiance of bliss
They will be served a sealed nectar
its seal [perfumed with] a fragrant herb––let those who strive, strive for this––
mixed with the water of Tasnim
a spring from which those brought near will drink
The wicked used to laugh at the believers––
they would wink at one another when the believers passed by them
joke about them when they got back to their own people
and say, when they saw them, ‘These people are misguided,’
though they were not sent to be their keepers
so today the believers are laughing at the disbelievers
as they sit on couches, gazing around
Have the disbelievers [not] been repaid for their deeds
When the sky is ripped apart
obeying its Lord as it rightly must
when the earth is levelled out
casts out its contents, and becomes empty
obeying its Lord as it rightly must
you humans, toiling laboriously towards your Lord, will meet Him
whoever is given his record in his right hand
will have an easy reckoning
and return to his people well pleased
but whoever is given his record from behind his back
will cry out for destruction––
he will burn in the blazing Fire
He used to live among his people well pleased
He thought he would never return [to his Lord]––
indeed he will! His Lord was watching him
I swear by the glow of sunset
by the night and what it covers
by the full moon
you will progress from stage to stage
So why do they not believe
Why, when the Quran is read to them, do they not prostrate themselves [to God]
No! The disbelievers reject the Quran––
God knows best what they keep hidden inside––
so give them news of a painful torment
But those who believe and do good deeds will have a never-ending reward
By the sky with its towering constellations
by the promised Day
by the Witness and that which is witnessed
damned were the makers of the trench
the makers of the fuel-stoked fire
They sat down
to watch what they were doing to the believers
Their only grievance against them was their faith in God, the Mighty, the Praiseworthy
to whom all control over the heavens and earth belongs: God is witness over all things
For those who persecute believing men and women, and do not repent afterwards, there will be the torment of Hell and burning
But for those who believe and do good deeds there will be Gardens graced with flowing streams: that is the great triumph
[Prophet], your Lord’s punishment is truly stern––
it is He who brings people to life, and will restore them to life again––
and He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Loving
The Glorious Lord of the Throne
He does whatever He will
Have you [not] heard the stories of the forces
of Pharaoh and Thamud
Yet still the disbelievers persist in denial
God surrounds them all
This is truly a glorious Quran
[written] on a preserved Tablet
By the sky and the night-comer––
What will explain to you what the night-comer is
The piercing star––
there is a watcher over every soul
Man should reflect on what he was created from
He is created from spurting fluid
then he emerges from between the backbone and breastbone
God is certainly able to bring him back to life
On the Day when secrets are laid bare
he will have no power and no one to help him
By the sky and its recurring rain
by the earth that cracks open
This is truly a decisive statement
it is not something to be taken lightly
They plot and scheme
but so do I
[Prophet], let the disbelievers be, let them be for a while
[Prophet], glorify the name of your Lord the Most High
who created [all things] in due proportion
who determined their destinies and guided them
who brought out the green pasture
then made it dark debris
[Prophet], We shall teach you [the Quran] and you will not forget––
unless God wishes; He knows both what is open and what is hidden––
We shall show you the easy way
So remind, if reminding will help
Those who stand in awe of God will heed the reminder
but it will be ignored by the most wicked
who will enter the Great Fire
where they will neither die nor live
Prosperous are those who purify themselves
remember the name of their Lord, and pray
Yet you [people] prefer the life of this world
even though the Hereafter is better and more lasting
All this is in the earlier scriptures
the scriptures of Abraham and Moses
Have you heard tell [Prophet] about the Overwhelming Event
On that Day, there will be downcast faces
toiling and weary
as they enter the blazing Fire
and are forced to drink from a boiling spring
with no food for them except bitter dry thorns
that neither nourish nor satisfy hunger
On that Day there will also be faces radiant with bliss
well pleased with their labour
in a lofty garden
where they will hear no idle talk
with a flowing spring
raised couches
goblets placed before them
cushions set in rows
and carpets spread
Do the disbelievers not see how rain clouds are formed
how the heavens are lifted
how the mountains are raised high
how the earth is spread out
So [Prophet] warn them: your only task is to give warning
you are not there to control them
As for those who turn away and disbelieve
God will inflict the greatest torment upon them
It is to Us they will return
and then it is for Us to call them to account
By the Daybreak
by the Ten Nights
by the even and the odd
by the passing night––
is this oath strong enough for a rational person
Have you [Prophet] considered how your Lord dealt with [the people] of 'Ad
of Iram, [the city] of lofty pillars
whose like has never been made in any land
and the Thamud, who hewed into the rocks in the valley
and the mighty and powerful Pharaoh
All of them committed excesses in their lands
and spread corruption there
your Lord let a scourge of punishment loose on them
Your Lord is always watchful
[The nature of] man is that, when his Lord tries him through honour and blessings, he says, ‘My Lord has honoured me,’
but when He tries him through the restriction of his provision, he says, ‘My Lord has humiliated me.’
No indeed! You [people] do not honour orphans
you do not urge one another to feed the poor
you consume inheritance greedily
and you love wealth with a passion
No indeed! When the earth is pounded to dust, pounded and pounded
when your Lord comes with the angels, rank upon rank
when Hell is that Day brought near- on that Day man will take heed, but what good will that be to him then
He will say, ‘Would that I had provided for this life to come!’
On that Day, no one will punish as He punishes
and no one will bind as He binds
‘[But] you, soul at peace
return to your Lord well pleased and well pleasing
go in among My servants
and into My Garden.’
I swear by this city––
and you [Prophet] are an inhabitant of this city––
[I swear] by parent and offspring
that We have created man for toil and trial
Does he think that no one will have power over him
‘I have squandered great wealth,’ he says
Does he think no one observes him
Did We not give him eyes
a tongue, lips
and point out to him the two clear ways [of good and evil]
Yet he has not attempted the steep path
What will explain to you what the steep path is
It is to free a slave
to feed at a time of hunger
an orphaned relative
or a poor person in distress
and to be one of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion
Those who do this will be on the right-hand side
but those who disbelieve in Our revelations will be on the left-hand side
and the Fire will close in on them
By the sun in its morning brightness
and by the moon as it follows it
by the day as it displays the sun’s glory
and by the night as it conceals it
by the sky and how He built it
and by the earth and how He spread it
by the soul and how He formed it
and inspired it [to know] its own rebellion and piety
The one who purifies his soul succeeds
and the one who corrupts it fails
In their arrogant cruelty, the people of Thamud called [their messenger] a liar
when the most wicked man among them rose [against him]
The messenger of God said to them, ‘[Leave] God’s camel to drink,’
but they called him a liar and hamstrung her. Their Lord destroyed them for their crime and levelled them
He did not hesitate to punish them
By the enshrouding night
by the radiant day
by His creation of male and female
The ways you take differ greatly
There is the one who gives, who is mindful of God
who testifies to goodness––
We shall smooth his way towards ease
There is the one who is miserly, who is self-satisfied
who denies goodness––
We shall smooth his way towards hardship
and his wealth will not help him as he falls
Our part is to provide guidance––
this world and the next belong to Us––
so I warn you about the raging Fire
in which none but the most wicked one will burn
who denied [the truth], and turned away
The most pious one will be spared this––
who gives his wealth away as self-purification
not to return a favour to anyone
but for the sake of his Lord the Most High––
and he will be well pleased
By the morning brightness
and by the night when it grows still
your Lord has not forsaken you [Prophet], nor does He hate you
and the future will be better for you than the past
your Lord is sure to give you so much that you will be well satisfied
Did He not find you an orphan and shelter you
Did He not find you lost and guide you
Did He not find you in need and make you self-sufficient
So do not be harsh with the orphan
and do not chide the one who asks for help
talk about the blessings of your Lord
Did We not relieve your heart for you [Prophet]
and remove the burden
that weighed so heavily on your back
and raise your reputation high
So truly where there is hardship there is also ease
truly where there is hardship there is also ease
The moment you are freed [of one task] work on
and turn to your Lord for everything
By the fig, by the olive
by Mount Sinai
by this safe town
We create man in the finest state
then reduce him to the lowest of the low
except those who believe and do good deeds––
they will have an unfailing reward. After this, what makes you [man] deny the Judgement
Is God not the most decisive of judges
Read! In the name of your Lord who created
He created manfrom a clinging form
Read! Your Lord is the Most Bountiful One
who taught by [means of] the pen
who taught man what he did not know
But man exceeds all bounds
when he thinks he is self-sufficient
[Prophet], all will return to your Lord
Have you seen the man who forbids
[Our] servant to pray
Have you seen whether he is rightly guided
or encourages true piety
Have you seen whether he denies the truth and turns away from it
Does he not realize that God sees all
No! If he does not stop, We shall drag him by his forehead––
his lying, sinful forehead
Let him summon his comrades
We shall summon the guards of Hell
No! Do not obey him [Prophet]: bow down in worship and draw close
We sent it down on the Night of Glory
What will explain to you what that Night of Glory is
The Night of Glory is better than a thousand months
on that night the angels and the Spirit descend again and again with their Lord’s permission on every task
[there is] peace that night until the break of dawn
Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and the idolaters were not about to change their ways until they were sent clear evidence
a messenger from God, reading out pages [blessed with] purity
containing true scriptures
[Yet] those who were given the Scripture became divided only after they were sent [such] clear evi-dence
though all they are ordered to do is worship God alone, sincerely devoting their religion to Him as people of true faith, keep up the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, for that is the true religion
Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and the idolaters will have the Fire of Hell, there to remain. They are the worst of creation
Those who believe and do good deeds are the best of creation
Their reward with their Lord is everlasting Gardens graced with flowing streams, where they will stay forever. God is well pleased with them and they with Him. All this is for those who stand in awe of their Lord
When the earth is shaken violently in its [last] quaking
when the earth throws out its burdens
when man cries, ‘What is happening to it?’
on that Day, it will tell all
because your Lord will inspire it [to do so]
On that Day, people will come forward in separate groups to be shown their deeds
whoever has done an atom’s-weight of good will see it
but whoever has done an atom’s-weight of evil will see that
By the charging steeds that pant
and strike sparks with their hooves
who make dawn raids
raising a cloud of dust
and plunging into the midst of the enemy
man is ungrateful to his Lord––
and He is witness to this––
he is truly excessive in his love of wealth
Does he not know that when the contents of graves burst forth
when the secrets of hearts are uncovered, on that Day
their Lord will be fully aware of them all
The Crashing Blow
What is the Crashing Blow
What will explain to you what the Crashing Blow is
On a Day when people will be like scattered moths
and the mountains like tufts of wool
the one whose good deeds are heavy on the scales
will have a pleasant life
but the one whose good deeds are light
will have the Bottomless Pit for his home––
what will explain to you what that is?––
a blazing fire
Striving for more distracts you
until you go into your graves
No indeed! You will come to know
No indeed! In the end you will come to know
No indeed! If only you knew for certain
You will most definitely see Hellfire
you will see it with the eye of certainty
On that Day, you will be asked about your pleasures
By the declining day
man is [deep] in loss
except for those who believe, do good deeds, urge one another to the truth, and urge one another to steadfastness
Woe to every fault-finding backbiter
who amasses riches, counting them over
thinking they will make him live for ever
No indeed! He will be thrust into the Crusher
What will explain to you what the Crusher is
It is God’s Fire, made to blaze
which rises over people’s hearts
It closes in on them
in towering columns
Do you [Prophet] not see how your Lord dealt with the army of the elephant
Did He not utterly confound their plans
He sent ranks of birds against them
pelting them with pellets of hard-baked clay
He made them [like] cropped stubble
[He did this] to make the Quraysh feel secure
secure in their winter and summer journeys
So let them worship the Lord of this House
who provides them with food to ward off hunger, safety to ward off fear
[Prophet], have you considered the person who denies the Judgement
It is he who pushes aside the orphan
and does not urge others to feed the needy
So woe to those who pray
but are heedless of their prayer
those who are all show
and forbid common kindnesses
We have truly given abundance to you [Prophet]––
so pray to your Lord and make your sacrifice to Him alone––
it is the one who hates you who has been cut off
Say [Prophet], ‘Disbelievers
I do not worship what you worship
you do not worship what I worship
I will never worship what you worship
you will never worship what I worship
you have your religion and I have mine.’
When God’s help comes and He opens up your way [Prophet]
when you see people embracing God’s faith in crowds
celebrate the praise of your Lord and ask His forgiveness: He is always ready to accept repentance
May the hands of Abu Lahab be ruined! May he be ruined too
Neither his wealth nor his gains will help him
he will burn in the Flaming Fire––
and so will his wife, the firewood-carrier
with a palm-fibre rope around her neck
Say, ‘He is God the One
God the eternal
He begot no one nor was He begotten
No one is comparable to Him.’
Say [Prophet], ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of daybreak
against the harm in what He has created
the harm in the night when darkness gathers
the harm in witches when they blow on knots
the harm in the envier when he envies.’
Say, ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of people
the Controller of people
the God of people
against the harm of the slinking whisperer––
who whispers into the hearts of people––
whether they be jinn or people.’
{
    "name": "eng-abdelhaleem",
    "author": "Abdel Haleem",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-abdelhaleem.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-abdelhaleem.min.json"
}