In the name of Allah, most benevolent, ever-merciful
ALL PRAISE BE to Allah, Lord of all the worlds
Most beneficent, ever-merciful
King of the Day of Judgement
You alone we worship, and to You alone turn for help
Guide us (O Lord) to the path that is straight
The path of those You have blessed, Not of those who have earned Your anger, nor those who have gone astray
ALIF LAM MIM
This is The Book free of doubt and involution, a guidance for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path
Who believe in the Unknown and fulfil their devotional obligations, and spend in charity of what We have given them
Who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed to those before you, and are certain of the Hereafter
They have found the guidance of their Lord and will be successful
As for those who deny, it is all the same if you warn them or not, they will not believe
God has sealed their hearts and ears, and veiled their eyes. For them is great deprivation
And there are some who, though they say: "We believe in God and the Last Day," (in reality) do not believe
They (try to) deceive God and those who believe, yet deceive none but themselves although they do not know
Sick are their hearts, and God adds to their malady. For them is suffering for they lie
When asked to desist from spreading corruption in the land they say: "Why, we are reformers
Yet they are surely mischief-mongers, even though they do not know
When asked to believe as others do, they say: "Should we believe like fools?" And yet they are the fools, even though they do not know
When they meet the faithful they say: "We believe;" but when alone with the devils (their fellows), they say: "We are really with you; we were joking
But God will turn the joke against them and allow them to sink deeper into evil and wander perplexed in their wickedness
They are indeed those who bartered away good guidance for error and gained nothing from the deal, nor found the right way
They are like a man who kindles a fire, and when its glow has illumined the air God takes away their light leaving them in the dark where they will not be able to see
They are deaf, dumb and blind, and shall never return
Or like rain pouring from the sky which hides within it darkness, thunder and lightning. They thrust their fingers into their ears for safety against noise and death. But God surrounds those who believe not from all sides
Verily the lightning could snatch away their eyes. When it flashes forth they walk in its flare. When darkness returns they stand still. And if the Lord wills so He could take away their hearing and sight; surely God is all-powerful
So, O you people, adore your Lord who created you, as He did those before you, that you could take heed for yourselves and fear Him
Who made the earth a bed for you, the sky a canopy, and sends forth rain from the skies that fruits may grow -- your food and sustenance. So, do not make another the equal of God knowingly
If you are in doubt of what We have revealed to Our votary, then bring a Surah like this, and call any witness, apart from God, you like, if you are truthful
But if you cannot, as indeed you cannot, then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is men and rocks, which has been prepared for the infidels
Announce to those who believe and have done good deeds, glad tidings of gardens under which rivers flow, and where, when they eat the fruits that grow, they will say: "Indeed they are the same as we were given before," so like in semblance the food would be. And they shall have fair spouses there, and live there abidingly
God is not loath to advance the similitude of a gnat or a being more contemptible; and those who believe know whatever is from the Lord is true. But those who disbelieve say: "What does God mean by this parable?" He causes some to err this way, and some He guides; yet He turns away none but those who transgress
Who, having sealed it, break God's covenant, dividing what He ordained cohered; and those who spread discord in the land will suffer assuredly
Then how can you disbelieve in God? He gave you life when you were dead. He will make you die again then bring you back to life: To Him then you will return
He made for you all that lies within the earth, then turning to the firmament He proportioned several skies: He has knowledge of everything
Remember, when your Lord said to the angels: "I have to place a trustee on the earth," they said: "Will You place one there who would create disorder and shed blood, while we intone Your litanies and sanctify Your name?" And God said: "I know what you do not know
Then He gave Adam knowledge of the nature and reality of all things and everything, and set them before the angels and said: "Tell Me the names of these if you are truthful
And they said: "Glory to You (O Lord), knowledge we have none except what You have given us, for You are all-knowing and all-wise
Then He said to Adam: "Convey to them their names." And when he had told them, God said: "Did I not tell you that I know the unknown of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you disclose and know what you hide
Remember, when We asked the angels to bow in homage to Adam, they all bowed but Iblis, who disdained and turned insolent, and so became a disbeliever
And We said to Adam: "Both you and your spouse live in the Garden, eat freely to your fill wherever you like, but approach not this tree or you will become transgressors
But Satan tempted them and had them banished from the (happy) state they were in. And We said: "Go, one the antagonist of the other, and live on the earth for a time ordained, and fend for yourselves
Then his Lord sent commands to Adam and turned towards him: Indeed He is compassionate and kind
And We said to them: "Go, all of you. When I send guidance, whoever follows it will neither have fear nor regret
But those who deny and reject Our signs will belong to Hell, and there abide unchanged
O children of Israel, remember the favours I bestowed on you. So keep your pledge to Me, and I will mine to you, and be fearful of Me
And believe in what I have sent down which verifies what is already with you; and do not be the first to deny it, nor part with it for little gain; and beware of Me
Do not confuse truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth knowingly
Be firm in devotion; give zakat (the due share of your wealth for the welfare of others), and bow with those who bow (before God)
Will you enjoin good deeds on the others and forget your own selves? You also read the Scriptures, why do you then not understand
Find strength in fortitude and prayer, which is heavy and exacting but for those who are humble and meek
Who are conscious that they have to meet their Lord, and to Him they have to return
Remember, O children of Israel, the favours I bestowed on you, and made you exalted among the nations of the world
Take heed of the day when no man will be useful to man in the least, when no intercession matter nor ransom avail, nor help reach them
Remember, We saved you from the Pharaoh's people who wronged and oppressed you and slew your sons but spared your women: In this was a great favour from your Lord
Remember, We parted the sea and saved you, and drowned the men of Pharaoh before your very eyes
Yet, remember, as We communed with Moses for forty nights you took the calf in his absence (and worshipped it), and you did wrong
Even so, We pardoned you that you may be grateful
Remember, We gave Moses the Book and Discernment of falsehood and truth, that you may be guided
Remember, Moses said: "My people, by taking this calf you have done yourselves harm, so now turn to your Creator in repentance, and kill your pride, which is better with your Lord." And (the Lord) softened towards you, for He is all-forgiving and merciful
Remember, when you said to Moses: "We shall not believe in you until we see God face to face," lightning struck you as you looked
Even then We revived you after you had become senseless that you might give thanks
And made the cloud spread shade over you, and sent for you manna and quails that you may eat of the good things We have made for you. No harm was done to Us, they only harmed themselves
And remember, We said to you: "Enter this city, eat wherever you like, as much as you please, but pass through the gates in humility and say: 'May our sins be forgiven.' We shall forgive your trespasses and give those who do good abundance
But the wicked changed and perverted the word We had spoken to a word distorted, and We sent from heaven retribution on the wicked, for they disobeyed
And remember, when Moses asked for water for his people, We told him to strike the rock with his staff, and behold, twelve springs of gushing water gushed forth so that each of the tribes came to know its place of drinking. Eat and drink, (enjoy) God's gifts, and spread no discord in the land
Remember, when you said: "O Moses, we are tired of eating the same food (day after day), ask your Lord to give us fruits of the earth, herbs and cucumbers, grains and lentils and onions;" he said: "Would you rather exchange what is good with what is bad? Go then to the city, you shall have what you ask." So they were disgraced and became indigent, earning the anger of God, for they disbelieved the word of God, and slayed the prophets unjustly, for they transgressed and rebelled
Surely the believers and the Jews, Nazareans and the Sabians, whoever believes in God and the Last Day, and whosoever does right, shall have his reward with his Lord and will neither have fear nor regret
Remember the day We made the covenant with you and exalted you on the Mount and said: "Hold fast to what We have given you, and remember what is therein that you may take heed
But you went back (on your word), and but for the mercy and grace of God you were lost
You know and have known already those among you who had broken the sanctity of the Sabbath, and to whom We had said: "Become (like) apes despised
And whom We made an example for the people (of the day) and those after them, and warning for those who fear God
Remember, when Moses said to his people: "God demands that you sacrifice a cow," they said: "Are you making fun of us?" And he said: "God forbid that I be of the ignorant
Call on your Lord for us," they said, "that He might inform us what kind she should be." "Neither old nor young, says God, but of age in between," answered Moses. "So do as you are bid
Call on your Lord," they said, "to tell us the colour of the cow." "God says," answered Moses, "a fawn coloured cow, rich yellow, well pleasing to the eye
Call on your Lord," they said, "to name its variety, as cows be all alike to us. If God wills we shall be guided aright
And Moses said: "He says it's a cow unyoked, nor worn out by ploughing or watering the fields, one in good shape with no mark or blemish." "Now have you brought us the truth," they said; and then, after wavering, they sacrificed the cow
Remember when you killed a man and blamed each other for the deed, God brought to light what you concealed
We had pronounced already: "Slay (the murderer) for (taking a life)." Thus God preserves life from death and shows you His signs that you may understand
Yet, in spite of this, your hearts only hardened like rocks or even harder, but among rocks are those from which rivers flow; and there are also those which split open and water gushes forth; as well as those that roll down for fear of God. And God is not negligent of all that you do
How do you expect them to put their faith in you, when you know that some among them heard the word of God and, having understood, perverted it knowingly
For when they meet the faithful, they say: "We believe;" but when among themselves, they say: "Why do you tell them what the Lord has revealed to you? They will only dispute it in the presence of your Lord. Have you no sense indeed
Do they not know that God is aware of what they hide and what they disclose
Among them are heathens who know nothing of the Book but only what they wish to believe, and are only lost in fantasies
But woe to them who fake the Scriptures and say: "This is from God," so that they might earn some profit thereby; and woe to them for what they fake, and woe to them for what they earn from it
Yet they say: "The Fire will not touch us for more than a few days." Say.. "Have you so received a promise from God?" "Then surely God will not withdraw His pledge. Or do you impute things to God of which you have no knowledge at all
Why, they who have earned the wages of sin and are enclosed in error, are people of Hell, where they will abide for ever
But those who believe and do good deeds are people of Paradise, and shall live there forever
Remember, when We made a covenant with the people of Israel and said: "Worship no one but God, and be good to your parents and your kin, and to orphans and the needy, and speak of goodness to men; observe your devotional obligations, and give zakat (the due share of your wealth for the welfare of others)," you went back (on your word), except only a few, and paid no heed
And remember, when We made a covenant with you whereby you agreed you will neither shed blood among you nor turn your people out of their homes, you promised, and are witness to it too
But you still kill one another, and you turn a section of your people from their homes, assisting one another against them with guilt and oppression. Yet when they are brought to you as captives you ransom them, although forbidden it was to drive them away. Do you, then, believe a part of the Book and reject a part? There is no other award for them who so act but disgrace in the world, and on the Day of Judgement the severest of punishment; for God is not heedless of all that you do
They are those who bought the life of the world at the cost of the life to come; and neither will their torment decrease nor help reach them
Remember We gave Moses the Book and sent after him many an apostle; and to Jesus, son of Mary, We gave clear evidence of the truth, reinforcing him with divine grace. Even so, when a messenger brought to you what did not suit your mood you turned haughty, and called some imposters and some others you slew
And they say: "Our hearts are enfolded in covers." In fact God has cursed them for their unbelief; and only a little do they believe
And when the Book was sent to them by God verifying what had been revealed to them already even though before it they used to pray for victory over the unbelievers and even though they recognised it when it came to them, they renounced it. The curse of God be on those who deny
They bartered their lives ill denying the revelation of God out of spite that God should bestow His grace among His votaries on whomsoever He will, and thus earned wrath upon wrath. The punishment for disbelievers is ignominious
And when it is said to them: "believe in what God has sent down," they say: "We believe what was sent to us, and do not believe what has come thereafter," although it affirms the truth they possess already. Say: "Why have you then been slaying God's apostles as of old, if you do believe
Although Moses had come to you with evidence of the truth, you chose the calf in his absence, and you transgressed
Remember when We took your pledge and exalted you on the Mount (saying:) "Hold fast to what We have given you, firmly, and pay heed," you said: "We have heard and will not obey." (The image of) the calf had sunk deep into their hearts on account of unbelief. Say: "Vile is your belief if you are believers indeed
Tell them: "If you think you alone will abide with God to the exclusion of the rest of Mankind, in the mansions of the world to come, then wish for death if what you say is true
But they will surely not wish for death because of what they had done in the past; and God knows the sinners well
You will see they are covetous of life more than other men, even more than those who practise idolatry. Each one of them desires to live a thousand years, although longevity will never save them from punishment, for God sees all they do
Say: "Whosoever is the enemy of Gabriel who revealed the word of God to you by the dispensation of God, reaffirming what had been revealed before, and is a guidance and good news for those who believe
Whosoever is the enemy of God and His angels and apostles, and of Gabriel and Michael, then God is the enemy of such unbelievers
We have sent clear signs to you, such as none can deny except those who transgress the truth
And every time they made a pledge some of them pushed it aside, and many of them do not believe
When a messenger was sent to them by God affirming the Books they had already received, some of them put (His message) behind their backs as if they had no knowledge of it
And they follow what devilish beings used to chant against the authority of Solomon, though Solomon never disbelieved and only the devils denied, who taught sorcery to men, which, they said, had been revealed to the angels of Babylon, Harut and Marut, who, however, never taught it without saying: "We have been sent to deceive you, so do not renounce (your faith)." They learnt what led to discord between husband and wife. Yet they could not harm any one or without the dispensation of God. And they learnt what harmed them and brought no gain. They knew indeed whoever bought this had no place in the world to come, and that surely they had sold themselves for something that was vile. If only they had sense
Had they come to believe instead, and taken heed for themselves, they would surely have earned from God a far better reward. If only they had sense
Say not (to the Prophet), O Believers: "Have regard for us (ra'ina)," but "look at us (unzurna)," and obey him in what he says. Painful is the nemesis for disbelievers
Those without faith among the people of the Book, and those who worship idols, do not wish that good should come to you from your Lord. But God chooses whom He likes for His grace; and the bounty of God is infinite
When We cancel a message (sent to an earlier prophet) or throw it into oblivion, We replace it with one better or one similar. Do you not know that God has power over all things
Do you not know that God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and that there is none to save and protect you apart from God
Do you too, O believers, wish to question your Apostle as Moses was in the past? But he who takes unbelief in exchange for belief only strays from the right path
How many of the followers of the Books having once known the truth desire in their hearts, out of envy, to turn you into infidels again even after the truth has become clear to them! But you forbear and overlook till God fulfil His plan; and God has power over all things
Fulfil your devotional obligations and pay the zakat. And what you send ahead of good you will find with God, for He sees all that you do ill
And they say: "None will go to Paradise but the Jews and the Christians;" but this is only wishful thinking. Say: "Bring the proof if you are truthful
Only he who surrenders to God with all his heart and also does good, will find his reward with his Lord, and will have no fear or regret
The Jews say: "The Christians are not right," and the Christians say: "The Jews are in the wrong;" yet both read the Scriptures; and this is what the unread had said too. God alone will judge between them in their differences on the Day of Reckoning
And who is more unjust than he who prohibits the name of God being used in His mosques, who hurries to despoil them even though he has no right to enter them except in reverence? For them is ignominy in the world and severe punishment in the life to come
To God belong the East and the West. Wherever you turn the glory of God is everywhere: All-pervading is He and all-knowing
Yet they say that God has begotten a son. May He be praised! Indeed everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him, and all are obedient to God
Creator of the heavens and the earth from nothingness, He has only to say when He wills a thing: "Be", and it is
But those who are ignorant say: "Why does God not speak or show us a sign?" The same question had been asked by men before them, who were like them in their hearts. But to those who are firm in their faith We have shown Our signs already
And We have sent you with the truth to give glad tidings and to warn. You will not be questioned about those and who are inmates of Hell
The Jews and Christians will never be pleased with you until you follow their way. Say: "God's guidance alone is true guidance;" for if you give in to their wishes after having received the (Book of) knowledge from God, then none will you have as friend or helper to save you
Those to whom We have sent down the Book, and who read it as it should be read, believe in it truly; but those who deny it will be losers
O children of Israel, remember the favours I bestowed on you, and made you exalted among the nations of the world
Fear the day when no man will stand up for man in the least, and no ransom avail nor intercession matter nor help reach
Remember, when his Lord tried Abraham by a number of commands which he fulfilled, God said to him: "I will make you a leader among men." And when Abraham asked: "From my progeny too?" the Lord said: "My pledge does not include transgressors
Remember, We made the House (of Ka'bah) a place of congregation and safe retreat, and said: "Make the spot where Abraham stood the place of worship;" and enjoined upon Abraham and Ishmael to keep Our House immaculate for those who shall walk around it and stay in it for contemplation and prayer, and for bowing in adoration
And when Abraham said: "O Lord, make this a city of peace, and give those of its citizens who believe in God and the Last Day fruits for food," He answered: "To those will I also give a little who believe not, for a time, then drag them to Hell, a dreadful destination
And when Abraham was raising the plinth of the House with Ishmael, (he prayed): "Accept this from us, O Lord, for You hear and know everything
And make us submit, O Lord, to Your will, and our progeny a people submissive to You. Teach us the way of worship and forgive our trespasses, for You are compassionate and merciful
And send to them, O Lord, an apostle from among them to impart Your messages to them, and teach them the Book and the wisdom, and correct them in every way; for indeed You are mighty and wise
Who will turn away from the creed of Abraham but one dull of soul? We made him the chosen one here in the world, and one of the best in the world to come
(For) when his Lord said to him: "Obey," he replied: "I submit to the Lord of all the worlds
And Abraham left this legacy to his sons, and to Jacob, and said: "O my sons, God has chosen this as the faith for you. Do not die but as those who have submitted (to God)
Were you present at the hour of Jacob's death? "What will you worship after me?" he asked his sons, and they answered: "We shall worship your God and the God of your fathers, of Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, the one and only God; and to Him we submit
Those were the people, and they have passed away. Theirs the reward for what they did, as yours will be for what you do. You will not be questioned about their deeds
They say: "Become Jews or become Christians, and find the right way." Say: "No. We follow the way of Abraham the upright, who was not an idolater
Say: "We believe in God and what has been sent down to us, and what had been revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and their progeny, and that which was given to Moses and Christ, and to all other prophets by the Lord. We make no distinction among them, and we submit to Him
If they come to believe as you did, they will find the right path. If they turn away then they will only oppose; but God will suffice you against them, for God hears all and knows everything
We have taken the colouring of God; and whose shade is better than God's? Him alone we worship
Say: "Why do you dispute with us about God when He is equally your Lord and our Lord? To us belong our actions, to you yours; and we are true to Him
Or do you claim that Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and their offspring were Jews or Christians? Say: "Have you more knowledge than God?" Who is more wicked than he who conceals the testimony he received from God? God is not unaware of all you do
They were the people, and they have passed away. Theirs the reward for what they did, as yours will be for what you do. You will not be questioned about their deeds
The foolish will now ask and say: "What has made the faithful turn away from the Qiblah towards which they used to pray?" Say: "To God belong the East and the West. He guides who so wills to the path that is straight
We have made you a temperate people that you act as witness over man, and the Prophet as witness over you. We decreed the Qiblah which you faced before that We may know who follow the Apostle and who turn away in haste. And this was a hard (test) except for those who were guided by God. But God will not suffer your faith to go waste, for God is to men full of mercy and grace
We have seen you turn your face to the heavens. We shall turn you to a Qiblah that will please you. So turn towards the Holy Mosque, and turn towards it wherever you be. And those who are recipients of the Book surely know that this is the truth from their Lord; and God is not negligent of all that you do
Even though you bring all the proof to the people of the Book they will not face the direction you turn to, nor you theirs, nor will they follow each other's direction. And if you follow their whims after all the knowledge that has reached you, then surely you will be among transgressors
Those to whom We have sent down the Book know this even as they know their sons. Yet a section among them conceals the truth knowingly
The truth is from your Lord, so be not among those who are sceptics
Each has a goal to which he turns. So strive towards piety and excel the others: God will bring you all together wheresoever you be. God has power over everything
Wherever you come from turn towards the Holy Mosque: This in truth is from your Lord. God is not negligent of all you do
Whichever place you come from turn towards the Holy Mosque, and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it so that people may have no cause for argument against you, except such among them as are wicked. But do not fear them, fear Me that I may accomplish My favours on you, and you may find the right way perchance
Even as We sent a messenger from among you to convey Our messages to you and cleanse you, and teach you the Book and the wisdom, and what you did not know
So, therefore, remember Me, and I shall remember you; and give thanks and do not be ungrateful
O you who believe, seek courage in fortitude and prayer, for God is with those who are patient and persevere
Do not say that those who are killed in the way of God, are dead, for indeed they are alive, even though you are not aware
Be sure We shall try you with something of fear and hunger and loss of wealth and life and the fruits (of your labour); but give tidings of happiness to those who have patience
Who say when assailed by adversity: "Surely we are for God, and to Him we shall return
On such men are the blessings of God and His mercy, for they are indeed on the right path
Truly Safa and Marwa are the symbols of God. Whoever goes on pilgrimage to the House (of God), or on a holy visit, is not guilty of wrong if he walk around them; and he who does good of his own accord will find appreciation with God who knows everything
They who conceal Our signs and the guidance We have sent them and have made clear in the Book, are condemned of God and are condemned by those who are worthy of condemning
But those who repent and reform and proclaim (the truth), are forgiven, for I am forgiving and merciful
But those who deny, and die disbelieving, bear the condemnation of God and the angels and that of all men
Under which they will live, and their suffering will neither decrease nor be respite for them
Your God is one God; there is no god other than He, the compassionate, ever-merciful
Creation of the heavens and the earth, alternation of night and day, and sailing of ships across the ocean with what is useful to man, and the rain that God sends from the sky enlivening the earth that was dead, and the scattering of beasts of all kinds upon it, and the changing of the winds, and the clouds which remain obedient between earth and sky, are surely signs for the wise
And yet there are men who take others as compeers of God, and bestow on them love due to God; but the love of the faithful for God is more intense. If only the wicked could see now the agony that they will behold (on the Day of Resurrection), they will know that to God belongs the power entirely'. And the punishment of God is severe
When those who were followed will disclaim those who followed them, and see the torment all ties between them shall be severed
And the followers will say: "Could we live but once again we would leave them as they have abandoned us now." God will show them thus their deeds, and fill them with remorse; but never shall they find release from the Fire
O men, eat only the things of the earth that are lawful and good. Do not walk in the footsteps of Satan, your acknowledged enemy
He will ask you to indulge in evil, indecency, and to speak lies of God you cannot even conceive
When it is said to them: "Follow what God has revealed," they reply: "No, we shall follow only what our fathers had practiced," -- even though their fathers had no wisdom or guidance
The semblance of the infidels is that of a man who shouts to one that cannot hear more than a call and a cry. They are deaf, dumb and blind, and they fail to understand
O believers, eat what is good of the food We have given you, and be grateful to God, if indeed you are obedient to Him
Forbidden to you are carrion and blood, and the flesh of the swine, and that which has been consecrated (or killed) in the name of any other than God. If one is obliged by necessity to eat it without intending to transgress, or reverting to it, he is not guilty of sin; for God is forgiving and kind
Those who conceal any part of the Scriptures that God has revealed, and thus make a little profit thereby, take nothing but fire as food; and God will not turn to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor nourish them for growth; and their doom will be painful
They are those who bartered away good guidance for error, and pardon for punishment: How great is their striving for the Fire
That is because God has revealed the Book containing the truth; but those who are at variance about it have gone astray in their contrariness
Piety does not lie in turning your face to East or West: Piety lies in believing in God, the Last Day and the angels, the Scriptures and the prophets, and disbursing your wealth out of love for God among your kin and the orphans, the wayfarers and mendicants, freeing the slaves, observing your devotional obligations, and in paying the zakat and fulfilling a pledge you have given, and being patient in hardship, adversity, and times of peril. These are the men who affirm the truth, and they are those who follow the straight path
O believers, ordained for you is retribution for the murdered, (whether) a free man (is guilty) of (the murder of) a free man, or a slave of a slave, or a woman of a woman. But he who is pardoned some of it by his brother should be dealt with equity, and recompense (for blood) paid with a grace. This is a concession from your Lord and a kindness. He who transgresses in spite of it shall suffer painful punishment
In retribution there is life (and preservation). O men of sense, you may haply take heed for yourselves
It is ordained that when any one of you nears death, and he owns goods and chattels, he should bequeath them equitably to his parents and next of kin. This is binding on those who are upright and fear God
And any one who changes the will, having heard it, shall be guilty and accountable; for God hears all and knows everything
He who suspects wrong or partiality on the part of the testator and brings about a settlement, does not incure any guilt, for God is verily forgiving and merciful
O believers, fasting is enjoined on you as it was on those before you, so that you might become righteous
Fast a (fixed) number of days, but if someone is ill or is travelling (he should complete) the number of days (he had missed); and those who find it hard to fast should expiate by feeding a poor person. For the good they do with a little hardship is better for men. And if you fast it is good for you, if you knew
Ramadan is the month in which the Qur'an was revealed as guidance to man and clear proof of the guidance, and criterion (of falsehood and truth). So when you see the new moon you should fast the whole month; but a person who is ill or travelling (and fails to do so) should fast on other days, as God wishes ease and not hardship for you, so that you complete the (fixed) number (of fasts), and give glory to God for the guidance, and be grateful
When My devotees enquire of you about Me, I am near, and answer the call of every supplicant when he calls. It behoves them to hearken to Me and believe in Me that they may follow the right path
You are allowed to sleep with your wives on the nights of the fast: They are your dress as you are theirs. God is aware you were cheating yourselves, so He turned to you and pardoned you. So now you may have intercourse with them, and seek what God has ordained for you. Eat and drink until the white thread of dawn appears clear from the dark line, then fast until the night falls; and abstain from your wives (when you have decided) to stay in the mosques for assiduous devotion. These are the bounds fixed by God, so keep well within them. So does God make His signs clear to men that they may take heed for themselves
And do not consume each other's wealth in vain, nor offer it to men in authority with intent of usurping unlawfully and knowingly a part of the wealth of others
They ask you of the new moons. Say: "These are periods set for men (to reckon) time, and for pilgrimage." Piety does not lie in entering the house through the back door, for the pious man is he who follows the straight path. Enter the house through the main gate, and obey God. You may haply find success
Fight those in the way of God who fight you, but do not be aggressive: God does not like aggressors
And fight those (who fight you) wheresoever you find them, and expel them from the place they had turned you out from. Oppression is worse than killing. Do not fight them by the Holy Mosque unless they fight you there. If they do, then slay them: Such is the requital for unbelievers
But if they desist, God is forgiving and kind
Fight them till sedition comes to end, and the law of God (prevails). If they desist, then cease to be hostile, except against those who oppress
(Fighting during) the holy month (if the sanctity) of the holy month (is violated) is (just) retribution. So if you are oppressed, oppress those who oppress you to the same degree, and fear God, and know that God is with those who are pious and follow the right path
Spend in the way of God, and do not seek destruction at your own hands. So do good for God loves those who do good
Perform the pilgrimage and holy visit ('Umra, to Makkah) in the service of God. But if you are prevented, send an offering which you can afford as sacrifice, and do not shave your heads until the offering has reached the place of sacrifice. But if you are sick or have ailment of the scalp (preventing the shaving of hair), then offer expiation by fasting or else giving alms or a sacrificial offering. When you have security, then those of you who wish to perform the holy visit along with the pilgrimage, should make a sacrifice according to their means. But he who has nothing, should fast for three days during the pilgrimage and seven on return, completing ten. This applies to him whose family does not live near the Holy Mosque. Have fear of God, and remember that God is severe in punishment
Known are the months of pilgrimage. If one resolves to perform the pilgrimage in these months, let him not indulge in concupiscence, sin or quarrel. And the good you do shall be known to God. Provide for the journey, and the best of provisions is piety. O men of understanding, obey Me
It is no sin to seek the favours of your Lord (by trading). When you start from 'Arafat in a concourse, remember God at the monument that is sacred (al-Mash'ar al-haram), and remember Him as He has shown you the way, for in the olden days you we're a people astray
Then move with the crowd impetuously, and pray God to forgive you your sins. God is surely forgiving and kind
When you have finished the rites and ceremonies, remember God as you do your fathers, in fact with a greater devotion. There are some who say: "Give us, O Lord, in the world;" but they will forego their share in the life to come
But some there are who pray: "Give us of good in the world, O Lord, and give us of good in the life to come, and suffer us not to suffer the torment of Hell
They are those who will surely have their share of whatsoever they have earned; for God is swift at the reckoning
Remember God during the stated days; but if a person comes away after two days, it will not be a sin; and if one tarries, he will not transgress, if he keep away from evil. Follow the law of God, and remember that you will have to gather before Him in the end
There is a man who talks well of the world to your pleasing, and makes God witness to what is in his heart, yet he is the most contentious
For when his back is turned he goes about spreading disorder in the land, destroying fields and flocks; but God does not love disorder
Whenever he is told: "Obey God," his arrogance leads him to more sin; and sufficient for him shall be Hell: How evil a place of wide expanse
And there is a man who is willing to sell even his soul to win the favour of God; and God is compassionate to His creatures
O believers, come to full submission to God. Do not follow in the footsteps of Satan your acknowledged foe
If you falter even after Our signs have reached you, then do not forget that God is all-powerful and all-wise
Are they waiting for God to appear in the balconies of clouds with a host of angels, and the matter to be settled? But all things rest with God in the end
Ask the children of Israel how many a clear sign We had given them. But if one changes the favour of God after having received it, then remember, God is severe in revenge
Enamoured are the unbelievers of the life of this world, and scoff at the faithful. But those who keep from evil and follow the straight path will have a higher place than they on the Day of Reckoning; for God gives in measure without number whomsoever He will
Men belonged to a single community, and God sent them messengers to give them happy tidings and warnings, and sent the Book with them containing the truth to judge between them in matters of dispute; but only those who received it differed after receiving clear proofs, on account of waywardness (and jealousies) among them. Then God by His dispensation showed those who believed the way to the truth about which they were differing; for God shows whom He please the path that is straight
Do you think you will find your way to Paradise even though you have not known what the others before you have gone through? They had suffered affliction and loss, and were shaken and tossed about so that even the Apostle had to cry out with his followers: "When will the help of God arrive?" Remember, the help of God is ever at hand
They ask you of what they should give in charity. Tell them: "What you can spare of your wealth as should benefit the parents, the relatives, the orphans, the needy, the wayfarers, for God is not unaware of the good deeds that you do
Enjoined on you is fighting, and this you abhor. You may dislike a thing yet it may be good for you; or a thing may haply please you but may be bad for you. Only God has knowledge, and you do not know
They ask you of war in the holy month. Tell them: "To fight in that month is a great sin. But a greater sin in the eyes of God is to hinder people from the way of God, and not to believe in Him, and to bar access to the Holy Mosque and turn people out of its precincts; and oppression is worse than killing. They will always seek war against you till they turn you away from your faith, if they can. But those of you who turn back on their faith and die disbelieving will have wasted their deeds in this world and the next. They are inmates of Hell, and shall there abide for ever
Surely those who believe, and those who leave their homes and fight in the way of God, may hope for His benevolence, for God is forgiving and kind
They ask you of (intoxicants,) wine and gambling. Tell them: "There is great enervation though profit in them for men; but their enervation is greater than benefit. And they ask you what they should give. Tell them: "The utmost you can spare." So does God reveal His signs: You may haply reflect
On this world and the next. And they ask you about the orphans. Tell them: "Improving their lot is much better; and if you take interest in their affairs, they are your brethren; and God is aware who are corrupt and who are honest; and if He had pleased He could surely have imposed on you hardship, for God is all-powerful and all-wise
Do not marry idolatrous women unless they join the faith. A maid servant who is a believer is better than an idolatress even though you may like her. And do not marry your daughters to idolaters until they accept the faith. A servant who is a believer is better than an idolater even though you may like him. They invite you to Hell, but God calls you to Paradise and pardon by His grace. And He makes His signs manifest that men may haply take heed
They ask you about menstruation. Tell them: "This is a period of stress. So keep away from women in this state till they are relieved of it. When they are free of it, you may go to them as God has enjoined. For God loves those who seek pardon, and those who are clean
Women are like fields for you; so seed them as you intend, but plan the future in advance. And fear God, and remember, you have to face Him in the end. So convey glad tidings to those who believe
Do not implicate God in your oaths to avoid doing good and being pious and keeping peace among men, for God hears all and knows everything
God will not call you to account for that which is senseless in your oaths, but only for what is in your hearts; for God is forgiving and forbearing
Those who swear to keep away from their wives (with intent of divorcing them) have four months of grace; then if they reconcile (during this period), surely God is forgiving and kind
And if they are bent on divorce, God hears all and knows everything
Women who are divorced have to wait for three monthly periods, and if they believe in God and the Last Day they must not hide unlawfully what God has formed within their wombs. Their husbands would do well to take them back in that case, if they wish to be reconciled. Women also have recognised rights as men have, though men have an edge over them. But God is all-mighty and all-wise
Divorce is (revokable) two times (after pronouncement), after which (there are two ways open for husbands), either (to) keep (the wives) honourably, or part with them in a decent way. You are not allowed to take away the least of what you have given your wives, unless both of you fear that you would not be able to keep within the limits set by God. If you fear you cannot maintain the bounds fixed by God, there will be no blame on either if the woman redeems herself. Do not exceed the limits of God, for those who exceed the bounds set by God are transgressors
If a man divorces her again (a third time), she becomes unlawful for him (and he cannot remarry her) until she has married another man. Then if he divorces her there is no harm if the two unite again if they think they will keep within the bounds set by God and made clear for those who understand
When you have divorced your wives, and they have reached the end of the period of waiting, then keep them honourably (by revoking the divorce), or let them go with honour, and do not detain them with the intent of harassing lest you should transgress. He who does so will wrong himself. Do not mock the decrees of God, and remember the favours God has bestowed on you, and revealed to you the Book and the Law to warn you of the consequences of doing wrong. Have fear of God, and remember, God is cognisant of everything
When you have divorced your wives and they have completed the fixed term (of waiting), do not stop them from marrying other men if it is agreed between them honourably. This warning is for those among you who believe in God and the Last Day. This is both proper and right for you, for God knows and you do not know
The mothers should suckle their babies for a period of two years for those (fathers) who wish that they should complete the suckling, in which case they should feed them and clothe them in a befitting way; but no soul should be compelled beyond capacity, neither the mother made to suffer for the child nor the father for his offspring. The same holds good for the heir of the father (if he dies). If they wish to wean the child by mutual consent there is no harm. And if you wish to engage a wet nurse you may do so if you pay her an agreed amount as is customary. But fear God, and remember that God sees all that you do
Wives of men who die among you should wait (after their husbands death) for four months and ten days; and when the term is over there is no sin if they do what they like with themselves honourably, for God is aware of all that you do
There is no harm in proposing in secret to (any of) these women, or keeping the intention to yourself: God is aware that you will keep them in mind. Yet do not make a promise in secret, unless you speak in a manner that is proper; and do not resolve upon marriage till the fixed term of waiting is over. Remember that God knows what is in your hearts; so be fearful of Him, and remember that God is forgiving and forbearing
There is no sin in divorcing your wives before the consummation of marriage or settling the dowry; but then provide adequately for them, the affluent according to their means, the poor in accordance with theirs as is befitting. This is surely the duty of those who do good
And if you divorce them before the consummation of marriage, but after settling the dowry, then half the settled dowry must be paid, unless the woman forgoes it, or the person who holds the bond of marriage pays the full amount. And if the man pays the whole, it is nearer to piety. But do not forget to be good to each other, and remember that God sees all that you do
Be wakeful of your service of prayer, and the midmost service; and honour God by standing before Him in devotion
If you fear (war or danger), pray while standing or on horseback; but when you have safety again remember God, for He taught you what you did not know
Those among you about to die leaving wives behind, should bequeath a year's maintenance and lodging for them, without expelling them from home. But if they leave (of their own accord), you will not be blamed for what they do with themselves in their own rights. God is all-mighty and all-wise
Making a fair provision for women who are divorced is the duty of those who are God-fearing and pious
So does God pronounce His decrees that you may understand
Have you never thought of men who went out of their homes as a measure of safety against death, and they were thousands, to whom God said: "Die," then restored them to life? Indeed God bestows His blessings on men; only most men are not grateful
Fight in the way of God, and remember that God hears all and knows everything
Who will give a goodly loan to God which He might double many times? For God withholds and enlarges, and to Him you will return
Have you thought of the elders of Israel after Moses, and how they said to their apostle: "Set up a king for us, then we shall fight in the way of God?" He replied: "This too is possible that when commanded to fight you may not fight at all." They said: "How is it we should not fight in the way of God when we have been driven from our homes and deprived of our Sons?" But when they were ordered to fight they turned away, except for a few; yet God knows the sinners
And when their prophet said to them: "God has raised Saul king over you," they said: "How can he be king over us when we have greater right to kingship than he, for he does not even possess abundant wealth?" "God has chosen him in preference to you," said the prophet "and given him much more wisdom and prowess; and God gives authority to whomsoever He will: God is infinite and all-wise
Their prophet said to them: "The sign of his kingship will be that you will come to have a heart full of peace and tranquility from your Lord and the legacy left by Moses' and Aaron's family supported by angels. This shall be a token for you if you really believe
When Saul led his armies, he said: "God will test you by a stream. Whoever drinks its water will not be of me; but those who do not drink shall be on my side. The only exception will be those who scoop up a palmful of water with their hands." And but for a few they all drank of its water. When they had crossed it, and those who believed with him, they said: "We have no strength to combat Goliath and his forces today. But those who believed they have to face their Lord, said: "Many a time has a small band defeated a large horde by the will of God. God is with those who are patient (and persevere)
And when they were facing Goliath and his hordes they prayed: "O Lord, give us endurance and steady our steps, and help us against the deniers of truth
By the will of God they defeated them, and David killed Goliath, and God gave him kingship and wisdom, and taught him whatsoever He pleased. If God did not make men deter one another this earth would indeed be depraved. But gracious is God to the people of the world
These are the messages of God. We recite them to you in all truth, as indeed you are one of the apostles
Of all these apostles We have favoured some over the others. God has addressed some of them, and the stations of some have been exalted over the others. And to Jesus, son of Mary, We gave tokens, and reinforced him with divine grace. If God had so willed those who came after them would never have contended when clear signs had come to them. But dissensions arose, some believed, some denied. And if God had willed they would never have fought among themselves. But God does whatsoever He please
O believers, expend of what We have given you before the day arrives on which there will be no barter, and no friendship or intercession matter, and those who are disbelievers will be sinners
God: There is no god but He, the living, eternal, self-subsisting, ever sustaining. Neither does somnolence affect Him nor sleep. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth: and who can intercede with Him except by His leave? Known to Him is all that is present before men and what is hidden (in time past and time future), and not even a little of His knowledge can they grasp except what He will. His seat extends over heavens and the earth, and He tires not protecting them: He alone is all high and supreme
There is no compulsion in matter of faith. Distinct is the way of guidance now from error. He who turns away from the forces of evil and believes in God, will surely hold fast to a handle that is strong and unbreakable, for God hears all and knows everything
God is the friend of those who believe, and leads them out of darkness into light; but the patrons of infidels are idols and devils who lead them from light into darkness. They are the residents of Hell, and will there for ever abide
Have you thought of the man who argued with Abraham about his Lord because God had given him a kingdom? When Abraham said: "My Lord is the giver of life and death," he replied: "I am the giver of life and death." And Abraham said: "God makes the sun rise from the East; so you make it rise from the West," and dumbfounded was the infidel. God does not guide those who are unjust
Or take the man who passed by a town which lay destroyed upside down. He said: "How can God restore this city now that it is destroyed?" So God made him die for a hundred years, then brought him back to life, and inquired: "How long did you stay in this state?" "A day or less than a day," he replied. "No," He said, "you were dead a hundred years, yet look at your victuals, they have not decomposed; and look at your ass! We shall make you a warning for men. And regard the bones, how We raise them and clothe them with flesh." When this became clear to him, the man said: "Indeed God has power over all things
Remember, when Abraham said: "O Lord, show me how you raise the dead," He said: "What! Do you not believe?" "I do," answered Abraham. "I only ask for my heart's assurance." (The Lord) said: "Trap four birds and tame them, then put each of them on a (separate) hill, and call them, and they will come flying to you. Know that God is all-powerful and all-wise
The semblance of those who expend their wealth in the way of God is that of a grain of corn from which grow seven ears, each ear containing a hundred grains. Truly God increases for whomsoever He will, for God is infinite and all-wise
Those who spend in the way of God, and having spent do not boast or give pain (by word or deed), will get their reward from their Lord, and will neither have fear nor regret
Saying a word that is kind, and forgiving is better than charity that hurts. (Do not forget that) God is affluent and kind
O believers, do not nullify your charity by giving to oblige and flaunting (your favours) like a man who spends of his wealth only to show off, but does not believe in God and the Last Day. His semblance is that of a rock covered with earth which is washed away by rain exposing the hard rock bare. So they gain nothing from their earnings. God does not guide a people who do not believe
But the semblance of those who expend their wealth to please God with firm and resolute hearts, is like a garden on a height on which the rain falls and it yields its fruits twice as much; and even if the rain does not fall the dew will suffice. For God sees all that you do
Does any of you wish to have an orchard full of date-palm trees and vines, and streams of running water and fruits of all kinds, and then old age should overtake him while his children are small, and a scorching whirlwind should smite and burn it down? Thus God makes His signs clear to you that you may reflect
O believers, give in charity what is good of the things you have earned, and of what you produce from the earth; and do not choose to give what is bad as alms, that is, things you would not like to accept yourself except with some condescension. Remember that God is affluent and praiseworthy
Satan threatens you with want, and orders you (to commit) shameful acts. But God promises His pardon and grace, for God is bounteous and all-knowing
He gives wisdom to whomsoever He please; and those who are bestowed wisdom get good in abundance. Yet none remembers this save men of wisdom
Whatsoever you give away in alms or vow as offering, is all known to God; but the wicked will have none to help them
If you give alms openly, it is well; but if you do it secretly and give to the poor, that is better. This will absolve you of some of your sins; and God is cognisant of all you do
It is not for you to guide them: God guides whom He will. Whatever you spend you will do so for yourself, for you will do so to seek the way that leads to God; and what you spend in charity you will get back in full, and no wrong will be done to you
(Give to) the needy who are engaged in the service of God who are not able to move about in the land, whom the ignorant consider to be affluent as they refrain from asking. You can know them from their faces for they do not ask of men importunately. God is surely cognisant of good things that you spend
Those who spend of their wealth in the way of God, day and night, in secret or openly, have their reward with their Lord, and have nothing to fear or regret
Those who live on usury will not rise (on Doomsday) but like a man possessed of the devil and demented. This because they say that trading is like usury. But trade has been sanctioned and usury forbidden by God. Those who are warned by their Lord and desist will keep (what they have taken of interest) already, and the matter will rest with God. But those who revert to it again are the residents of Hell where they will abide for ever
God takes away (gain) from usury, but adds (profit) to charity; and God does not love the ungrateful and sinners
Those who believe and do good deeds, and fulfil their devotional obligations and pay the zakat, have their reward with their Lord, and will have neither fear nor regret
O believers, fear God and forego the interest that is owing, if you really believe
If you do not, beware of war on the part of God and His Apostle. But if you repent, you shall keep your principal. Oppress none and no one will oppress you
If a debtor is in want, give him time until his circumstances improve; but if you forego (the debt) as charity, that will be to your good, if you really understand
Have fear of the day when you go back to God. Then each will be paid back in full his reward, and no one will be wronged
O believers, when you negotiate a debt for a fixed term, draw up an agreement in writing, though better it would be to have a scribe write it faithfully down; and no scribe should refuse to write as God has taught him, and write what the borrower dictates, and have fear of God, his Lord, and not leave out a thing. If the borrower is deficient of mind or infirm, or unable to explain, let the guardian explain judiciously; and have two of your men to act as witnesses; but if two men are not available, then a man and two women you approve, so that in case one of them is confused the other may prompt her. When the witnesses are summoned they should not refuse (to come). But do not neglect to draw up a contract, big or small, with the time fixed for paying back the debt. This is more equitable in the eyes of God, and better as evidence and best for avoiding doubt. But if it is a deal about some merchandise requiring transaction face to face, there is no harm if no (contract is drawn up) in writing. Have witnesses to the deal, (and make sure) that the scribe or the witness is not harmed. If he is, it would surely be sinful on your part. And have fear of God, for God gives you knowledge, and God is aware of everything
If you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, pledge your goods (against the Loan); and if one trusts the other, then let him who is trusted deliver the thing entrusted, and have fear of God, his Lord. Do not suppress any evidence, for he who conceals evidence is sinful of heart; and God is aware of all you do
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; and whether you reveal what is in your heart or conceal it, you will have to account for it to God who will pardon whom He please and punish whom He will, for God has the power over all things
The Prophet believes in what has been revealed to him by his Lord, and so do the faithful. Each one believes in God and His angels, His Books and the prophets, and We make no distinction between the apostles. For they say: "We hear and obey, and we seek Your forgiveness, O Lord, for to You we shall journey in the end
God does not burden a soul beyond capacity. Each will enjoy what (good) he earns, as indeed each will suffer from (the wrong) he does. Punish us not, O Lord, if we fail to remember or lapse into error. Burden us not, O Lord, with a burden as You did those before us. Impose not upon us a burden, O Lord, we cannot carry. Overlook our trespasses and forgive us, and have mercy upon us; You are our Lord and Master, help us against the clan of unbelievers
ALIF LAM MIM
God: there is no god but He, the living, eternal, self-subsisting, ever sustaining
He has verily revealed to you this Book, in truth and confirmation of the Books revealed before, as indeed He had revealed the Torah and the Gospel
Before this as guidance for men, and has sent the criterion (of falsehood and truth). As for those who deny the signs of God, the punishment is severe; for God is all powerful and great His requital
There is nothing in the earth and the heavens that is hidden from God
He shapes you in the womb of the mother as He wills. There is no god but He, the all-mighty and all-wise
He has sent down this Book which contains some verses that are categorical and basic to the Book, and others allegorical. But those who are twisted of mind look for verses metaphorical, seeking deviation and giving to them interpretations of their own; but none knows their meaning except God; and those who are steeped in knowledge affirm: "We believe in them as all of them are from the Lord." But only those who have wisdom understand
Let us not go astray, O Lord, having guided us already. Bestow on us Your blessings for You are the benevolent
You will gather mankind together, O Lord, on a day that is certain to come, and God does not fail in His promise
As for those who deny, neither their wealth nor their children will help them in the least against God. They shall be but faggots for (the fire of) Hell
Like the people of the Pharaoh, and those before them, who rejected Our signs, and were punished for their sins by God; and the punishment of God is severe
So tell the disbelievers: "You will surely be subdued and driven to Hell: How bad a preparation
There was a token for you in the two armies which clashed (in the battle of Badr), one fighting for God, the other of unbelievers who saw with their own eyes the faithful to be two times as many as they, for God reinforces with His help whomsoever He will. In this is a lesson for those who have eyes
Enamoured are the people of the lust of (earthly) pleasures, of women and of children and hoarded heaps of gold and silver, well-bred horses, and tilled land and cattle, all (vain) goods and chattels of the life of this world, while the best of abodes is with God
Say: "Shall I tell you of (things) even better? With the Lord are gardens with running streams of water for those who keep from evil and follow the straight path, where they will live unchanged with the purest of companions and blessings of God." And under God's eyes are devotees
who say: "O Lord, we believe; forgive our trespasses and save us the torment of Hell
They are the patient, the sincere and devout, full of charity, who pray for forgiveness in the hours of dawn
God is witness there is no god but He, and so are the angels and men full of learning. He is the upholder of justice. There is no god but He, the mighty and all-wise
The true way with God is peace; and the people of the Book did not differ until knowledge (of this revelation) had come to them, out of mutual opposition. But those who deny the signs of God (should remember) He is swift in the reckoning
Even then if they argue, tell them: "I have bowed in submission to God, and so have my followers." And tell the people of the Book and the Arabs: "Do you submit?" If they do, they will find the right path; if they turn away, your duty is to deliver the message. And God keeps an eye on His votaries
To those who deny the signs of God, and slay the apostles unjustly, and slay the upholders of justice, give news of painful punishment
Their good deeds will be wasted in this world and in the next, and none will they have to help them
Have you not seen the people who have received a part of Revelation who are called to the Book of God that it may judge (in their disputes) between them? But some, being averse turn away
For they say: "The Fire will not touch us for more than a few days." They have been deceived by the lies they have themselves fabricated, and stray from their faith
How shall it be when We gather them together on a day that is certain to come, when each will receive his reward without (favour or) wrong
Say: "O Lord of all dominions, You give whom it pleases You the kingdom, and You take away the power from whosoever You will; You exalt whom You please and debase whom You will. All goodness is Yours (entirely). Indeed You have the power over all things
You make the night succeed the day, the day succeed the night, raise the living from the dead, the dead from the living, and give whomsoever You please, and in measure without number
Those who believe should not take unbelievers as their friends in preference to those who believe -- and whoever does so should have no (expectations) of God -- unless to safeguard yourselves against them. But God commands you to beware of Him, for to God you will journey in the end
Say: "Whether you conceal or reveal whatsoever is in your hearts it is all known to God, as is known to Him all that is in the heavens and the earth; and God has the power over all things
On the day when every man will find whatever of good he has earned and of evil, and is confronted with it, he shall wish that a distance appeared between him and that day -- (that it were far away). God bids you beware of Him, though compassionate is God to His votaries
Say: "If you love God then follow me that God may love you and forgive your faults; for God is forgiving and kind
Say: "Obey God and His Messenger;" and if they refuse (then remember) God does not love disbelievers
God had chosen Adam and Noah and the families of Abraham and 'Imran in preference to others
They were descendants of one another; and God hears all and knows everything
Remember, when the wife of 'Imran prayed: "O Lord, I offer what I carry in my womb in dedication to Your service, accept it, for You hear all and know everything
And when she had given birth to the child, she said: "O Lord, I have delivered but a girl." -- But God knew better what she had delivered: A boy could not be as that girl was. "I have named her Mary," (she said), "and I give her into Your keeping. Preserve her and her children from Satan the ostracized
Her Lord accepted her graciously, and she grew up with excellence, and was given into the care of Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah came to see her in the chamber, he found her provided with food, and he asked: "Where has this come from, O Mary?" And she said: "From God who gives food in abundance to whomsoever He will
Then prayed Zachariah to his Lord: "O Lord, bestow on me offspring, virtuous and good, for You answer all prayers
Then the angels said to him as he stood in the chamber at prayer: "God sends you good tidings of John who will confirm a thing from God and be noble, continent, and a prophet, and one of those who are upright and do good
How can I have a son, O Lord," he said, "for I am old and my wife is barren?" "Thus," came the answer, "God does as He wills
And Zachariah said: "Give me a token, O Lord." "The token will be," was the reply, "that you will speak to no man for three days except by signs; and remember your Lord much, and pray at evening and sunrise
The angels said: "O Mary, indeed God has favoured you and made you immaculate, and chosen you from all the women of the world
So adore your Lord, O Mary, and pay homage and bow with those who bow in prayer
This is news of the Unknown that We send you, for you were not there when they cast lots with quills (to determine) who should take care of Mary, nor when they disputed it
When the angels said: "O Mary, God gives you news of a thing from Him, for rejoicing, (news of one) whose name will be Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, illustrious in this world and the next, and one among the honoured
Who will speak to the people when in the cradle and when in the prime of life, and will be among the upright and doers of good
She said: "How can I have a son, O Lord, when no man has touched me?" He said: "That is how God creates what He wills. When He decrees a thing, He says 'Be', and it is
He will teach him the Law and the judgement, and the Torah and the Gospel
And he will be Apostle to the children of Israel, (saying:) 'I have come to you with a prodigy from your Lord that I will fashion the state of destiny out of mire for you, and breathe (a new spirit) into it, and (you) will rise by the will of God. I will heal the blind and the leper, and infuse life into the dead, by the leave of God. I will tell you what you devour and what you hoard in your homes. In this will be a portent for you if you do believe
I (have come to) confirm the truth of the Torah which was sent down before me, and make certain things lawful which have been forbidden until now; and I come to you with a sign from your Lord; so be fearful of God and follow me
Surely God is my Lord, and your Lord, so worship Him; and this is the right path
When Jesus perceived their unbelief he asked: "Who will help me in the way of God?" "We," the disciples answered, "shall be the helpers of God. We believe in God; and you be our witness that we submit and obey
O Lord, we believe in Your revelations and follow this Apostle. Enroll us among the witnesses
But they (the unbelievers) contrived a plot, and God did the like; and God's plan is the best
When God said: "O Jesus, I will take you to Myself and exalt you, and rid you of the infidels, and hold those who follow you above those who disbelieve till the Day of Resurrection. You have then to come back to Me when I will judge between you in what you were at variance
Those who are infidels will surely receive severe punishment both in this world and the next; and none will they have to help (or save) them
But those who believe and do good deeds shall be given their recompense in full; but God does not love the unjust
These verses that We read to you are signs and reminder full of wisdom
For God the likeness of Jesus is as that of Adam whom He fashioned out of dust and said "Be" and he was
This is the truth from your Lord, so do not be in doubt
Tell those who dispute this with you even after the knowledge that has reached you: "Come, let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, and pray and solicit God to condemn those who lie
And this verily is the true account. There is no god but God, and God is all-mighty and all-wise
If they turn away (remember) God knows the mischief-mongers
Tell them: "O people of the Book, let us come to an agreement on that which is common between us, that we worship no one but God, and make none His compeer, and that none of us take any others for lord apart from God." If they turn away you tell them: "Bear witness that we submit to Him
O people of the Book, why dispute about Abraham? The Torah and the Gospel were sent down after him: Do you not understand
Remember you are those who disputed the things you knew; so wherefore dispute about things you do not know? And God has the knowledge, while you do not know
Neither was Abraham a Jew nor a Christian, but upright and obedient, and not an idolater
Of all men the nearest to Abraham are those who follow him, and then this Prophet and the faithful; and God is the protector of all believers
Some among the people of the Book wish to lead you astray, yet they lead none astray but themselves, though they do not realise
O people of the Book, why do you disbelieve the signs of God having witnessed them yourselves
O people of the Book, why do you mix the false with the true, and hide the truth knowingly
A section of the people of the Book say: "Believe in the morning what has been revealed to the faithful, and deny in the evening; they might perhaps turn back
And do not believe those who do not belong to your faith." Say: "True guidance is the guidance of God -- that any may be given the like of what has been given you." Will they argue with you before your Lord? Say: "God's is the bounty. He gives whomsoever He please, for He is infinite and all-wise
He may choose whom He likes for His favours, for great is His bounty
There are some among the people of the Book who return a whole treasure entrusted to them; yet some there are who do not give back a dinar until you demand and insist, because they say: "It is not a sin for us to (usurp) the rights of the Arabs." Yet they lie against God, and they know it
But certainly whoever keeps his promise and follows the right path (will be blessed), for God loves those who shun evil and follow the right course
Those who trade on the promises of God, and who purchase a little gain from their oaths, will have no share in the life to come. God will not address or even regard them on the Day of Resurrection, nor perfect them, and their suffering will be painful
Among them is a section which distorts in reading the Scripture in a way that though it sounds like the Scripture, in fact it is not; yet they say it is from God, when they know it is not; and they lie about God, and knowingly
It is not for a mortal to whom God reveals the Book and the judgement and the prophethood to say to the people: "Be my votaries instead of God's," but (to say): "Become learned in divine law, by virtue of teaching and studying the Book
He will surely not bid you make the angels and the prophets your lords. Would he order you disbelief after you have submitted (and accepted the law of God)
Remember when God covenanted the prophets (and said): "If after I have given you the Law and the judgement there comes an apostle to you who confirms the truth already with you, you will surely believe him and help him;" and asked: "Do you accept and agree to the terms of My covenant?" They said: "We accept." "Then you be witness," said God, "and I shall be witness with you
Then any one who turns away will be a transgressor
Do they seek another way than God's? But whosoever is in the heavens and the earth is submissive to God and obedient (to Him), by choice or constraint, and will be returned to Him
Say: "We believe in God, and in what has been revealed to us, and in what had been sent down to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and their offspring, and what had been revealed to Moses and to Jesus and to all other prophets by their Lord. We make no distinction between them, and we submit to Him and obey
And whoever seeks a way other than submission to God, it will not be accepted from him, and he will be a loser in the world to come
How can God show the way to those who, having come to faith, turned away, even though they had borne witness that the Messenger was true, and the clear signs had reached them? God does not show the unrighteous the way
For such the requital is the curse of God and the angels and of men
They shall live under it, and none of their agony decrease nor be respite for them
But those who repent and reform, God is surely forgiving and merciful
Those who deny, having once come to faith, and persist in denial, will not have their repentance accepted, for they have gone astray
From those who deny and die disbelieving will never be accepted an earthful of gold if proferred by them as ransom. For them is grievous punishment, and none will help them
You will never come to piety unless you spend of things you love; and whatever you spend is known to God
To the children of Israel was lawful all food except what Israel forbade himself before the Torah was revealed. Say: "Bring the Torah and recite it, if what you say is true
And anyone who fabricates lies about God even after this, is wicked indeed
Say: "God has veritably spoken the truth. So now follow the way of Abraham the upright, who was not of idolaters
The first House of God to be set up for men was at Bakkah the blessed, a guidance for the people of the world
It contains clear signs, and the spot where Abraham had stood. And anyone who enters it will find security. And whosoever can afford should visit the House on a pilgrimage as duty to God. Whosoever denies, should remember that God is independent of the peoples of the world
Say: "O people of the Book, why do you reject the word of God when God is a witness to all that you do
Then say: "O people of the Book, why do you turn the believers away from the path of God, looking for obliquities in the way when you are witness to it? And God is aware of all that you do
O believers, if you follow what some of the people of the Book say, it will turn you into unbelievers even after you have come to belief
And how can you disbelieve? To you are being recited the messages of God, and His prophet is among you. And whosoever holds fast to God shall verily be guided to the path that is straight
O believers, fear God as He should be feared, and do not die but submitting (to Him)
Hold on firmly together to the rope of God, and be not divided among yourselves, and remember the favours God bestowed on you when you were one another's foe and He reconciled your hearts, and you turned into brethren through His grace. You had stood on the edge of a pit of fire and He saved you from it, thus revealing to you His clear signs that you may find the right way perchance
So let there be a body among you who may call to the good, enjoin what is esteemed and forbid what is odious. They are those who will be successful
So be not like those who became disunited and differed among themselves after clear proofs had come to them. For them is great suffering
On the Day when some faces would be bright, and some others will be black (with despair), those with black faces (will be told): "Having come to the faith you denied it; now taste therefore the penalty for you disbelieved
And those with bright faces shall be under God's grace and enjoy it for ever
These are the commandments of God We recite to you verily; God does not wish injustice to the creatures of the world
For to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth, and to God do all things return
Of all the communities raised among men you are the best, enjoining the good, forbidding the wrong, and believing in God. If the people of the Book had come to believe it was best for them; but only some believe, and transgressors are many
They will do you no harm but annoyance; and if they fight you they will only turn their backs, then no help will reach them
Degraded they shall live wheresoever they be unless they make an alliance with God and alliance with men, for they have incurred the anger of God, and misery overhangs them. That is because they denied the signs of God and killed the prophets unjustly, and rebelled, and went beyond the limit
Yet all of them are not alike. Among the people of the Book is a section upright, who recite the scriptures in the hours of the night and bow in adoration and pray
And believe in God and the Last Day, and enjoin what is good and forbid what is wrong, and who hasten to give in charity: they are among the upright and the doers of good
And the good they do will not go unaccepted; for God is aware of those who keep away from evil
As for those who disbelieve, neither wealth nor children will avail them in the least against God. They are the residents of Hell where they will live for ever
What they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites and destroys the crops of a people who had wronged themselves. God did not wrong them, they wronged themselves
O believers, do not make others except your own people your confidants. They will spare no effort to ruin you: They surely desire your annihilation. Hate is on their tongues, and what they hide in their hearts is worse. We have shown you the signs if you have sense
Just think! You hold them as your friends but they do not, even though you believe in all the Scriptures. When they meet you they say: "We believe;" but when they are alone they bite their fingers in rage. Say: "Die of your rage. God is aware of the secrets of the hearts
If good comes your way, they are vexed; but if evil befalls you they are pleased and rejoice; yet if you are patient and guard yourselves against evil, their cunning will not harm you in the least, for whatsoever they do is well within the reach of God
Remember when you set forth in the morning from your house assigning the faithful positions for the battle, God heard everything and knew all
When two of your bands were about to lose heart God befriended them; and in Him should the faithful place their trust
For God had helped you during the Battle of Badr at a time when you were helpless. So act in compliance with the laws of God; you may well be grateful
Remember when you said to the faithful: "Is it not sufficient that your Lord should send for your help three thousand angels from the heavens
Indeed if you are patient and take heed for yourselves, and the (enemy) come rushing at you suddenly your Lord will send even five thousand angels on chargers sweeping down
And God did not do so but as good tidings for you, and to reassure your hearts for victory comes from God alone, the all-mighty and all-wise
In order that He may cut off a part of unbelievers or overthrow them, and they turn back in frustration
You have no say in the matter if He pardon them or punish them, for they are unjust
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth: He may pardon whom He please and punish whom He will. Yet God is forgiving and kind
O you who believe, do not practice usury, charging doubled and redoubled (interest); but have fear of God: you may well attain your goal
Keep away from the Fire prepared for the infidels
Obey God and the Prophet, that you may be treated with mercy
And hasten for the pardon of your Lord, and for Paradise extending over the heavens and the earth, laid out for those who take heed for themselves and fear God
Who expend both in joy and tribulation, who suppress their anger and pardon their fellowmen; and God loves those who are upright and do good
And those who, if they commit a shameful act or some wrong against themselves, remember God and seek forgiveness for their sins: For who can forgive except God? They should not be perverse about their doings, knowingly
Their recompense is pardon by their Lord, and gardens with streams of running water where they will abide for ever. How fair is the recompense of those who act
There have been many dispensations before you; so travel in the land and see what befell those who denied the truth
This is a clear declaration for mankind, and a guidance and a warning for those who preserve themselves from evil
So do not lose heart or be grieved, for you will surely prevail if you are believers
If you have been wounded they too have suffered a wound. We cause this alternation of night and day in the affairs of men so that God may know those who believe, taking some as witness (of truth) from your ranks, for God does not like those who are unjust
This is so that God may try the faithful and destroy the unbelievers
Do you think you will go to Paradise while God does not know who among you strive and persist
You had wished to know death before you faced it (in battle); so now you have seen it before your own eyes
Muhammad is only a messenger; and many a messenger has gone before him. So what if he dies or is killed! Will you turn back and go away in haste? But he who turns back and goes away in haste will do no harm to God. But God will reward those who give thanks (and are grateful)
No one can die before his appointed term except in accordance with the law of God. And to him who desires a reward in this world, We shall give it; and to him who desires a reward in the life to come, We shall do that. We shall certainly reward those who are grateful
Many a seeker after God has fought in the way of God by the side of many an apostle, undaunted (by disaster), and did not disgrace themselves; -- verily God loves those who are steadfast
Nor did they say aught but: "O our Lord, forgive us our sins and excesses in our acts, and steady our steps, and help us against unbelieving people
So God rewarded them in this world, and a better reward awaits them in the next; for God loves those who do good
O believers, if you listen to the infidels they will make you turn your backs, and you will be the losers
But God is your protector, and He is the best of helpers
We shall strike terror into the hearts of unbelievers for ascribing compeers to God for which He has sent down no sanction. Hell is their residence, the evil abode of the unjust
The promise made to you by God was verified when you destroyed (the foe) by His leave, until you were unmanned and disputed the order, and thus disobeyed (the Apostle) even after He had brought you in sight of (victory) you longed for. Some of you desired this world, and some of you the next. Then He put you to flight before (them) in order to try you. But (now) He has forgiven you, for surely God is kind to the faithful
Remember, as you were rushing up (the hill) without turning back to look, though the Prophet was calling you from the rear, He requited you with anguish for an anguish that you do not fret for missed opportunity and what befell you, for God is aware of all that you do
Then after affliction He Sent you a drowsiness as comes after security, overwhelming some among you, and making some anxious for themselves, and made them think thoughts of pagan ignorance; and they said: "Have we a say in any affair?" Say: "All affairs rest with God." They hide in their hearts what they do not disclose to you. They say: "If we had a say in the affair we would not have been killed in this place." Tell them: "Even had you stayed at home, those of you who were ordained to fight would have gone to their place of (eternal) rest. God had to try them to bring out what they concealed in their breasts, and to bring out the secrets of their hearts, for God knows your innermost thoughts
All those among you who turned their backs on the day the two armies clashed (at 'Uhud) were surely induced by Satan to fail in their duty because of their sinful deeds. But God has already forgiven them, for God is forgiving and kind
O you who believe, do not be like those who deny, and say of their brethren (who died) travelling in the land or fighting: "Had they stayed with us here they would not have died or been killed." This happened so that God may fill their hearts with grief. God is the giver of life and death and sees all that you do
If you are killed in the cause of God or you die, the forgiveness and mercy of God are better than all that you amass
And if you die or are killed, even so it is to God that you will return
It was through God's mercy that you dealt with them gently; for had you been stern and hard of heart they would surely have broken away from you. So pardon them and pray that forgiveness be theirs, and seek their counsel in all affairs, And when you have come to a decision place your trust in God alone, for He loves those who place their trust in Him
If God is there to help you none will overcome you; and if He forsake you, who will help you other than Him? So only in God should the faithful place their trust
It is not for a prophet to be false; and whoever is false will indeed bring his falsehood with him on the Day of Reckoning when each will receive his reward without favour or wrong
Is a man who has followed the pleasure of God the same as he who has incurred His wrath, whose abode is surely Hell, a dreadful place
There are different ranks with God, And God sees everything you do
God has favoured the faithful by sending an apostle to them from among themselves, who recites to them His messages, and reforms and teaches them the Law and the judgement, for they were clearly in error before
How is it that when misfortune befell you, you said: "Where has this come from?" -- even though you had inflicted disaster twice as great on (the enemy). Say: "This has come from your own selves." Surely God has power over all things
What you suffered on the day the two armies had met was by God's dispensation, so that He may distinguish the faithful
And may distinguish the hypocrites who were told: "Fight in the way of God, or defend yourselves," and who had replied: "If we knew of the fight we would have followed you." They were nearer unbelief than faith on that day, and they said with their tongues what was not in their hearts; but God is aware of what they hide
To those who sit at home and say of their brothers: "They would never have been killed had they listened to us, say: "Drive away death from your midst if what you say is true
Never think that those who are killed in the way of God are dead. They are alive, getting succour from their Lord
Rejoicing at what God has given them of His grace, and happy for those who are trying to overtake them but have not joined them yet, and who will have no fear or regret
They rejoice at the kindness and mercy of God; and God does not suffer the wages of the faithful to go waste
Those who obeyed the call of God and His Messenger, even after they were wounded, and took heed for themselves, shall indeed have an ample reward
Those who were told: "They have gathered an army, beware," and their faith increased and they said: "God is sufficient for us, and the best of protectors
And returned with God's favour and grace without harm, for they attended the pleasure of God; and great is the benevolence of God
It is no one but Satan who frightens you with his allies. But do not fear him, fear Me, if indeed you are believers
And do not be grieved by those who rush into disbelief. They do no harm to God; and God will not give them any share in the life to come, and their torment shall be great
Those who barter unbelief for faith, will not harm God in the least, and the punishment for them will be painful
The unbelievers must not think that the respite We give them augurs well. We do so that they sink deeper into sin, and suffer an ignominious doom
God will not leave the believers in the state they are in till He has sifted the evil from the good; nor will God reveal the secrets of the Unknown. He chooses (for this) from His apostles whom He will. So believe in God and the prophets, for if you believe and fear the displeasure of God your reward will be great
Let not those who are niggardly of things that God has given them of His largesse think that this is good for them. In fact, it is worse; for what they grudged will be hung around their necks on the Day of Resurrection. To God belong the heavens and the earth, and God is aware of all you do
God has indeed heard the words of those who said: "God is a pauper whereas we are rich." We shall make a note of their words, and the murders of the prophets they committed unjustly, and say to them: "Now taste the agony of burning
This is (requital) for the deeds you had committed, for God is not unjust to any of His creatures
To those who say: "God has ordained that we should not believe an apostle who does not bring burnt offerings," say: "Many an apostle had come to you before me with manifest proofs, even with what you mention; then why did you kill them if you were men of truth
If they call you a liar (remember) so had other apostles been called before you, who had come with clear signs and Scriptures and the Book enlightening
Every soul will know the taste of death. You will get your recompense in full on the Day of Resurrection; and he who is spared the Fire and finds his way to Paradise will meet his desire. As for the life of this world, it is nothing but a merchandise of vanity
You will, nonetheless, be tried with your wealth and life, and will hear many untoward things from the followers of former Books and the infidels. But if you endure with patience and follow the straight path, it will surely (accord) with God's fixed resolve about human affairs
And remember when God took a promise from the people of the Book to make its (truth) known to mankind, and not keep back any part of it, they set aside (the pledge), and sold it away for a little gain but how wretched the bargain that they made
Think not that those who exult at what they have done, and who love to be praised for what they have not done, shall escape the punishment, for grievous indeed will be their doom
For God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and God's is the power over all things
In the creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation of night and day, are signs for the wise
Those who honour God in meditation, standing or sitting or lying on their sides, who reflect and contemplate on the creation of the heavens and the earth, (and say) "Not in vain have You made them. All praise be to You, O Lord, preserve us from the torment of Hell
Whoever, O Lord, should be cast into Hell shall be verily disgraced; and the sinners shall have none to help (or save) them
We have heard, O our Lord, the crier call inviting us to faith (and announcing): 'Believe in your Lord.' O our Lord, to faith we have come, so forgive our trespasses, deliver us from sin, and grant us (the glory of) death with the just
Give us what You promised, O Lord, through Your prophets; and put us not to shame on the Day of Reckoning, for never do You go back on Your promise
The Lord heard their prayer and answered: "I suffer not the good deeds of any to go waste, be he a man or a woman: The one of you is of the other. And those who were deprived of their homes or banished in My cause, and who fought and were killed, I shall blot out their sins and admit them indeed into gardens with rippling streams." -- A recompense from God, and the best of rewards is with God
Be not deceived by the comings and goings of unbelievers in the land
Their commerce is but short-lived, and then their abode shall be Hell: And what an evil abode
But those who are pious and obedient to their Lord, will have gardens with streams of running water where they will abide as guests of God; and what is with God is best for the pious
Certainly among the people of the Book are some who believe in God and in what has been revealed to you and had been revealed to them; and they bow in humility before God, and do not trade for paltry gain the signs of God. Their reward is verily with their Lord; and swift is the reckoning of God
So you who believe, have endurance in suffering, be patient and persevere, strengthen each other and be firm, and be pious and fear God that you may find success
O MEN, FEAR your Lord who created you from a single cell, and from it created its mate, and from the two of them dispersed men and women (male and female) in multitudes. So fear God in whose name you ask of one another (the bond of) relationships. God surely keeps watch over you
Give to the orphans their possessions, and do not replace things of your own which are bad with things which are good among theirs, and do not intermix their goods with your own and make use of them, for this is a grievous crime
If you fear you cannot be equitable to orphan girls (in your charge, or misuse their persons), then marry women who are lawful for you, two, three, or four; but if you fear you cannot treat so many with equity, marry only one, or a maid or captive. This is better than being iniquitous
Give to women their dowers willingly, but if they forego part of it themselves, then use it to your advantage
Do not entrust (their) property God has given you to maintain (On trust), to those who are immature; but feed them and clothe them from it, and speak to them with kindness
And test (and try) the orphans until they are of marriageable age. If you find they have acquired sound judgement, then hand over their property to them; but devour not their wealth, nor use it up hastily out of fear that soon they will grow up (and demand it). And (the guardian) who is rich should abstain from spending much (of their wealth); and he who is poor should use only as much as is fair. And when you give back their possessions have this witnessed, (and remember) that God is sufficient to take all account
Men have a share in what the parents and relatives leave behind at death; and women have a share in what the parents and relatives leave behind. Be it large or small a legal share is fixed
And when the relatives and orphans and the needy collect at the time of the division (of property) provide for them too, and talk kindly to them
Let people fear the day when they leave small children behind them unprovided, and how concerned they would be for them. So fear God and say the right things to them
Those who devour the possessions of the orphans unjustly devour only fire, and will surely burn in Hell
As for the children, God decrees that the share of the male is equivalent to that of two females. If they consist of women only, and of them more than two, they will get two-thirds of the inheritance; but in case there is one, she will inherit one half. The parents will each inherit a sixth of the estate if it happens the deceased has left a child; but if he has left no children, and his parents are his heirs, then the mother will inherit one-third; but if he has left brothers, the mother will inherit one-sixth after payment of legacies and debts. Of parents and children you do not know who are more useful to you. These are the decrees of God who knows all and is wise
Your share in the property the wives leave behind is half if they die without an issue, but in case they have left children, then your share is one-fourth after the payment of legacies and debts; and your wife shall inherit one-fourth of what you leave at death if you die childless, if not, she will get one-eighth of what you leave behind after payment of legacies and debts. If a man or a woman should die without leaving either children or parents behind but have brother and sister, they shall each inherit one-sixth. In case there are more, they will share one-third of the estate after payment of legacies and debts without prejudice to others. This is the decree of God who knows all and is kind
These are the limits set by God, and those who follow the commandments of God and the Prophet, will indeed be admitted to gardens with streams of water running by, where they will for ever abide; and this will be success supreme
Those who disobey God and the Prophet and exceed the bounds of law, will be taken to Hell and abide there for ever and shall suffer despicable punishment
If any of your women is guilty of unnatural offence, bring four of your witnesses to give evidence; if they testify against them, retain them in the houses until death overtakes them or God provides some other way for them
If two (men) among you are guilty of such acts then punish both of them. But if they repent and reform, let them be, for God accepts repentance and is merciful
God does accept repentance, but only of those who are guilty of an evil out of ignorance yet quickly repent, and God turns to them again, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
But (He does not accept) the repentance of those who continue indulging in evil until death draws near and they say: "We now repent;" nor of those who die disbelieving. For them We have a grievous retribution in wait
O believers, you are not allowed to take perforce the women (of dead relatives) into your heritage, or tyrannise over them in order to deprive them of what you have given them, unless they are guilty of open adultery. Live with them with tolerance and justice even if you do not care for them. For it may well be you may not like a thing, yet God may have endued it with much goodness
If you want to take another wife in place of the one you are married to, then even if you have given her a talent of gold, do not take back a thing. Would you take it away by slandering and using unjust means
How could you do that having slept with one another, and when they had taken a solemn pledge from you
And do not wed the women your fathers had wed. What happened in the past is now past: It was lewd and abhorrent, and only the way of evil
Unlawful are your mothers and daughters and your sisters to you, and the sisters of your fathers and your mothers, and the daughters of your brothers and sisters, and foster mothers, foster sisters, and the mothers of your wives, and the daughters of the wives you have slept with who are under your charge; but in case you have not slept with them there is no offence (if you marry their daughters); and the wives of your own begotten sons; and marrying two sisters is unlawful. What happened in the past (is now past): God is forgiving and kind
Also forbidden are married women unless they are captives (of war). Such is the decree of God. Lawful for you are women besides these if you seek them with your wealth for wedlock and not for debauchery. Then give those of these women you have enjoyed, the agreed dower. It will not be sinful if you agree to something (else) by mutual consent after having settled the dowry. God is certainly all-knowing and all-wise
If one of you cannot afford to marry a believing gentlewoman (let him marry) a maid who is a believer. God is aware of your faith: The one of you is of the other; so marry them with the consent of their people, and give them an appropriate dowry. They are women (seeking) wedlock, and not lechery, nor secretly looking for paramours. But if they are married and guilty of adultery, inflict on them half the punishment (enjoined) for gentlewomen. This is for those who are afraid of doing wrong. In case they can wait, it is better for them. God is forgiving and kind
God wishes to make it clear to you and guide you through the example of earlier people, and to forgive you, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
God likes to turn to you, but those who are lost in the pleasures of the flesh wish to turn you astray, far away
God would like to lighten your burden, for man was created weak
O believers, you should not usurp unjustly the wealth of each other, but trade by mutual consent; and do not destroy yourselves. God is merciful to you
If someone does so through oppression or injustice, We shall cast him into Hell: This is how (the Law of) God works inevitably
If you keep away from the deadly sins that have been forbidden, We shall efface your faults, and lead you to a place of honour
Do not covet what God has favoured some with more than He has some others. Men have a share in what they earn, and women have theirs in what they earn. Ask God for His favours. Surely God has knowledge of everything
For each We have appointed heirs to what parents and relatives leave behind. And to those you have given your pledge in marriage give their share, for God is witness to everything
Men are the support of women as God gives some more means than others, and because they spend of their wealth (to provide for them). So women who are virtuous are obedient to God and guard the hidden as God has guarded it. As for women you feel are averse, talk to them suasively; then leave them alone in bed (without molesting them) and go to bed with them (when they are willing). If they open out to you, do not seek an excuse for blaming them. Surely God is sublime and great
If you fear a breach between them, appoint one arbiter from the people of the man and one from the people of the woman. If they wish to have a settlement then God will reconcile them, for God is all-knowing and cognisant
Pay homage to God, and make none His compeer, and be good to your parents and relatives, the orphans and the needy and the neighbours who are your relatives, and the neighbours who are strangers, and the friend by your side, the traveller and your servants and subordinates. God does not surely love those who are arrogant and boastful
Who are miserly and bid others to be so, and hide what God has given them in His largesse. We have prepared for unbelievers a shameful punishment
Those who spend of their wealth to show off and do not believe in God and the Last Day, take Satan as companion, and how evil a companion (have they)
Would something have befallen them if they had believed in God and the Last Day, and spent of what has been given them by God? God is fully aware of all they do
God does not wrong any one, not even the equal of an atom; and if men do good He multiplies it by two, and adds a great reward of His own
How shall it be when We call witnesses from each and every people and call you as witness over them
On that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Prophet, shall wish they were levelled with the dust, and shall not be able to conceal a thing from God
O you who believe, do not perform your service of prayer when you are intoxicated until you are sure of what you are saying, nor when in a state of seminal pollution, until you have taken a bath, except when you are travelling. But in case you are ill or are travelling, or you have relieved yourself of nature's call, or cohabited with a woman, and cannot find water, then take wholesome dust and pass it over your face and hands: God is benign and forgiving
Have you not seen the people who were given a share of the Book, but who purchased only error, and wish that you also go astray
But God knows your enemies well: and sufficient is God to protect you, and sufficient is God for all help
Some among the Jews distort the words out of context and say (in place of the right words): "We have heard and do not obey;" and, "hear without hearing," and "listen to us," twisting their tongues and reviling the faith. But if they had said: "We have heard and obey," and, "hear and regard us," it would have been better for them and more appropriate. But God has disgraced them for their lack of belief; and so only a few of them believe
O people of the Book, believe in what We have revealed, which confirms what is already with you before We disfigure your visages and turn your faces about and curse you, as We did with those who had broken the Sabbath; and what God decrees comes to pass
God does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to Him, though He may forgive aught else if He please. And he who ascribes compeers to God is guilty of the gravest sin
Have you not seen the people who call themselves pure? Yet God purifies whom He pleases, and none shall be wronged even the breadth of a thread
See how they fabricate lies about God, which is a clear sin
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Book, who believe in false deities and evil powers, and say of unbelievers: "These are better guided than those who believe
They are the ones who were cursed by God; and those who are cursed by God will have none to protect them
Have they a share in the kingdom? (If they had,) they would never have given an iota to the people
Are they so envious of others for what God has given them of His bounty? So We had given the Book and the Law to Abraham's family, and given them great dominion
Then some of them believed in it, and some turned away from it; yet sufficient is Hell, the flaming Fire
And those who disbelieve Our revelations shall be cast into Hell; and when their skin is burnt up and singed, We shall give them a new coat that they may go on tasting the agony of punishment, for God is all-mighty and all-wise
But those who believe and do good deeds We shall admit into gardens with streams of running water, where they will abide for ever, with fairest of companions and coolest of shades
God enjoins that you render to the owners what is held in trust with you, and that when you judge among the people do so equitably. Noble are the counsels of God, and God hears all and sees everything
O you who believe, obey God and the Prophet and those in authority among you; and if you are at variance over something, refer it to God and the Messenger, if you believe in God and the Last Day. This is good for you and the best of settlement
Have you never seen those who aver they believe in what has been revealed to you and had been to others before you, yet desire to turn for judgement to evil powers, even though they have been commanded to disbelieve in them? Satan only wishes to lead them astray, far away
When they are told: "Come to that which God has revealed, and to the Prophet," you should see the hypocrites, how they hesitate and turn their faces away
How shall it be when they suffer misfortunes for their own misdeeds? Then they will come to you swearing by God and saying: "We wish for nothing but good and amity
The secrets of the hearts of these people are well known to God. So leave them alone, and counsel them and speak to them eloquent words that would touch their very souls
We have sent no apostle but that he should be obeyed by the will of God. If they had come to you after wronging themselves and asked forgiveness of God, and you had also asked forgiveness for them, they would surely have found God forgiving and merciful
Indeed, by your Lord, they will not believe till they make you adjudge in their disputes and find no constraint in their minds about your decisions and accept them with full acquiescence
If We had commanded them to lay down their lives and to go forth from their homes, only a few would have obeyed; though had they followed what they had been commanded it would surely have been good for them and the strengthening of their faith
And We would have bestowed on them a great reward of Our own
And led them to the path that is straight
Those who obey God and the Prophet are with those who are blessed by God, the prophets, the sincere and the trustful, the martyrs and the upright; and how excellent a company are they
This is a favour from God; and sufficient is God, the all-knowing
O believers, take precautions, and advance in detachments, or go all together in a body
Someone among you will surely lag behind, and if calamity should befall you, will say: "God was gracious to me that I was not among them
But if success comes to you from God he will say, as though no love existed between you and him: "I wish I were with them, for I would have certainly met with great success
Those who barter the life of this world for the next should fight in the way of God. And We shall bestow on him who fights in the way of God, whether he is killed or is victorious, a glorious reward
What has come upon you that you fight not in the cause of God and for the oppressed, men, women and children, who pray: "Get us out of this city, O Lord, whose people are oppressors; so send us a friend by Your will, and send us a helper
Those who believe fight in the way of God; and those who do not, only fight for the powers of evil; so you should fight the allies of Satan. Surely the stratagem of Satan is ineffective
Have you not seen the people who were told: "Hold back your hands (from attacking), observe your devotional obligations and pay the zakat?" But when they were commanded to fight, behold, a section among them were filled with fear of men as though it were the fear of God and even more, and said: "O Lord, why did you make war compulsory for us? Why did you not allow us to live a little more?" Say to them: "How short-lived is the commerce of this world; but that of the next is best for those who fear God; and you will not be wronged the breadth of a thread
Death will overtake you wheresoever you be, even in the mightiest of towers. Yet if some good comes their way they say: "It is from God;" and if it is evil that befalls them, they say: "It is indeed from you." Say to them: "Every thing is from God." O, what has come upon the people that even this they fail to understand
What comes to you of good is verily from God; and what comes to you of ill is from your own self (your actions). We have sent you as apostle to all mankind; and God is sufficient as witness
He who obeys the Apostle obeys God; and if some turn away (remember) We have not sent you as warden over them
They say: "We obey;" but when they leave your company, a section of them discuss at night other things than you had said; but God takes note of what they discuss. So turn aside from them and trust in God; and God is sufficient as protector
Do they not ponder over the Qur'an? Had it been the word of any other but God they would surely have found a good deal of variation in it
And when any tidings of peace or war come to them they spread the news around. Had they gone to the Prophet or those in authority among them, then those who check and scrutinize would have known it, And but for the favour of God and His mercy you would certainly have followed Satan, except a few
So fight on in the way of God (irrespective of the others). You cannot compel any one except your own self; but urge the believers to fight. It may well be that God will keep back the might of the infidels, for God's might is greater, and severe His punishment
He who intercedes in a good cause will surely have a share in the recompense; and he who abets an evil act will share the burden thereof; for God (equates and) is watchful of all things
When you are greeted with a greeting, then greet with one fairer, or repeat the same greeting. For God takes account of all things
God: There is no god but He. He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection which is certain to come; and whose word is truer than God's
How is it that you are divided in two factions about the hypocrites? God has routed them for what they were doing. Do you wish to guide him to the path whom God has allowed to go astray? As for him whom God allows to go astray you will not find a way
They wish you to become disbelievers as they are, so that you should become like them. Therefore hold them not as friends until they go out of their homes in the way of God. If they do not, seize them wherever they are and do away with them. Do not make them your friends or allies
Except those who take refuge with a people allied to you, or those who, weary of fighting you or their people, come over to you. If God had so willed He would surely have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. If they keep aloof and do not fight, and offer peace, God has left you no reason to fight them
You will also find persons who, while wishing to live in peace with you as well as with their own people, turn to civil war the moment they are called to it. If they do not keep away from you, nor offer you peace nor restrain their hands, seize them and kill them wherever they are. We have given you a clear sanction against them
It is not for a believer to take a believer's life except by mistake; and he who kills a believer by mistake should free a slave who is a believer, and pay blood-money to the victim's family unless they forego it as an act of charity. If he belonged to a community hostile to you but was himself a believer, then a slave who is a believer should be freed. In case he belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, then give blood-money to his family and free a believing slave. But he who has no means (to do so) should fast for a period of two months continuously to have his sins forgiven by God, and God is all-knowing and all-wise
Any one who kills a believer intentionally will be cast into Hell to abide there for ever, and suffer God's anger and damnation. For him a greater punishment awaits
O believers, when you go out on a journey in the way of God, be discreet and do not say to anyone who greets you in peace: "You are not a believer." You desire the gain of earthly life, but there are prizes in plenty with God. You were also like him (an unbeliever) in the past, but God has been gracious to you. So be careful and discreet, for God is aware of what you do
The faithful who sit idle, other than those who are disabled, are not equal to those who fight in the way of God with their wealth and lives. God has exalted those in rank who fight for the faith with their wealth and souls over those who sit idle. Though God's promise of good is for all, He has granted His favour of the highest reward to those who struggle in preference to those who sit at home
For them are higher ranks with God, and forgiveness and grace; and God is forgiving and kind
As for those whose souls are taken by the angels (at death) while in a state of unbelief, they will be asked by the angels: "What (state) were you in?" They will answer: "We were oppressed in the land." And the angels will say: "Was not God's earth large enough for you to migrate?" Their abode will be Hell, and what an evil destination
But those who are helpless, men, women and children, who can neither contrive a plan nor do they know the way
May well hope for the mercy of God; and God is full of mercy and grace
Whosoever leaves his country in duty to God will find many places of refuge, and abundance on the earth. And he who leaves his home and becomes an emigre in the way of God and His Messenger, and death overtake him, is sure to receive his reward from God; for God is forgiving and kind
When you travel in the land there is no sin if you curtail your service of prayer if you fear the unbelievers may harass you, for indeed your open enemies are the infidels
When you are among them, and have to lead the service of prayer, let one group stand up with you, but let them keep their arms. After they have paid their homage they should go to the rear, and let the group which has not done so yet offer their service of prayer with you, remaining cautious and armed, The infidels wish to find you neglectful of your arms and provisions, to attack you unawares. It will not be a sin if you put aside your arms when you are troubled by rain, or you are ill; but take full precautions. God has reserved for infidels a despicable punishment
If you are late in performing your service of prayer honour God by remembering Him, standing or sitting or lying on your sides. And when you have security perform your act of prayer befittingly; and praying at fixed hours is prescribed for the faithful
And do not be chary of pursuing them. If you suffer, they shall also suffer like you. But while you have hope (of success) from God, they have none. Surely God is all-knowing and all-wise
We have sent down to you the Book containing the truth, in whose light you should judge among the people as God has shown you, and do not be a contender for deceivers
And seek God's forgiveness, for God is surely forgiving and kind
Do not argue for those who harbour deceit in their hearts, for God does not love the treacherous and the iniquitous
They try to hide from (men), but they cannot hide from God who is with them at night when they discuss such matters as He does not approve; but what they do is well within the compass of God
Well, you are those who pleaded for them in the life of this world; but who will plead for them on the Day of Resurrection or be their security
He who does evil or acts against his own interests (by disbelieving), then prays for God's forgiveness, will find God compassionate and merciful
He who earns the wages of sin does so for himself; and God is aware of everything and is wise
He who commits a mistake or iniquity and ascribes it to one who is innocent, is guilty of calumny and brazen sin
But for the mercy of God and His grace you would certainly have been misled by a section of them; yet they could not mislead you but themselves alone, and could do you no harm, for God has revealed to you the Book and the Law, and taught you what you did not know. Great have been the blessings of God on you
Their confidential counsels are seldom for the good, save of those who talk of charity or goodness or peace among men. Whosoever does so for the pleasure of God, We shall give him an ample reward
And he who opposes the Prophet even after the way has become clear to him, and follows a path other than the way of believers, We shall lead him to what he has chosen for himself, and shall take him to Hell: How evil a journey's end
God does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to Him, and absolves all else whatsoever He will. And he who associates compeers with God has indeed wandered far astray
In His place they invoke only females (the pagan deities); and instead of Him they invoke Satan the obstinate rebel
Who was condemned by God and who said: "I shall take from Thy creatures my determinate share
And mislead them and tempt them, and order them to slit the ears of animals; and order them to alter God's creation." He who holds Satan as friend in place of God will assuredly be damned to perdition
Whatever the promises he makes, whatever the desires he enkindles, and whatever the hopes Satan rouses in them, are no more than delusion
For such the abode is only Hell from which they will find no escape
But those who believe and do good deeds We shall admit into gardens with streams of running water where they will abide for ever. True is the promise of God; and whose word could be truer than God's
It is neither dependent on your wishes, nor the wishes of the people of the Book, (but) whosoever does ill will be punished for it, and will find no protector or friend apart from God
But he who performs good deeds, whether man or a woman, and is a believer, will surely enter Paradise, and none shall be deprived even of an iota of his reward
Whose way is better than that of the man who has submitted to God, and does good, and who follows the creed of Abraham the upright? And God chose Abraham as friend
And all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God; and everything is well within the compass of God
And they ask you for judgement about women. Tell them: "God has given you instructions about them. You also read them in the Book concerning orphaned women (in your charge) to whom you deny their ordained rights and yet wish to take them in marriage, as well as in respect of helpless children, that you should be just in the matter of orphans." The good you do is known to God
If a woman fears aversion from her husband, or ill treatment, there is no harm if they make a peaceful settlement; and peace is an excellent thing. But men keep self-interest uppermost. Yet if you do good and fear God, God is cognisant of all that you do
Howsoever you may try you will never be able to treat your wives equally. But do not incline (to one) exclusively and leave (the other) suspended (as it were). Yet if you do the right thing and are just, God is verily forgiving and kind
If both (decide to) separate, God in His largesse will provide for them; for God is infinite and all wise
All that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God. We had commanded those who received the Book before you, and have commanded you too, to obey the laws of God. Even if you deny, surely all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God; and God is self-sufficient and praise-worthy
For all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God; and God is sufficient as guardian
He could take you away if He will, O men, and replace you with others: God has the power to do so
Whosoever desires a reward of this world (should remember) that with God are rewards of this world and the next; and God hears all and sees everything
O you who believe, be custodians of justice (and) witnesses for God, even though against yourselves or your parents or your relatives. Whether a man be rich or poor, God is his greater well-wisher than you. So follow not the behests of lust lest you swerve from justice; and if you prevaricate or avoid (giving evidence), God is cognisant of all that you do
O believers, believe in God and His Messenger and the Book He has revealed to His Apostle, and the Books revealed before. But he who believes not in God and His angels and the Books and the prophets and the Last Day, has wandered far away
Those who accept the faith, then disbelieve, then return to it, and deny once again and increase in disbelief, will not be forgiven by God or be guided by Him
Give tidings to the hypocrites that painful is their doom
Do those who take unbelievers as their friends in preference to the faithful seek power from them? But all power belongs to God
You have been commanded in the Book that whensoever you hear God's messages denied or derided, do not sit in that company until they begin talking of other things, or you will be no different from them. Indeed God will put the hypocrites and infidels together in Hell
Those who wait to see what befalls you, say in ease success comes to you from God: "Were we not with you?" But if fortune favours the infidels, they say: "Did we not overpower you, and yet protected you against the believers?" But God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection; and God will never give the unbelievers a way over the faithful
The hypocrites try to deceive God, but He (leads them to) deceive themselves. When they stand up for performing the service of prayer they do so indolently, only for show, and remember God but little
Wavering between the two, neither with these nor with those. For them who are not given the guidance by God, you will never find a way
O believers, do not hold unbelievers as friends in preference to the faithful. Do you want to proffer a clear proof of your own guilt before God
The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of Hell, and you will find none to help them
But those who repent and amend, and hold firmly to God, and are sincere and wholly obedient to God, are surely with the faithful; and God will bestow on the faithful a great reward
Why should God punish you if you acknowledge the truth and believe? God is responsive to gratitude and is cognisant
God does not like ill (of others) spoken about, except by him who has been wronged. For God hears all and knows everything
Whether you do some good openly or in secret, or forgive an ill done to you, (know) that God is forgiving and all-powerful
Those who believe not in God and His apostles, and desire to differentiate between God and His messengers, and say: "We believe in some and not in the others," and wish to find a way (between affirmation and denial)
Are verily the real unbelievers. And We have reserved for unbelievers an ignominious punishment
But those who believe in God and His apostles and make no distinction among any of them, will be given by Him their recompense; for God is forgiving and kind
The people of the Book demand of you to bring for them a book from heaven. But of Moses they had asked a bigger thing, and demanded: "Show us God face to face." They were struck by lightning then as punishment for their wickedness. Even then they made the calf, when clear signs had reached them. Still We forgave them and gave Moses clear authority
We exalted them on the Mount, and they gave a solemn pledge, and We said to them: "Enter the gates submissively," and told them: "Do not break the Sabbath," and took a solemn pledge from them
So (they were punished) for breaking the covenant and disbelieving the signs of God, and for killing the prophets unjustly, and saying: "Our hearts are enfolded in covers," (though) in fact God had sealed them because of their unbelief; so they do not believe except a few
And because they denied and spoke dreadful calumnies of Mary
And for saying: "We killed the Christ, Jesus, son of Mary, who was an apostle of God;" but they neither killed nor crucified him, though it so appeared to them. Those who disagree in the matter are only lost in doubt. They have no knowledge about it other than conjecture, for surely they did not kill him
But God raised him up (in position) and closer to Himself; and God is all-mighty and all-wise
There is not one among the people of the Book who will not believe in it before his death; and he will be a witness over them on the Day of Resurrection
Because of the wickedness of some among the Jews, and because they obstructed people from the way of God, We forbade them many things which were lawful for them
And because they practised usury although it had been forbidden them; and for using others' wealth unjustly. For those who are unbelievers among them We have reserved a painful punishment
But to the learned among them, and the believers who affirm what has been revealed to you and was revealed to those before you, and to those who fulfil their devotional obligations, who pay the zakat and believe in God and the Last Day, We shall give a great reward
We have sent revelations to you as We sent revelations to Noah and the prophets (who came) after him; and We sent revelations to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob, and their offspring, and to Jesus and Job, and to Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and to David We gave the Book of Psalms
And to many an apostle We have mentioned before, and to many other apostles We have not mentioned to you; and to Moses God spoke directly
All these apostles of good news and admonition were sent so that after the apostles men may have no argument against God. God is all-powerful and all-wise
God is Himself witness to what has been revealed to you, and revealed with His knowledge, and the angels are witness; and God is sufficient as witness
Those who denied and turned away from the path of God, have wandered far astray
Those who deny and transgress will not be forgiven by God, nor be shown the way
Except to Hell, where they will abide for ever; and this is how (the law of God) works inevitably
O men, the Apostle has now come to you, bringing the truth from your Lord; so believe for your own good; but if you deny (then remember) that all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God; and God is all-knowing and all-wise
O people of the Book, do not be fanatical in your faith, and say nothing but the truth about God. The Messiah who is Jesus, son of Mary, was only an apostle of God, and a command of His which He sent to Mary, as a mercy from Him. So believe in God and His apostles, and do not call Him 'Trinity'. Abstain from this for your own good; for God is only one God, and far from His glory is it to beget a son. All that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him; and sufficient is God for all help
The Christ will never disdain to be a votary of God, nor will the angels close to Him. And those who disdain to serve Him and are proud (should remember) that they will all go back to Him in the end
Then those who believed and earned good deeds will be given their recompense in full, and even more out of grace. But those who disdain and who boast will receive a painful punishment. They will find none except God to help them or save them
O men, you have received infallible proof from your Lord, and We have sent down a beacon light to you
So those who believe in God and hold fast to Him shall indeed be received into His mercy and His grace, and be guided to Him the straight path
They ask you for judgement about 'Kalalah' (a man who dies childless). Say: "God has given a decision in the matter of inheritance." If a man dies and leaves no child behind but have a sister, she will get a half of what he owned, as he would have done the whole of what she possessed if she had died a childless person. In ease he has two sisters then they will get two-thirds of the heritage. But if he has both brothers and sisters, the male will inherit a share equal to that of two females. God makes this manifest to you lest you wander astray, for God has knowledge of everything
O YOU WHO believe, fulfil your obligations. Made lawful (as food) for you are animals except those mentioned (here); but unlawful during Pilgrimage is game. God ordains whatsoever He wills
O you who believe, do not violate the (sanctity of) offerings to God, nor the rites of the holy month, nor sacrificial cattle with garlands (that are brought to the Ka'bah), nor of the people who flock to the Holy House seeking the bounties of their Lord, and His pleasure. Hunt when you have laid aside the robe of the pilgrim. And do not let your hatred of a people who had barred you from the Holy Mosque lead you to aggression. But help one another in goodness and piety, and do not assist in crime and rebellion, and fear God. Surely God is severe in punishment
Forbidden you is carrion and blood, and the flesh of the swine, and whatsoever has been killed in the name of some other than God, and whatever has been strangled, or killed by a blow or a fall, or by goring, or that which has been mauled by wild beasts unless slaughtered while still alive; and that which has been slaughtered at altars is forbidden, and also dividing the meat by casting lots with arrows. All this is sinful. Today the unbelievers have lost every hope of (despoiling) your creed; so do not fear them, fear Me. Today I have perfected your system of belief and bestowed My favours upon you in full, and have chosen submission (al-Islam) as the creed for you. If one of you is driven by hunger (to eat the forbidden) without the evil intent of sinning, then God is forgiving and kind
They ask you what is lawful for them. Say: "All things are lawful for you that are clean, and what the trained hunting animals take for you as you have trained then, in the light of God's teachings, but read over them the name of God, and fear (straying from the path of) God, for God is swift in the reckoning
On this day all things that are clean have been made lawful for you; and made lawful for you is the food of the people of the Book, as your food is made lawful for them. And lawful are the chaste Muslim women, and the women of the people of the Book who are chaste, (for marriage) and not fornication or liaison, if you give them their dowries. Useless shall be rendered the acts of those who turn back on their faith, and they will be among the losers in the life to come
O believers, when you stand up for the service of prayer wash your faces and hands up to elbows, and also wipe your heads, and wash your feet up to the ankles. If you are in a state of seminal pollution, then bathe and purify yourself well. But in case you are ill or are travelling, or you have satisfied the call of nature, or have slept with a woman, and you cannot find water, then take wholesome dust and pass it over your face and your hands, for God does not wish to impose any hardship on you. He wishes to purify you, and grace you with His favours in full so that you may be grateful
Remember the favours He bestowed on you, and the covenant He cemented with you, when you said: "We have heard and obey." Have fear of God, for He knows the secrets of your heart
O you who believe, stand up as witnesses for God in all fairness, and do not let the hatred of a people deviate you from justice. Be just: This is closest to piety; and beware of God. Surely God is aware of all you do
God has made a promise of forgiveness and the highest reward to those who believe and perform good deeds
But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations are the people of Hell
O believers, remember the favours God bestowed on you when a people raised their hands against you and He restrained their hands. So fear God; and the faithful should place their trust in God
God covenanted the people of Israel and raised twelve leaders among them, and said: "I shall verily be with you. If you fulfil your devotional obligations, pay the zakat and believe in My apostles and support them, and give a goodly loan to God, I shall certainly absolve you of your evil, and admit you to gardens with streams of running water. But whosoever among you denies after this, will have wandered away from the right path
When they dishonoured their pledge We condemned them, and hardened their hearts. So they distort the words of the Scripture out of context, and have forgotten some of what they were warned against. You will always hear of treachery on their part except that of a few. But forbear and forgive them, for God loves those who do good
We had taken the pledge of those also who call themselves Christians. But they too forgot to take advantage of the warning they were given. So We have caused enmity and hatred among them to last till the Day of Resurrection, when God will inform them of what they were doing
O people of the Book, Our Apostle has come to you, announcing many things of the Scriptures that you have suppressed, passing over some others. To you has come light and a clear Book from God
Through which God will lead those who follow His pleasure to the path of peace, and guide them out of darkness into light by His will, and to the path that is straight
Verily they are unbelievers who say: "The Messiah, son of Mary, is God." You ask them: "Who could prevail against God if He had chosen to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and the rest of mankind?" For God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever lies between them. He creates what He please, for God has the power over all things
Say the Jews and the Christians: "We are sons of God and beloved of Him." Say: "Why does He punish you then for your sins? No: You are only mortals, of His creation." He can punish whom He please and pardon whom He will, for God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, and everything will go back to Him
O you people of the Book, Our Apostle has come to you when apostles had ceased to come long ago, lest you said: "There did not come to us any messenger of good news or of warnings." So now there has reached you a bearer of good tidings and of warnings; for God has the power over all things
Remember when Moses said to his people: "O my people, remember the favours that God bestowed on you when He appointed apostles from among you, and made you kings and gave you what had never been given to any one in the world
Enter then, my people, the Holy Land that God has ordained for you, and do not turn back, or you will suffer
They said: "O Moses, in that land live a people who are formidable; we shall never go there until they leave. We shall enter when they go away
Then two of the men who feared (God), and to whom God was gracious, said to them: "Charge and rush the gate. If you enter, you will surely be victorious. And place your trust in God if you truly believe
They said: "O Moses, we shall never, never enter so long as they are there. Go you and your Lord to fight them; we stay here
Said (Moses): "O Lord, I have control over none but myself and my brother; so distinguish between us and these, the wicked people
(And God) said: "Then verily this land is forbidden them for forty years, and they shall wander perplexed over the earth. So do not grieve for these, the wicked people
Narrate to them exactly the tale of the two sons of Adam. When each of them offered a sacrifice (to God), that of one was accepted, and that of the other was not. Said (the one): "I will murder you," and the other replied: "God only accepts from those who are upright and preserve themselves from evil
If you raise your hand to kill me, I will raise not mine to kill you, for I fear God, the Lord of all the worlds
I would rather you suffered the punishment for sinning against me, and for your own sin, and became an inmate of Hell. And that is the requital for the unjust
Then the other was induced by his passion to murder his brother, and he killed him, and became one of the damned
Then God sent a raven which scratched the ground in order to show him how to hide the nakedness of his brother. "Alas, the woe," said he, "that I could not be even like the raven and hide the nakedness of my brother," and was filled with remorse
That is why We decreed for the children of Israel that whosoever kills a human being, except (as punishment) for murder or for spreading corruption in the land, it shall be like killing all humanity; and whosoever saves a life, saves the entire human race. Our apostles brought clear proofs to them; but even after that most of them committed excesses in the land
The punishment for those who wage war against God and His Prophet, and perpetrate disorders in the land, is to kill or hang them, or have a hand on one side and a foot on the other cut off, or banish them from the land. Such is their disgrace in the world, and in the Hereafter their doom shall be dreadful
But those who repent before they are subdued should know that God is forgiving and kind
O you who believe, follow the path shown to you by God, and seek the way of proximity to Him, and struggle in His way: you may have success
As for unbelievers, if they possess the riches of the whole earth, and two times more, and offer it as ransom for release from the torments of the Day of Resurrection, it will not be accepted from them, and their punishment will surely be painful
They would like to escape from the Fire, but will never succeed, and their suffering will be constant
As for the thief, whether man or woman, cut his hand as punishment from God for what he had done; and God is all mighty and all wise
But those who repent after a crime and reform, shall be forgiven by God, for God is forgiving and kind
Do you not know that God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He will, and pardons whom He please, for God has the power over all things
Be not grieved, O Apostle, by those who hasten to outrace others in denial, and say with their tongues: "We believe," but do not believe in their hearts. And those of the Jews who listen to tell lies, and spy on behalf of others who do not come to you, and who distort the words (of the Torah) out of context, and say: "If you are given (what we say is true) accept it; but if you are not given it, beware." You cannot intercede with God for him whom God would not show the way. These are the people whose hearts God does not wish to purify. For them is ignominy in this world and punishment untold in the next
Eavesdropping for telling lies, earning through unlawful means! So, if they come to you, judge between them or decline. And if you decline, they can do you no harm; but if you judge, you should do so with justice, for God loves those who are just
But why should they make you a judge when the Torah is with them which contains the Law of God? Even then they turn away. They are those who will never believe
We sent down the Torah which contains guidance and light, in accordance with which the prophets who were obedient (to God) gave instructions to the Jews, as did the rabbis and priests, for they were the custodians and witnesses of God's writ. So, therefore, do not fear men, fear Me, and barter not My messages away for a paltry gain. Those who do not judge by God's revelations are infidels indeed
And there (in the Torah) We had ordained for them a life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose, and an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth, and for wounds retribution, though he who forgoes it out of charity, atones for his sins. And those who do not judge by God's revelations are unjust
Later, in the train (of the prophets), We sent Jesus, son of Mary, confirming the Torah which had been (Sent down) before him, and gave him the Gospel containing guidance and light, which corroborated the earlier Torah, a guidance and warning for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path
Let the people of the Gospel judge by what has been revealed in it by God. And those who do not judge in accordance with what God has revealed are transgressors
And to you We have revealed the Book containing the truth, confirming the earlier revelations, and preserving them (from change and corruption). So judge between them by what has been revealed by God, and do not follow their whims, side-stepping the truth that has reached you. To each of you We have given a law and a way and a pattern of life. If God had pleased He could surely have made you one people (professing one faith). But He wished to try and test you by that which He gave you. So try to excel in good deeds. To Him will you all return in the end, when He will tell you of what you were at variance
Judge between them in the light of what has been revealed by God, and do not follow their whims, and beware of them lest they lead you away from the guidance sent down to you by God. If they turn away, then know that God is sure to punish them for some of their sins; and many of them are transgressors
Do they seek a judgement of the days of pagan ignorance? But who could be a better judge than God for those who are firm in their faith
O believers, do not hold Jews and Christians as your allies. They are allies of one another; and anyone who makes them his friends is surely one of them; and God does not guide the unjust
You will notice that those whose hearts are afflicted with sickness (of doubt) only hasten to join them and say: "We fear lest misfortune should surround us." It may well be that God may soon send (you) success, or other command of His. Then will they be repentant of what they had concealed in their hearts
Then the believers will say: "Are these the people who had sworn by God on solemn oath and said: "We are surely with you?" Wasted have been all their deeds, and losers they remain
O believers, any one of you who turns back on his faith (should remember) that God could verily bring (in your place) another people whom He would love as they would love Him, gentle with believers, unbending with infidels, who would strive in the way of God, unafraid of blame by any slanderer. Such is the favour of God which He bestows on whomsoever He will. God is infinite and all-knowing
Your only friends are God and His Messenger, and those who believe and are steadfast in devotion, who pay the zakat and bow in homage (before God)
And those who take God and His Prophet and the faithful as their friends are indeed men of God, who will surely be victorious
O believers, do not make friends with those who mock and make a sport of your faith, who were given the Book before you, and with unbelievers; and fear God if you truly believe
(Nor make friends with) those who, when you call (the faithful) to prayer, make mock of it and jest, because they do not understand
Say to them: "O people of the Book, what reason have you for disliking us other than that we believe in God and what has been sent down to us, and was sent down before, and because most of you are disobedient
Say: "Shall I inform you who will receive the worst chastisement from God? They who were condemned by God, and on whom fell His wrath, and those who were turned to apes and swine, and those who worship the powers of evil. They are in the worse gradation, and farthest away from the right path
When they come to you they say: "We believe;" but unbelieving they came and unbelieving go; and God is aware of what they conceal in their hearts
You will see among them many who rush into sin and wickedness, and devour unlawful gain. How evil are the things they do
Why do not their rabbis and priests prohibit them from talking of sinful things and from devouring unlawful gain? Evil are the acts they commit
The Jews say: "Bound are the hands of God." Tied be their own hands, and damned may they be for saying what they say! In fact, both His hands are open wide: He spends of His bounty in any way He please. But what your Lord has revealed to you will only increase their rebellion and unbelief. So We have caused enmity and hatred among them (which will last) till the Day of Resurrection. As often as they ignite the fires of war they are extinguished by God. Yet they rush around to spread corruption in the land; but God does not love those who are corrupt
If the people of the Book had believed and feared, We would surely have absolved them of their sins, and admitted them to gardens of delight
And if they had followed the teachings of the Torah and the Gospel, and what has been sent down to them by their Lord, they would surely have enjoyed (blessings) from the heavens above and the earth below their feet
Some among them are moderate, but evil is what most of them do! O Prophet, announce what has reached you from your Lord, for if you do not, you will not have delivered His message. God will preserve you from (the mischief of) men; for God does not guide those who do not believe
Say to them: "O people of the Book, you have no ground (for argument) until you follow the Torah and the Gospel and what has been revealed to you by your Lord." But what has been revealed to you by your Lord will surely increase rebellion and unbelief in many; so do not grieve for those who do not believe
All those who believe, and the Jews and the Sabians and the Christians, in fact any one who believes in God and the Last Day, and performs good deeds, will have nothing to fear or regret
We had taken a solemn pledge from the children of Israel, and sent messengers to them; but whenever an apostle came to them bringing what did not suit their mood, they called one imposter, another they slew
And imagined that no trials would befall them; and they turned deaf and blind (to the truth). But God still turned to them; yet many of them turned blind and deaf again; but God sees everything they do
They are surely infidels who say: "God is the Christ, son of Mary." But the Christ had only said: "O children of Israel, worship God who is my Lord and your Lord." Whosoever associates a compeer with God, will have Paradise denied to him by God, and his abode shall be Hell; and the sinners will have none to help them
Disbelievers are they surely who say: "God is the third of the trinity;" but there is no god other than God the one. And if they do not desist from saying what they say, then indeed those among them who persist in disbelief will suffer painful punishment
Why do they not turn to God and ask His forgiveness? God is forgiving and kind
The Christ, son of Mary, was but an apostle, and many apostles had (come and) gone before him; and his mother was a woman of truth. They both ate the (same) food (as men). Behold, how We show men clear signs, and behold, how they wander astray
Tell them: "Leaving God aside, will you worship something that has no power over your loss or gain?" But God is all-hearing and all-knowing
Tell them: "O people of the Book, do not overstep the bounds of truth in your beliefs, and follow not the wishes of a people who had erred before, and led many others astray, and wandered away from the right path
Cursed were disbelievers among the children of Israel by David and Jesus, son of Mary, because they rebelled and transgressed the bounds
They did not restrain one another from the wicked things they used to do; and vile were the things that they were doing
You can see among them many allying themselves with the infidels. Vile it was what they sent ahead of them, so that God's indignation came upon them; and torment will they suffer an eternity
If they had believed in God and the Prophet and what had been revealed to him, they would never have held them as allies; and many among them are transgressors
You will find the Jews and idolaters most excessive in hatred of those who believe; and the closest in love to the faithful are the people who say: "We are the followers of Christ," because there are priests and monks among them, and they are not arrogant
For when they listen to what has been revealed to this Apostle, you can see their eyes brim over with tears at the truth which they recognise, and say: "O Lord, we believe; put us down among those who bear witness (to the truth)
And why should we not believe in God and what has come down to us of the truth? And we hope to be admitted by our Lord among those who are upright and do good
God will reward them for saying so with gardens where streams flow by, where they will live for ever. This is the recompense of those who do good
But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations are residents of Hell
O believers, do not forbid the good things God has made lawful for you; and do not transgress. God does not love transgressors
Eat what is lawful and good of the provisions God has bestowed on you, and fear God in whom you believe
God does not punish you but for what you swear in earnest. The expiation (for breaking an oath) is feeding ten persons who are poor, with food that you give your own families, or clothing them, or freeing a slave. But he who cannot do so should fast for three days. This is the expiation for an oath when you have sworn it. So abide by your oaths. Thus God makes His commandments clear to you: You may perhaps be grateful
O believers, this wine and gambling, these idols, and these arrows you use for divination, are all acts of Satan; so keep away from them. You may haply prosper
Satan only wishes to create among you enmity and hatred through wine and gambling, and to divert you from the remembrance of God and prayer. Will you therefore not desist
Obey God and the Prophet, and beware. If you turn away, remember, that the duty of Our Apostle is to give you a clear warning
Those who believe and perform good deeds will not be held guilty for what they have eaten (in the past) if they fear God and believe, and do good things and are conscious (of God) and believe, and still fear and do good, for God loves those who do good
O you who believe, God will surely try you with the game that you take with your hands or your lances, in order to know who fear Him unseen. Whosoever transgress after this will suffer grievous punishment
O you who believe, do not kill game when you are on pilgrimage. And anyone among you who does so on purpose should offer livestock of equivalent value, determined by two honourable persons among you, (as atonement), to be brought to the Ka'bah as an offering; or else expiate by giving food to the poor, or its equivalent in fasting, so that he may realise the gravity of his deed. God has forgiven what has happened in the past; but any one who does so again will be punished by God. And God is severe in requital
Lawful is all game of the water for you, and eating of it as food, so that you and the travellers may benefit by it. But unlawful is game of the jungle when you are on pilgrimage. Fear God before whom you have to gather in the end
God has made the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, a means of support for mankind, as also the holy month, the sacrificial offerings, and consecrated cattle, so that you may understand that known to God is all that is in the heavens and the earth, and God has knowledge of everything
Know that the punishment of God is severe, but that God is also forgiving and kind
It is for the Prophet to convey the message: God knows what you reveal and what you hide
Tell them: "The unclean and the pure are not equal, even though the abundance of the unclean may be pleasing to you." So fear God, O men of wisdom; you may haply find success
O believers, do not ask about things which, if made known to you, may vex you. But if you ask about them when the Qur'an is being revealed they will be unfolded to you. God has overlooked (your failings) in this (respect), for God is forgiving and forbearing
Such things were asked by a people before you, but they disbelieved them afterwards
God has not sanctioned Baheerah or Sa'ibah, Waseelah or Ham. The unbelievers fabricate lies of God, for many of them are devoid of sense
When you say to them: "Come to what God has revealed, and the Prophet," they say: "Sufficient to us is the faith that our fathers had followed," even though their fathers had no knowledge or guidance
O you who believe, on you rests (the responsibility) for your own selves. If you follow the right path those who have gone astray will not be able to do you harm. To God have all of you to return, when He will tell you what you were doing
O you who believe, let two honest men among you be witness when you dictate your last will and testament as (the hour of) death draws near; and if death approaches while you are on a journey, two men other than yours. Detain them after the service of prayer, and if you doubt their word make them swear by God that: "We shall not take a bribe even though it be offered by a near relative, nor hide the testimony of God, for then we shall surely be sinful
If it transpires they have concealed the truth, two of those who are immediately concerned should take their place and swear by God: "Our testimony is truer than theirs. We have stated no more (than the truth), or else we shall be unjust
It is thus likely that men will bear witness rightly, or else fear that their oaths may be disproved by oaths given after them. So fear God, and do not forget that God does not guide the iniquitous
The day God will gather the apostles and ask: "What answer was made to you?" They will say: "We know not. You alone know the secrets unknown
And when God will say: "O Jesus, son of Mary, remember the favours I bestowed on you and your mother, and reinforced you with divine grace that you spoke to men when in the cradle, and when in the prime of life; when I taught you the law and the judgement and the Torah and the Gospel; when you formed the state of your people's destiny out of mire and you breathed (a new spirit) into it, and they rose by My leave; when you healed the blind by My leave, and the leper; when you put life into the dead by My will; and when I held back the children of Israel from you when you brought to them My signs, and the disbelievers among them said: "Surely these are nothing but pure magic
And when I inspired the disciples (through Jesus) to believe in Me and My apostle, they said: "We believe, and You bear witness that we submit
When the disciples said: "O Jesus, son of Mary, could your Lord send down for us a table laid with food?" he said: "Fear God, if indeed you believe
They said: "We should like to eat of it to reassure our hearts and to know that it's the truth you have told us, and that we should be witness to it
Said Jesus, son of Mary. "O God, our Lord, send down a table well laid out with food from the skies so that this day may be a day of feast for the earlier among us and the later, and a token from You. Give us our (daily) bread, for You are the best of all givers of food
And said God: "I shall send it down to you; but if any of you disbelieve after this, I shall inflict such punishment on him as I never shall inflict on any other creature
And when God will ask: "O Jesus, son of Mary, did you say to mankind: 'Worship me and my mother as two deities apart from God?' (Jesus) will answer: "Halleluja. Could I say what I knew I had no right (to say)? Had I said it You would surely have known, for You know what is in my heart though I know not what You have. You alone know the secrets unknown
I said nought to them but what You commanded me: Worship God, my Lord and your Lord. And so long as I dwelt with them I was witness over their actions. And after my life had been done, You were their keeper; and You are a witness over all things
If You punish them, indeed they are Your creatures; if You pardon them, indeed You are mighty and wise
God will say: 'This is the day when the truthful shall profit by their truthfulness. For them will be gardens with streams running by, where they will for ever abide." God will accept them, and they will be gratified in (obeying) Him. This will surely be happiness supreme
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth, and His the power over everything
ALL PRAISE BE to God who created the heavens and the earth, and ordained darkness and light. Yet the unbelievers make the others equal of their Lord
It is He who created you from clay then determined a term (of life) for you, and a term (is fixed) with Him. Even then you doubt
He is God in the heavens and the earth. He knows what you hide and bring out into the open, and knows what you earn (of good and evil)
Yet no sign of their Lord comes to them but they turn away from it
So they disbelieved the truth when it came to them; but they will soon come to know the reality of what they had ridiculed
Do they not see how many generations We laid low before them, whom We had firmly established in the land as We have not established you, and showered abundant rain on them, and made rivers lap at their feet, yet whom We destroyed for their sins, and raised new generations after them
Even if We had sent you a transcript on paper which they could feel with their hands, the unbelievers would have said: "This is nothing but clear sorcery
They say: "How is it no angel was sent down to him?" Had We sent an angel down the matter would have come to end, and they would have had no respite
Even if We had sent down an angel as messenger he would have appeared in the garb of a man and filled them with confusion, like the one they are filled with
Surely the apostles have been mocked before you; but what they had mocked rebounded on the mockers themselves
Say: "Travel in the land and see what happened to those who disbelieved
And ask: "To whom belongs what is in the heavens and the earth?" Say: "To God." He has prescribed grace for Himself. He will gather you on the Day of Resurrection which is certain to come. Only they who are lost of soul will not come to believe
Whatsoever dwells in the night and day belongs to Him. He is all-hearing and all-knowing
Say: "Should I find some other protector besides God the Creator of the heavens and the earth, who nourishes all and is nourished by none? Say: "I am commanded to be the first to submit to Him, and not be an idolater
Say: "If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a grievous Day
Whosoever is spared that Day will surely have mercy shown to him, and this will be a clear triumph
If God sends you harm, there is no one but He who can take it away; and if He bring you good, surely He has power over everything
It is He who prevails over His creatures, and He is all-wise and aware
Ask: "Of all things what is most vital as evidence?" Say: "God (who) is witness between you and me that this Qur'an has been revealed to me that I may warn you on its strength, and those whom it reaches. Do you really bear witness there are other gods with God?" Tell them: "I bear no such Witness." Say: "Verily He is the only God, and I am clear of what you associate (with Him)
Those to whom We have given the Book know it distinctly as they know their sons; but those who are lost of soul do not believe
And who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God or denies His revelations? Surely the wicked will not succeed
The day We shall gather all of them together and say to those who ascribe (partners to God): "Where are the compeers who you claimed (were equal to God)
Then their excuse will be but to say: "By God our Lord, we were not idolaters
You will see how they will lie against themselves, and all their slanderings will be vain
There are some among them who listen to you; but We have put a covering on their hearts so that they fail to understand it, and a deafness appears in their ears. Even if they saw all the signs they would not believe in them; and even when they come to you to dispute with you, the unbelievers say: "This is nothing but fables of antiquity
And they forbid others from (believing in) it, and themselves keep away from it. But they ruin none but themselves, and do not understand
If you should see them when they are stood before the Fire, they will say: "Ah would that we were sent back (to the world)! We shall not deny the signs of our Lord, and be among those who believe
But no. What they were hiding has now become clear to them. If they were sent back they would surely return to what had been forbidden them, for surely they are liars
They say: "There is no other life but that of this world, and we will not be raised (from the dead)
If you see them when they are put before their Lord, He will say to them: "Is not this the truth?" They will answer: "Indeed, by our Lord." He will say: "Then taste the agony of punishment for what you had denied
They are surely lost who call the meeting with God a lie. When the Hour comes upon them unawares, they will say: "Alas, we neglected it!" and carry their burdens on their backs: How evil the burden they will carry
As for the life of this world, it is nothing but a frolic and frivolity. The final abode is the best for those who are pious and fear God. Do you not comprehend
We know what they say distresses you. It is not you in fact they accuse of lies, but the wicked deny the revelations of God
Many an apostle has been accused of lies before you. Yet they bore with fortitude the falsehoods and the hurt until our help arrived. There is no changing the word of God: The news of (past) apostles has come to you already
If their aversion still weighs upon you, seek out a tunnel (going deep) into the earth, or a ladder reaching out to the skies, and bring them a sign: (Even then they will not believe). If God had willed He would have brought them all to the right path. So be not like the pagans
Only they will respond who can hear. As for the dead, raised they will be by God, then to Him they will be returned
They say: "How is it no miracle was sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "God certainly has power to send down a miracle; but most men cannot understand
There is not a thing that moves on the earth, no bird that flies on its wings, but has a community of its own like yours. There is nothing that We have left out from recording. Then they will all be gathered before their Lord
Those who deny Our revelations are deaf, dumb, and lost in the dark. God sends whosoever He wills astray, and leads whom He will to the straight path
Say: "Have you thought if the punishment of God or the Hour (of Doom) came upon you, would you call to any other than God? Answer, if you are men of truth
No: You will call to Him alone; and He will, if He please, remove (the distress) for which you had called Him; and forget those you associate as compeers (with Him)
We have indeed sent (apostles) to many a people before you, and inflicted upon them hardships and afflictions so that they might submit
Then why did they not submit when Our punishment came upon them? But their hearts were hardened, and Satan made things they were doing look attractive to them
When they had become oblivious of what they were warned, We opened wide the gates of everything to them; yet as they rejoiced at what they were given, We caught them unawares, and they were filled with despair
Thus were the wicked people rooted out of existence to the last. All praise be to God, the Lord of all the worlds
Say: "Imagine if God takes away your hearing and sight, and sets a seal on your hearts, what deity other than God will restore them to you?" See how We inflect Our signs: Even then they turn aside
Say: "Imagine if the punishment of God were to come unawares, or openly, who will perish but the evil-doers
We do not send apostles but to give good tidings and to warn. Then those who believe or reform will have neither fear nor regret
But those who deny Our messages will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient
Tell them: "I do not say that I possess the treasures of God, or have knowledge of the Unknown, or that I am an angel. I only follow what is sent down to me." And say: "How can a blind man and a man who can see, be alike? Will you not reflect
Warn those who fear, through this (Qur'an), that they will be gathered before their Lord, and they will have none to protect or intercede for them apart from Him. They may haply take heed for themselves
Do not turn away those who supplicate their Lord morning and evening, seeking His magnificence. You are not accountable for them in the least, nor they for you at all. If you drive them away you will only be unjust
Thus do We try men through one another so that they may ask: "Are these the ones of all of us who have been favoured by God?" Does God not know who are the grateful
When those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say to them: "Peace on you." Your Lord has prescribed grace for Himself, so that in case one of you commits evil out of ignorance, then feels repentant and reforms, He may be forgiving and kind
Thus distinctly do We explain Our signs that the way of sinners may become distinct
Tell them: "I am forbidden to worship those you invoke apart from God." And say: "I will not follow your wishes. If I do, I shall be lost and not be one of those who follow the right path
Tell them: "A clear proof has come to me from my Lord, and Him you deny. But what you wish to be hastened is not within my power. The judgement is only God's. He unfolds the Truth, and is the best of judges
Say: "If what you wish to be hastened were in my power, all matters between you and me would have been settled; God is cognisant of those who are unjust
He has the keys of the Unknown. No one but He has knowledge; He knows what is on the land and in the sea. Not a leaf falls without His knowledge, nor a grain in the darkest (recess) of the earth, nor any thing green or seared that is not recorded in the open book (of nature)
It is He indeed who sends you to death at night, and knows what you do in the day, then makes you rise with it again in order that the fixed term of life be fulfilled. Then to Him you will be returned when He will tell you what you did
He has power over His creatures, and appoints guardians to watch over them. When death comes to one of you, Our messengers take away his soul, and do not falter
Then they are taken to God, their real lord and master. His indeed is the judgement; and He is swift at reckoning
Ask: "Who is it who comes to your rescue in the darkness of the desert and the sea, and whom you supplicate humbly and unseen: 'If You deliver us from this, we shall indeed he grateful
Say: "God delivers you from this and every calamity. Even then you ascribe compeers (to Him)
Say: "He has power to send you retribution from the skies above, or the earth beneath your feet, or confound you with divisions among you, and give one the taste of the vengeance of the other." See, how distinctly We explain Our signs that they may understand
This (Book) has been called by your people a falsehood though it is the truth. Say: "I am not a warden over you
A time is fixed for every prophecy; you will come to know in time
When you see them argue about Our messages, withdraw from their company until they begin to talk of other things. In case the Devil makes you forget, leave the company of these unjust people the moment you remember this
As for the heedful and devout, they are not accountable for them, but should give advice: They may haply come to fear God
Leave those alone who have made a sport and frolic of their faith, and have been seduced by the life of this world. Remind them hereby lest a man is doomed for what he has done. He will have none to help him, or intercede for him, other than God; and even if he offer all the ransoms they will not be accepted from him. They are those who will be destroyed by their own acts. There will be scalding water to drink for them and painful punishment, for they had disbelieved
Say: 'Should we call in place of God one who can neither help nor do us harm, and turn back after having been guided by God, like a man beguiled by the devils who wanders perplexed in the wilderness while his friends call him back to the right path, saying: 'Come to us, this way?' Say: "God's guidance is (true) guidance, and we have been commanded to submit to the Lord of all the worlds
Observe (your) devotional obligations and fear (God), for it is He before whom you will be gathered (in the end)
It is He who created the heavens and the earth with a definite purpose. The day He will say "Be, " it will be. His word is the truth, His alone the power on the Day when the blast of the trumpet will be sounded. He knows the hidden and the visible. He is all-prudent and all-knowing
Remember when Abraham said to Azar, his father: "Why do you take idols for God? I certainly find you and your people in error
Thus We showed to Abraham the visible and invisible world of the heavens and the earth, that he could be among those who believe
When the night came with her covering of darkness he saw a star, and (Azar, his father) said: "This is my Lord." But when the star set, (Abraham) said: "I love not those that wane
When (Azar) saw the moon rise all aglow, he said: "This is my Lord." But even as the moon set, (Abraham) said: "If my Lord had not shown me the way I would surely have gone astray
When (Azar) saw the sun rise all resplendent, he said: "My Lord is surely this, and the greatest of them all." But the sun also set, and (Abraham) said: "O my people, I am through with those you associate (with God)
I have truly turned my face towards Him who created the heavens and the earth: I have chosen one way and am not an idolater
His people argued, and he said: "Do you argue with me about God? He has guided me already, and I fear not what you associate with Him, unless my Lord wills, for held within the knowledge of my Lord is everything. Will you not reflect
And why should I fear those you associate with Him when you fear not associating others with God for which He has sent down no sanction? Tell me, whose way is the way of peace, if you have the knowledge
They alone have peace who believe and do not intermix belief with denial, and are guided on the right path
This is the argument We gave to Abraham against his people. We exalt whosoever We please in rank by degrees. Your Lord is wise and all-knowing
And We gave him Isaac and Jacob and guided them, as We had guided Noah before them, and of his descendants, David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. Thus We reward those who are upright and do good
Zachariah and John We guided, and guided Jesus and Elias who were all among the upright
We gave guidance to Ishmael, Elisha and Jonah and Lot; And We favoured them over the other people of the world
As We did some of their fathers and progeny and brethren, and chose them, and showed them the right path
This is God's guidance: He gives among His creatures whom He will. If they had associated others with Him, surely vain would have been all they did
Those were the people to whom We gave the Book and the Law and the Prophethood. But if they reject these things We shall entrust them to a people who will not deny
Those were the people who were guided by God; so follow their way. Say: "I ask no recompense of you for this. It is but a reminder for all the people of the world
But they failed to make a just estimation of God when they said: "He did not reveal to any man any thing." Ask them: "Who then revealed the Book that Moses brought, -- a guidance and light for men, -- which you treat as sheafs of paper, which you display, yet conceal a great deal, though through it you were taught things you did not know before, nor even your fathers knew?" Say: "God," and leave them to the sport of engaging in vain discourse
And this (Qur'an) is another Book that We have revealed, blessed, affirming the earlier (revelations), so that you may warn the people of (Makkah) the town of towns, and those who live around it. Those who believe in the life to come shall believe in it and be watchful of their moral obligations
Who is more vile than he who slanders God of falsehood, or says: "Revelation came to me," when no such revelation came to him; or one who claims: "I can reveal the like of what has been sent down by God?" If you could see the evil creatures in the agony of death with the angels thrusting forward their hands (saying): "Yield up your souls: This day you will suffer ignominious punishment for uttering lies about God and rejecting His signs with arrogance
You have come before Us all alone," (God will say), "as when you were created first, leaving behind all that We had bestowed on you. We do not see your intercessors with you who, you imagined, had partnership with you. Shattered lie your ties with them now, and gone are the claims you made
Indeed it is God who splits up the seed and the kernel, and brings forth the living from the dead, the dead from the living. This is God: So whither do you stray
He ushers in the dawn, and made the night for rest, the sun and moon a computation. Such is the measure appointed by Him, the omnipotent and all-wise
It is He who made the stars by which you reckon your way through the darkness of the desert and the sea. Distinct have We made Our signs for those who recognise
It is He who produced you from a single cell, and appointed a place of sojourning, (the womb of the mother), and a place of depositing, (the grave). How clear have We made Our signs for those who understand
It is He who sends down water from the skies, and brings out of it everything that grows, the green foliage, the grain lying close, the date palm trees with clusters of dates, and the gardens of grapes, and of olives and pomegranates, so similar yet so unlike. Look at the fruits, how they appear on the trees, and they ripen. In all these are signs for those who believe
Yet they ascribe to jinns a partnership with God, although He created them; and they ascribe to Him sons and daughters, without possessing any knowledge. All praise be to Him. He is much too exalted for things they associate (with Him)
Creator of the heavens and the earth from nothingness, how could He have a son when He has no mate? He created all things, and has knowledge of all things
This is God, your Lord; there is no god but He, the creator of all things. So pay homage to Him, for He takes care of everything
No eyes can penetrate Him, but He penetrates all eyes, and He knows all the mysteries, for He is all-knowing
To you have come signs from your Lord, (and the light of understanding). So any one who sees (and understands) does so for himself, and any one who turns blind shall suffer the consequences alone. (Say:) "I am not a guardian over you (to make you understand)
Thus in varied ways We explain Our signs so that they may say: "You have been instructed," and that We might make it clear to those who understand
So follow what is sent down to you by your Lord, for homage is due to no one but God, and turn away from idolaters
Had He willed they would not have been idolaters. We have not appointed you their guardian, nor are you their pleader
Do not revile those who invoke others apart from God, lest they begin to revile God out of malice and ignorance. We have made attractive their deeds to every people. They have to go back to their Lord, when He will tell them what they used to do
They solemnly swear by God: "If a sign comes to us we shall certainly believe in it." Tell them: "The signs are with God." Yet for all you know they will not believe if the signs came to them
We shall turn their hearts and their eyes, for they did not believe them at the very first, and leave them to wander perplexed in bewilderment
Even if We send down the angels to them, and the dead should speak to them, and We gather all things before their eyes, they will not believe, unless God should will, for most of them are ignorant
That is how We have made for each apostle opponents, the satans among men and jinns, who inspire one another with deceitful talk. But if your Lord had willed they would not have done so. Pay no attention to them and to what they fabricate
Let those who do not believe in the life to come, listen to it and be pleased with it, and let them gain what they may gain
(Say): "Then should I seek (the source of) law elsewhere than God, when it is He who has revealed this Book to you, which distinctly explains (everything)?" Those to whom We have given the Book know it has been sent by your Lord in truth. So be not a sceptic
Perfected are the laws of your Lord in truth and justice, and there is no changing His laws. He is all-hearing and all-knowing
If you follow the majority of people on the earth, they will lead you astray from the path of God, for they follow only conjecture and surmise
Your Lord surely knows those who have strayed from his path, and knows those who are rightly guided
Eat only that over which the name of God has been pronounced, if you truly believe in His commands
And why should you not eat of that over which the name of God has been pronounced, when He has made it distinctly clear what is forbidden, unless you are constrained to do so. Surely many (men) mislead others into following their vain desires through lack of knowledge. Your Lord certainly knows the transgressors
Discard both the visible and invisible sin. For those who sin will be punished for what they have done
Do not eat of that over which God's name has not been pronounced, for that would amount to exceeding the limits of law. Certainly the devils inspire their proteges to dispute with you: If you obey them, you will surely become an idolater
Can he who was lifeless, to whom We gave life, and gave him a light in whose glow he walks among men, be like him who is used to darkness from which he can never emerge? Thus have been their doings made attractive to unbelievers
And thus have We placed in every city the greatest of the sinners to contrive and deceive; yet they contrive against no one but themselves even though they do not know
Every time a sign comes to them they say: "We shall never believe till what God's apostles had been given comes to us." God knows best where to direct His messages. A degradation will befall the sinners and chastisement from God for deceiving
Thus God guides whomsoever He please by opening wide his breast to surrender; and Straitens the breasts of those He allows to go astray, (who feel suffocated) as if they were ascending the skies. Thus will God punish those who do not believe
This is the straight path of your Lord. Distinct have We made Our signs for those who reflect
For them is an abode of peace with their Lord. He will be their defender as reward for what they did
On the day He will gather them together, (He will say:) "O you assembly of jinns, you made great use of men." But their proteges among men will say: "O our Lord, we lived a life of mutual gain, but have now reached the term You ordained for us." "Your abode is Hell," He will say, "where you will dwell for ever, unless God please otherwise." Verily your Lord is wise and all-knowing
Thus do We place some sinners over others as requital for their deeds
O you assembly of jinns and men, did not apostles come to you from among you, communicating My signs to you, bringing warnings of this your day (of Doom)?" They will answer: "We bear witness to our sins." They were surely deluded by the life of the world, and bore witness against themselves because they were unbelievers
And this (so that it may be clear) that your Lord does not destroy towns and cities arbitrarily while the citizens remain unaware
Every one has his place according to his deeds, for your Lord is not negligent of what you do
Your Lord is all-sufficient and full of benevolence. He can take you away if He please, and make whom He will succeed you, as He had raised you from the progeny of others
The promise that was made to you is bound to be fulfilled. It is not in your power to defeat it
Tell them: "O my people, go on acting on your part, I am acting on mine. You will soon know whose is the guerdon of life to come." The wicked will not succeed
They allocate a share from God's own created fields and cattle to God, and they say: "This is God's" -- or so they think -- "and that, of the compeers of God," so that what belongs to the compeers does not reach God, but that which is God's may reach the compeers (set up by them). How bad is the judgement that they make
In the same way have their companions shown many unbelievers the killing of their children as desirable in order to ruin them and falsify their faith. If God had so willed they would never have done so. Leave them to their falsehoods
They also say: "These cattle and these crops are consecrated. None may eat of them other than those we permit," -- so they assert. "And the use of these cattle is forbidden for carrying burden." They do not pronounce the name of God on certain animals, inventing lies against Him. He will punish them for what they fabricate
And they say: "Whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is only meant for men and forbidden our women; but in case it should be still-born both could eat it." God will punish them for what they assert. He is all-wise and all-knowing
They will surely perish who kill their offspring in ignorance foolhardily, and forbid the food that God has given them by fabricating lies against God. Misguided are they surely, and will never come to guidance
It is He who grew the gardens, trellised and bowered, and palm trees and land sown with corn and many other seeds, and olives and pomegranates, alike and yet unlike. So eat of their fruit when they are in fruit, and give on the day of harvesting His due, and do not be extravagant, for God does not love those who are prodigal
He has created beasts of burden and cattle for slaughter. So eat of what God has given you for food, and do not walk in the footsteps of Satan who is surely your declared enemy
There are eight pairs, two of the species of sheep and two of goats. Ask them which has He forbidden, the two males or the two females, or what the females carry in their wombs? Produce the sanction if you are truthful
And there are two of camels and two of oxen. Ask them: "Which has He forbidden, the two males or the two females, or what the females carry in their wombs?" Were you present at the time God issued this command?" Who then could be more wicked than he who fabricates a lie and ascribes it to God to mislead men, without any knowledge? God does not guide the miscreants
You tell them: "In all the commands revealed to me I find nothing which men have been forbidden to eat except carrion and running blood and flesh of the swine for it is unclean, or meat consecrated in the name of some other than God, which is profane. But if one is constrained to eat of these without craving or reverting to it, then surely your Lord is forgiving and kind
We made unlawful for the Jews all animals with claws or nails, and the fat of the oxen and sheep, except that on their backs or their intestines, or which remains attached to their bones. This was the punishment for their insubordination; and what We say is true
If they call you a liar, tell them infinite is the mercy of your Lord; but His vengeance will not be turned back from the sinners
But the idolaters say: "If God had so willed we would not have associated (others with Him), nor would have our fathers, nor would we have forbidden any thing." So had others denied before them, and had to taste Our punishment in the end. Ask them: "Have you any knowledge? Then display it. You follow nothing but conjecture, and are nothing but liars
Say: "To God belongs the consummate argument. Had He willed He would surely have guided all of you aright
Tell them: "Bring your witnesses to testify that God has forbidden this (and this)." Then even if they testify, you should not testify with them; and do not follow the wishes of those who deny Our signs and believe not in the Hereafter, and make others the equal of their Lord
Tell them: "Come, I will read out what your Lord has made binding on you: That you make none the equal of God, and be good to your parents, and do not abandon your children out of poverty, for We give you food and We shall provide for them; and avoid what is shameful, whether open or hidden, and do not take a life which God has forbidden, unless for some just cause. These things has God enjoined on you. Haply you may understand
Do not spend the belongings of the orphans but for their betterment, until they come of age; and give in full measure, and weigh justly on the balance. God does not burden a soul beyond capacity. When you say a thing, let it be just, even though the matter relate to a relative of yours, and fulfil a promise made to God. These are the things that He has enjoined that you may take heed
(He has further commanded:) 'This is My straight path, so walk along it, and do not follow other ways, lest you should turn away from the right one.' All this has He commanded. You may perhaps take heed for yourselves
To that end We gave the Book to Moses, a perfect law, distinctly explaining all things, and a guidance and grace, so that they should believe in the meeting with their Lord
Blessed is this Book We have revealed; so follow it and preserve yourself from evil that you may qualify for grace
Lest you say: "The Book that was sent before was meant only for two groups; we were not aware of their teachings
Or that: "Had the Book been sent down to us we would surely have been guided better than they." So you have now received from your Lord a clear proof and a guidance and grace. Then who is more wicked than he who denies the signs of God and turns away from them? We shall punish those severely who turn away: A requital indeed for having turned aside
What are the people waiting for? For the angels to come down, or your Lord to appear, or some signs from your Lord? The day when certain signs appear from your Lord, the embracing of faith shall not be of any avail to one who did not come to belief at first, or who did not perform good deeds by virtue of his faith. Tell them: "Wait on, we are waiting too (for the good and evil to become distinct)
As for those who have created schisms in their order, and formed different sects, you have no concern with them. Their affair is with God. He will tell them the truth of what they were doing
He who does a good deed will receive ten times its worth; and he who does evil will be requited to an equal degree; and no one will be wronged
Tell them: "My Lord has directed me to a path that is straight, a supreme law, the creed of Abraham the upright who was not an idolater
Tell them: "My service and sacrifice, my life and my death, are all of them for God, the creator and Lord of all the worlds
No equal has He, I am commanded (to declare), and that I am the first to submit
Say: "Shall I search for another lord apart from God when He is the only Lord of all and everything?" Each soul earns (what it earns) for itself, and no man shall bear another's burden. You have to go back to your Lord in the end when He will tell you about the things you disputed
It is He who made you trustees on the earth, and exalted some in rank over others in order to try you by what He has given you. Indeed your Lord's retribution is swift, yet He is forgiving and kind
Alif Lam Mim Sad
This Book has been sent down to you; so do not hesitate to warn (the unbelievers) through it, and remind the faithful
Follow what has been revealed to you by your Lord, and do not follow any other lord apart from Him. Yet little do you care to remember
Many a habitation have We laid low before: Our retribution came upon them in the night or in the midst of siesta at noon
And when Our punishment overtook them they had nothing to say except crying out: "We have indeed been sinners
(On the Day of Reckoning) We shall question the people to whom We had sent Our apostles, (if they followed their teachings), and will question the apostles
We shall recount (their deeds) to them with knowledge, for We were never absent (and saw all they did)
And the weighing will be just on that Day. Then those whose (deeds) are heavier in the balance will find fulfilment
And those whose (deeds) are lighter in the scale shall perish for violating Our signs
We settled you on the earth, and provided means of livelihood for you in it; but little are the thanks you give
Verily We created you and gave you form and shape, and ordered the angels to bow before Adam in homage; and they all bowed but Iblis who was not among those who bowed
What prevented you" (said God), "from bowing (before Adam) at My bidding?" "I am better than him," said he. "You created me from fire, and him from clay
So God said: "Descend. You have no right to be insolent here. Go, and away; you are one of the damned
Grant me respite," said he, "till the raising of the dead
And God said: "You have the respite
Since You led me into error," said Iblis, "I shall lie in wait for them along Your straight path
And I shall come upon them from the front and behind, right and left; and You will not find among them many who would give thanks
Begone," said (God), "contemptible and rejected! As for those who follow you, I shall fill up Hell with all of you
And you, O Adam, and your spouse, live in the Garden and eat your fill wheresoever you like, but do not approach this tree, or you will become iniquitous
But Satan suggested (evil) to them, in order to reveal their hidden parts of which they were not aware (till then), and said: "Your Lord has forbidden you (to go near) this tree that you may not become angels or immortal
Then he said to them on oath: "I am your sincere friend
And led them (to the tree) by deceit. When they tasted (the fruit) of the tree their disgrace became exposed to them; and they patched the leaves of the Garden to hide it. And the Lord said to them: "Did I not forbid you this tree? And I told you that Satan was your open enemy
They said: "O our Lord, we have wronged ourselves. If You do not forgive us and have mercy upon us, we shall certainly be lost
Go," said God, "one the antagonist of the other, and live on the earth for a time ordained, and fend for yourselves
You will live there, and there will you die," He said, "and be raised from there (On the Day of Doom)
O sons of Adam, We have revealed to you a dress that would both hide your nakedness and be an adornment, but the raiment of piety is best. This is one of the tokens of God: You may haply reflect
O sons of Adam, let not Satan beguile you as he did your parents out of Eden, and made them disrobe to expose their disgrace to them. For he and his host can see you from where you cannot see them. We have made the devils the friends of those who do not believe
Who say when they commit shameful acts: "Our ancestors used to do so, and God has enjoined us to do the same." Say to them: "God never enjoins a conduct that is shameful. You impute such lies to God as you do not know
Tell them: "My Lord has enjoined piety, devotion in all acts of worship, and calling upon Him with exclusive obedience. For you will be reverted back to what you were (when) created first
A Section (among them) were guided, a section were bound to go astray, (for) instead of God they took the devils as their friends; yet they think they are on the right path
O sons of Adam, attire yourselves at every time of worship; eat and drink, but do not be wasteful, for God does not like the prodigals
Ask them: "Who forbids you attire that God has given to His creatures, and the good things that He has provided?" Tell them: "They are (meant) for believers in the world, and will be theirs on the Day of Judgement." That is how We explain Our signs to those who know
Tell them: "My Lord has forbidden repugnant acts, whether open or disguised, sin and unjust oppression, associating others with God, of which He has sent down no authority, and saying things of God of which you have no knowledge
A term is fixed for every people; and when their appointed time is come there will neither be a moment's delay nor haste
O sons of Adam, when apostles come to you from among you, who convey My messages, then those who take heed and amend will have neither fear nor regret
But those who deny Our signs and disdain them, shall belong to Hell, where they will abide for ever
Who could be more wicked than he who imputes lies to God or denies His revelations? Such as these will receive what is declared in the Book, and when Our angels come to draw out their souls and ask: "Where are they you worshipped other than God?" They will answer: "They have left us and fled;" and bear witness against themselves for being infidels
Enter then the Fire," will God say, "with the past generations of jinns and men." On entering each batch will condemn the other; and when all of them shall have entered one after the other, the last to come will say of those who had come before them: "O our Lord, they are the ones who led us astray; so give them double chastisement in the Fire." He will answer: "For all it will be double; but this you do not know
Then the former will say to the latter: "You have no privilege over us. So taste the punishment for what you had done
Verily for those who deny Our signs and turn away in haughtiness from them, the gates of heaven shall not be opened, nor will they enter Paradise, not till the camel passes through the needle's eye. That is how We requite the transgressors
For them is a flooring of Hell and a covering (of fire). That is how We requite the iniquitous
As for those who believe and do good, We never burden a soul beyond capacity. They are men of Paradise where they will abide for ever
Whatever the rancour they may have in their hearts We shall (cleanse and) remove. Streams of running water shall ripple at their feet, and they will say: "We are grateful to God for guiding us here. Never would we have been guided if God had not shown us the way. The apostles of our Lord had indeed brought the truth." And the cry shall resound: "This is Paradise you have inherited as meed for your deeds
And the inmates of Paradise will call to the residents of Hell: "We have found that the promise made to us by our Lord was true. Have you also found the promise of your Lord to be true?" They will answer: "Yes (it is so)." Then a crier will call from among them: "The curse of God be on the vile
Who obstruct those who follow the path of God and try to make it oblique, who do not believe in the life to come
There will be a veil between them, and on the wall will be the men (of al-A'raf) who will recognise everyone by their distinguishing marks, and will call to the inmates of Paradise: "Peace on you," without having entered it themselves though hoping to do so
When their eyes fall on the inmates of Hell they will say: "O Lord, do not place us in the crowd of the vile
Recognising them by their marks the men of al-A'raf will call (to the inmates of Hell): "Of what use was your amassing (of wealth) of which you were proud
(Then pointing to the inmates of Paradise, they will say): "Are they not those of whom you had sworn and said: 'God will not have mercy on them?' (And yet they have been told,) 'Enter Paradise where you will have no fear or regret
Those in Hell will call to the inmates of Paradise: "Pour a little water over us, or give us a little of what God has given you." They will answer: "God has verily forbidden these to those who denied the truth
Who made a sport and frolic of their faith and were lured by the life of the world." As they had forgotten the meeting of this Day so shall We neglect them today for having rejected Our signs
Indeed We had brought to them a Book distinct, replete with knowledge, and guidance and grace for men who believe
Are they waiting for the exposition of what it speaks of? The day that (Reality) is unravelled, the people who had lost sight of it will say: "The apostles of our Lord had indeed brought the truth. Do we have any one to intercede for us? If only we could go back to the world, we would act otherwise." Indeed they have caused themselves harm, and the lies they concocted did not help
Surely your Lord is God who created the heavens and the earth in six spans of time, then assumed all power. He covers up the day with night which comes chasing it fast; and the sun and moon and the stars are subject to His command. It is His to create and enjoin. Blessed be God, the Lord of all the worlds
Pray to your Lord in humility and unseen. He does not love the iniquitous
And do not corrupt the land after it has been reformed; and pray to Him in awe and expectation. The blessing of God is at hand for those who do good
Indeed it is He who sends the winds as harbingers of auspicious news announcing His beneficence, bringing heavy clouds which We drive towards a region lying dead, and send down rain, and raise all kinds of fruits. So shall We raise the dead that you may think and reflect
The soil that is good produces (rich) crops by the will of its Lord, and that which is had yields only what is poor. So do We explain Our signs in different ways to people who give thanks
We sent Noah to his people, and he said: "O people worship God; you have no other god but He; for I fear the retribution of the great Day may fall on you
The elders of his people replied: "We see clearly that you have gone astray
I have not gone astray, O my people," he said, "but have been sent by my Lord, the creator of all the worlds
I bring to you the messages of my Lord, and give you sincere advice, for I know from God what you do not know
Do you wonder that a warning has come to you from your Lord through a man who is one of you, and warns you to take heed for yourselves and fear God? You might be treated with mercy
But they called him a liar, and We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and drowned the others who rejected Our signs, for they were a people purblind
And We sent Hud, their brother, to the people of 'Ad. He said: "O you people, worship God, for you have no other god but He. Will you not take heed for yourselves
The chiefs of his people who were infidels replied: "We find you full of folly, and a liar to boot
I am not a fool, O people," he answered, "but have been sent by the Lord of all the worlds
I bring to you the messages of my Lord. I am your sincere friend
Do you wonder that a warning has come to you from your Lord through a man who is one of you and warns you? Remember, He made you leaders after the people of Noah, and gave you a greater increase in your stature. So think of the favours of God; you may haply be blessed
They answered: "Have you come to say to us that we should worship only one God, abandoning those our ancestors had worshipped? If so, bring on us what you threaten us with, if what you say is true
He replied: "You have already been beset with punishment and the wrath of God. Why dispute with me about names invented by you and your ancestors for which no sanction was sent down? So wait (for what is to come), I am waiting with you
Then We saved him and those on his side by Our grace, and destroyed to the very last those who rejected Our signs and denied the truth
We sent to Thamud their brother Saleh. "O you people," said he, "worship God, for you have no other god but He. Clear proof has come to you already from your Lord, and this she-camel of God is the token for you. Leave her free to graze upon God's earth, and do not molest her lest a grievous punishment should befall you
Remember, how you were made leaders after the people of 'Ad, and were settled on the land so that you could construct on the plains palaces, and carve dwellings out of mountains. So think of the favours of God, and do not act with corruption in the land
The chiefs among the people who were arrogant towards the weaker ones among them who believed, asked: "Do you really know that Saleh has been sent by his Lord?" They said: "Indeed we believe in the message he has brought
Those who were arrogant answered: "We do not believe in what you believe
Then they hamstrung the she-camel and rebelled against the command of their Lord, and said: "Bring, O Saleh, on us the affliction you promise, if you are one of the sent ones
Then they were seized by an earthquake, and lay overturned on the ground in their homes in the morning
Saleh turned away from them and said: "O my people, I conveyed to you the message of my Lord and warned you; but you do not like those who wish you well
And We sent Lot, who said to his people: "Why do you commit this lecherous act which none in the world has committed before
In preference to women you satisfy your lust with men. Indeed you are a people who are guilty of excess
His people made no answer, and only said: "Drive them out of the city. They profess to be pure
But We saved him and his family, except for his wife who was one of those who stayed behind
And We rained down on them a shower (of Stones). So witness the end of sinners
Remember, We sent to Midian their brother Shu'aib. "O you people," he said, "worship God, for you have no other god but He. Clear proof has come to you from your Lord; so give in full measure and full weight; do not keep back from people what is theirs, and do not corrupt the land after it has been reformed. This is best for you if you believe
Do not lie in ambush to intimidate and divert from the path of God those who believe in Him, nor seek obliquity in it. Remember the day when you were few and He increased your numbers. So consider the fate of those who were evil
If some of you believe what has been sent through me, and some of you do not, have patience until God decide between us, for He is the best of all judges
The arrogant leaders of the people replied: "We shall drive you away from our land, O Shu'aib, and those who are with you, unless you come back to your faith." But he remarked: "Even if we are disgusted with it
We shall only be guilty of blaspheming God if we accept your way after the people of Noah, and gave you a greater increase in your stature. So think of the favours of God; you may haply be blessed
The chiefs among his people who did not believe said (to them): "If you follow Shu'aib and his way you will surely be ruined
Then they were seized by an earthquake, and lay overturned on the ground in their homes in the morning
They who called Shu'aib a liar (disappeared) as though they had never existed; and those who called Shu'aib a liar were the ones who were ruined
So Shu'aib turned away from them and said: "O people, I conveyed to you the message of my Lord, and warned you. (But you paid no heed). How can I grieve for a people who do not believe
There is not a region to which We sent a prophet and did not inflict upon its people adversity and hardship so that they may submit
But when We changed hardship to ease, and they rose and prospered, (they forgot Our favours) and said: "Our ancestors had also known suffering and joy." So We caught them unawares
But if the people of these regions had believed and feared God, We would surely have showered on them blessings of the heavens and the earth; but they only denied, and We punished them for their deeds
Are the people of the region so secure that they lie asleep unaware as Our punishment overtakes them
Or, are the people of the towns so unafraid that (even when) Our retribution comes upon them in the hours of the morning they remain engrossed in sport and play
Can they remain secure against the plan of God? Only they feel secure against the plan of God who are certain of being ruined
Do not the people who inherited the earth from the (earlier) inhabitants perceive that We could afflict them too for their sins if We pleased, and put seals on their hearts that they may not hear (the voice of truth)
These were the (earlier) habitations whose accounts We have given to you. Their apostles came with clear proofs, but they did not believe what they once denied. That is how God seals the hearts of those who do not believe
We did not find many of them faithful to their promises, and found many of them disobedient
So We sent Moses with miracles after (these apostles) to the Pharaoh and his nobles, but they behaved with them high-handedly. See then the end of the authors of evil
Moses said: "O Pharaoh, I have been sent by the Lord of all the worlds
I am duty bound to speak nothing of God but the truth I have brought from your Lord a clear sign; so let the people of Israel depart with me
He said: "If you have brought a sign then display it, if what you say is true
At this Moses threw down his staff, and lo, it became a live serpent
And he drew forth his hand, and behold, it looked white to those who beheld it
The nobles of Pharaoh said: "He surely is a clever magician
He wishes to drive you away from the land. So what do you advise
They said: "Put him and his brother off (awhile) and send out heralds to the cities
To bring all the wise magicians to you
The magicians came to the Pharaoh and said: "Is there reward for us if we succeed
Yes," said he, "you will be among the honoured
So they said: "O Moses, you may cast your spell first, or we shall cast ours
You cast it first," answered Moses. When they cast their spell, they bewitched the eyes of the people and petrified them by conjuring up a great charm
We said to Moses: "Throw down your staff;" and it swallowed up their conjurations in no time
Thus the truth was upheld, and the falsehood that they practised was exposed
Thus there and then they were vanquished and overthrown, humiliated
The sorcerers fell to the ground in homage
And said: "We have come to believe in the Lord of all the worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
But Pharaoh said: "You have come to accept belief in Him without my permission! This surely is a plot you have hatched to expel the people from the land. You will soon come to know
I will have your hands and feet on alternate sides cut off, and have you all crucified
They answered: "We have (in any case) to go back to our Lord
The only reason you have to hate us is that we believed in the signs of our Lord as they came to us. O our Lord, give us sufficient endurance that we may die submitting (to You)
And the leaders of Pharaoh's people said to him: "Would you allow Moses and his people to create disorder in the land and discard you and your gods?" He replied: "We shall now slay their sons and spare their women, and subdue them
Said Moses to his people: "Invoke the help of God and be firm. The earth belongs to God: He can make whom He wills among His creatures inherit it. The future is theirs who take heed for themselves
They said: "We were oppressed before you came, and have been since you have come to us." He answered: "It may well be that soon God may destroy your enemy and make you inherit the land, and then see how you behave
We afflicted the people of Pharaoh with famine and dearth of everything that they might take heed
Yet when good came their way they said: "It is our due;" but when misfortune befell them they put the omen down to Moses and those who were with him. But surely the omen was with God, yet most of them did not understand
They said: "Whatsoever the sign you have brought to deceive us, we shall not believe in you
So We let loose on them floods and locusts, and vermin, frogs and blood -- how many different signs. But they still remained arrogant, for they were a people full of sin
Yet when punishment overtook them, they said: "O Moses, invoke your Lord for us as you have been enjoined. If the torment is removed, we shall certainly believe in you and let the people of Israel go with you
But no sooner was the punishment withdrawn for a time to enable them to make good their promise than they broke it
So We took vengeance on them, and drowned them in the sea for rejecting Our signs and not heeding them
We then made the people who were weak (and oppressed) successors of the land to the East and the West which We had blessed. Thus the fair promise of your Lord to the children of Israel was fulfilled, for they were patient in adversity; and whatsoever the Pharaoh and his people had fashioned, and the structures they had raised, were destroyed
When We brought the children of Israel across the sea, and they came to a people who were devoted to their idols, they said: "O Moses, make us also a god like theirs." "You are ignorant," he replied
These people and their ways will surely be destroyed, for false is what they practise
Do you want me to seek for you," he said, "a god other than God, when He has exalted you over all the nations of the world
Remember (the day) when He saved you from the people of Pharaoh who oppressed and afflicted you, and slew your sons and spared your women. In this was a great trial from your Lord
We made an appointment of thirty nights with Moses (On Mount Sinai) to which We added ten more; so the term set by the Lord was completed in forty nights. Moses said to Aaron, his brother: "Deputise for me among my people. Dispose rightly, and do not follow the way of the authors of evil
When Moses arrived at the appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said: "O Lord, reveal Yourself to me that I may behold You." "You cannot behold Me," He said. "But look at the mountain: If it remains firm in its place you may then behold Me." But when his Lord appeared on the mountain in His effulgence, it crumbled to a heap of dust, and Moses fell unconscious. When he came to, he said: "All glory to You. I turn to You in repentance, and I am the first to believe
Said (the Lord): "O Moses, I raised you above all men by sending My messages and speaking to you; so receive what I give you, and be grateful
And We wrote down on tablets admonitions and clear explanations of all things for Moses, and ordered him: "Hold fast to them, and command your people to observe the best in them. I will show you the abode of the wicked
I will turn those away from My signs who behave unjustly with arrogance in the land so that even though they see all the signs they will not believe in them; and if they see the path of rectitude, will not take it to be a way; and if they see the way of error take it to be the (right) path. This is so for they have called Our messages lies, and have been heedless of them
Vain are the acts of those who deny Our signs and the meeting in the Hereafter. Can they ever be rewarded for anything but what they did
In the absence of Moses his people prepared the image of a calf from their ornaments, which gave out the mooing of a cow. Yet they did not see it could neither speak to them nor guide them to the right path. Even then they took it (for a deity) and did wrong
Then they were filled with remorse and saw that they had erred and said: "If our Lord does not forgive us we will surely be lost
When Moses returned to his people, indignant and grieved, he said: "How wickedly you behaved in my absence. Why must you hasten the decree of your Lord?" And he cast aside the tablets, and pulled his brother by the hair. "O son of my mother," said (Aaron), "these people took advantage of my weakness and almost killed me. Do not let my enemies rejoice at my plight, and do not put me down among transgressors
(Moses) said: "O Lord, forgive me and my brother, and admit us to Your grace, for You are the most compassionate of all
Surely those who have taken the calf (as a god) will suffer the anger of their Lord, and disgrace in the world. That is how We requite those who fabricate lies
Yet those who do wrong, then repent and believe, are forgiven, for your Lord is forgiving and kind
When his anger subsided Moses picked up the tablets. Inscribed on them was guidance and grace for those who fear their Lord
Moses chose seventy of his people for the appointment (on Mount Sinai). When they arrived they were seized by a tremor. (Moses) said: "O Lord, if You had so pleased You could have annihilated them and me before this. Will You destroy us for something the foolish among us have done? This is but a trial from You whereby You will lead whom You will astray and guide whom You please. You are our saviour, so forgive us and have mercy on us, for You are the best of forgivers
Enjoin for us good in the world, and good in the world to come. We turn to You alone." And the Lord said: "I punish only those whom I will, but My mercy enfolds everything. I shall enjoin it for those who take heed for themselves, who pay the zakat and believe in My signs
Who follow the messenger, the gentile Prophet, described in the Torah and the Gospel, who bids things noble and forbids things vile, makes lawful what is clean, and prohibits what is foul, who relieves them of their burdens, and the yoke that lies upon them. Those who believe and honour and help him, and follow the light sent with him, are those who will attain their goal
Say: "O men, I am verily the apostle of God to you all. His whose kingdom extends over the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He, the giver of life and death. So believe in God and the messenger, the gentile Prophet, sent by Him, who believes in God and His messages. Obey him; you may haply be guided aright
Among the people of Moses is a section that shows the way to the truth, and deals justly in accordance with it
We divided them into twelve (different) tribes. When his people asked for water, We said to Moses: "Strike the rock with your staff;" and behold, twelve springs of water gushed forth, so that each of the tribes had a place of its own to drink; and We made the clouds spread shade over them and sent for them manna and quails (and said): "Eat of the good things We have provided for you." But (by disobeying) they did not harm Us, they harmed themselves
And when it was said to them: "Live in this land and eat of its produce wheresoever you like, and ask for remission of your sins, but pass through the gates with submission (and not pride), We shall forgive your trespasses, and give to those who are righteous abundance
The wicked among them changed and perverted the word We had spoken to a word unpronounced; so We sent from heaven retribution on them for all their wickedness
Enquire of them about the town situated by the sea where, when they did not keep the Sabbath, the fish came up to the surface of the water for them; but on days other than the Sabbath the fish did not come. We tried them in this way, for they were disobedient
When a Section of them said: "Why do you admonish a people whom God is about to destroy or to punish severely?" They replied: "To clear ourselves of blame before your Lord, and that they may fear God
But when they forgot to remember the warning, We saved those who prohibited evil, but inflicted on the wicked a dreadful punishment -- requital for their disobedience
When they persisted in doing what they had been forbidden, We said to them: "Become (like) apes despised
And your Lord declared He would send men against them who would inflict dreadful suffering on them till the Day of Doom, for your Lord is swift in retribution, though He is certainly forgiving and kind
We dispersed them in groups over the earth, some righteous, some otherwise; and We tried them with good things and bad, that they may haply turn back
Then after them a new generation inherited the Book. They took to the things of this base world, and said: "We shall (surely) be forgiven this." Yet they will accept similar things if they came their way again. Had they not been covenanted in the Book to say nothing in the name of God but the truth? And they have read this in it. The abode of the life to come is better for those who fear God. Can they not comprehend
As for those who adhere to the Book and are firm in devotion, We shall certainly not let the wages of those who are upright to go waste
The day We shook the mountain above them like an awning, and they feared it would fall over them, (We said): "Hold fast to what We have given you, and bear in mind what is (said) therein so that you may take heed
When your Lord brings forth from their loins the offspring of the children of Adam, He makes them witnesses over themselves, (and asks): "Am I not your Lord?" 'Indeed,' they reply. 'We bear witness,' -- lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection: "We were not aware of this
Or, lest they should say: "It were our fathers who had ascribed compeers to God; we are only their offspring. Will You destroy us for the deeds of those who dealt in vanities
That is how We explain Our signs distinctly so that they may come back (to the right path)
Relate to them the plight of the man whom We gave Our signs, but he passed them by, so that Satan came after him, and he went astray
We wished to exalt him, but he loved baseness and followed his lust. His likeness is that of a dog who hangs out his tongue if you drive him away, and still hangs it out if you leave him alone. Such is the case of the people who deny Our signs. Narrate this history to them; they may haply reflect
Evil is the case of those who deny Our signs and wrong themselves
He alone is guided whom God shows the way; and whom He leads astray is surely lost
Many of the jinns and human beings have We destined for Hell, who possess hearts but do not feel, have eyes but do not see, have ears but do not hear, like cattle, even worse than them. They are people unconcerned
All the names of God are beautiful, so call Him by them; and leave those alone who act profanely towards His names: They will be retributed for their deeds
Yet there are among those We have created people who lead (others) to the truth, and act justly in its light
We shall punish those who deny Our revelations slowly in a way that they will not know
I will just give them respite. My plan is certainly invincible
Have they not bethought themselves their companion is not mad? He is only a plain admonisher
Have they not contemplated the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything created by God, (to educe) that perhaps their own term is drawing to a close? In what lore after this would they then believe
Whosoever God allows to go astray has none to show him the way, for He leaves them to wander perplexed in their wickedness
They ask you about the Hour: "When is its determined time?" Say: "Only my Lord has the knowledge. No one can reveal it except He. Oppressive will it be for the heavens and the earth. When it comes, it will come unawares." They ask you about it as if you were in the know. You tell them: "Only God has the knowledge." But most people do not know
Tell them: "I am not master of my own gain or loss but as God may please. If I had the knowledge of the Unknown I would have enjoyed abundance of the good, and no evil would have touched me. I am only a bearer of warnings and bringer of happy news for those who believe
It is He who created you from a single cell, and from it created its mate, that you may live as companions. When the man covered the woman she conceived a light burden and carried it about. And when she was heavy (with child) they prayed together to their Lord: "If You bestow a healthy son on us we shall truly be grateful
But when they were given a healthy son, they started ascribing to other powers a share in what God had bestowed on them. But God is above what they ascribe to Him
Do they associate those with Him who cannot create a thing, and are themselves created
Who can neither help them, nor help themselves
If you call them to guidance they will not follow you. It is all the same if you call them or hold your tongue
Those whom you invoke besides God are created beings like you. So call on them and let them answer your call, if what you say is true
Do they have feet to walk on, or hands to hold with, or eyes to see and ears to hear with? Say to them: "Call your compeers, and work out a plot against me, and do not give me time
My saviour is God who has revealed this Book; and He protects those who are upright
While those you beseech apart from Him cannot help you or even help themselves
When you call upon them for guidance, they do not hear. When you think they are looking at you, (in fact) they cannot see
Cultivate tolerance, enjoin justice, and avoid the fools
If you are instigated by the Devil to evil seek refuge in God, for God hears all and knows everything
Verily those who fear God think of Him when assailed by the instigations of Satan, and lo! they begin to understand
Even though their (devilish) brothers would like them to continue in error, and would not desist
And when you do not bring a (Qur'anic) verse to them, they say: "Why don't you make one up?" Say: "I follow only what my Lord reveals to me." These (revelations) are an evident proof from your Lord, and a guidance and grace for those who believe
When the Qur'an is recited listen to it in silence. You may perhaps be blessed
Meditate on your Lord inwardly with humility and trepidation, reciting His Book softly, morning and evening, and be not negligent
Verily those who are in the presence of your Lord are never too proud to worship and celebrate His praises, and bow in homage to Him
THEY ASK YOU of (benefits accruing as) spoils of war. Tell them: "The benefits belong to God and His Messenger." So fulfil your duty to God and keep peace among yourselves. Obey God and the Prophet, If you really believe
Only they are true believers whose hearts fill up with awe when the name of God is mentioned; and their faith is further strengthened when His messages are read out to them; and those who place their trust in their Lord
Who are firm in devotion, and spend of what We have given them
Are true believers. There are for them (high) ranks with their Lord, and pardon and noble provision
As your Lord sent you from your home (to fight) for the true cause, a section of the faithful were averse
Who argued with you about the matter even after it had become quite clear, as if they were being pushed into (the arms of) death as they waited
Though God promised that one of two columns (would fall to you), you desired the one that was not armed. But God wished to confirm the truth by His words, and wipe the unbelievers out to the last
So that Truth may be affirmed and falsehood negated, even though the sinners be averse
Remember when you prayed to your Lord for help, He heard you and said: "I shall send a thousand angels following behind you for your aid
He gave you the good news only to reassure your hearts, for victory comes from God alone, and certainly God is all-mighty and all-wise
A blanketing sleep came over you as a (measure of) security from Him, and He sent down rain from the skies to cleanse you, and to remove the plague of Satan, and to strengthen your hearts and steady your steps
And the Lord said to the angels: "I am with you; go and strengthen the faithful. I shall fill the hearts of infidels with terror. So smite them on their necks and every joint, (and incapacitate them)
For they had opposed God and His Apostle; but whosoever opposes God and his Apostle (should know) that God is severe in retribution
For you is this (punishment) to taste, for the infidels the torment of Hell
O believers, when you meet unbelievers on the field of battle, do not turn your backs to them
For any one who turns his back on that day, except to manoeuvre or rally to his side, will bring the wrath of God on himself, and have Hell as abode; and what an evil destination
It was not you who killed them, but God did so. You did not throw what you threw, (sand into the eyes of the enemy at Badr), but God, to bring out the best in the faithful by doing them a favour of His own. God is all-hearing and all-knowing
That was that, but remember God will make the plots of the unbelievers contemptible
You had asked for a judgement, so the judgement has come to you (In the form of victory for the faithful). So, if you desist it will be better for you. If you come back to it, We shall do the same, and your forces, however large, will not be of the least avail, for God is with those who believe
O believers, obey God and His Messenger, and do not turn away from him when you hear (him speak)
And do not be like those who say: "We have heard," but do not hear
The worst of creatures in the eyes of God are those who are deaf and dumb and devoid of sense
If God had seen any good in them He would surely have made them hear. Now even if He makes them hear they will turn away (in obduracy)
O believers, respond to the call of God and His Prophet when he calls you to what will give you life (and preservation). Remember that God intervenes between man and his heart, and that you will be gathered before Him
Beware of sedition, which does not affect the oppressors alone among you, and know that the punishment of God is severe
Remember, when you were few and powerless in the land, afraid of despoliation at the hands of men. But then God sheltered and helped you to strength, and provided for you good things that you may perhaps be grateful
O you who believe, do not be faithless to God and His Apostle, nor violate your trusts knowingly
Know that your worldly possessions and your children are just a temptation, and that God has greater rewards with Him
O believers, if you follow the path shown by God, He will give you a standard (of right and wrong), and overlook your sins, and forgive you. God is abounding in benevolence
Remember, when the infidels contrived to make you a prisoner or to murder or expel you, they plotted, but God also planned; and God's plan is the best
When Our messages were read out to them, they said: "We have heard. We could certainly compose (writings) like them if we choose. They are but only tales of long ago
They had also said: "If this be the truth from you, O God, then rain down on us stones from the skies, or inflict a grievous punishment upon us
But God would not choose to punish them while you are in their midst, nor afflict them when they are seeking forgiveness
But what is there so special they have that God should not punish them when they obstruct people from the Holy Mosque, though they are not its (appointed) guardians? Its guardians could be only those who are pious and devout. But most of them do not know
Their worship in the House of God has been no more than whistling and clapping. So they have to taste the punishment for disbelief
Those who disbelieve spend their possessions on turning men away from God. They will go on spending and rue it in the end, and will be subdued. But those who remain disbelievers shall be gathered into Hell
That God may separate the bad from the good, and link the wicked together and cast them into Hell. These are verily the people who will lose
You tell the unbelievers in case they desist whatever has happened will be forgiven them. If they persist, they should remember the fate of those who have gone before them
So, fight them till all opposition ends, and obedience is wholly God's. If they desist then verily God sees all they do
But if they are obstinate, know that God is your helper and protector: How excellent a helper, and how excellent a protector is He
Know that one-fifth of what you acquire as booty (of war) is for God and His Apostle, and for relatives and orphans, the poor and wayfarers, if you truly believe in God and what We revealed to Our votary on the day of victory over the infidels when the two armies clashed (at Badr). For God has the power to do any thing
(That day) when you were at one end of the valley, (the unbelievers) at the other, and the caravan below you (on the lowland by the coast), you would surely have declined to fight if (the Makkans) had offered you battle. (But the battle did take place) that God may end the matter which had been accomplished, so that he who had to die may perish after a clear demonstration, and he who had to live may survive in the light of positive proof, for God hears all and knows everything
God showed (the Makkans) to be few in your dream, for if He had shown them to be many you would surely have lost courage and disagreed about the (wisdom) of the battle. But God spared you this, for He surely knows what is in the hearts of men
When you faced them He made (the enemy) seem few to you in numbers, and made you appear fewer in their eyes, (it was) so that God could accomplish what had been decreed; for all things rest with God
O believers, when you meet an army, stand firm, and think of God a great deal that you may be blessed with success
Obey God and His Apostle, and do not disagree among yourselves or you will be unmanned and lose courage. Persevere, for God is with those who endure
Do not be like those who went out of their homes full of their own importance, ostentatiously, trying to hinder others from the way of God. But God encompasses all they do
Satan made their deeds look alluring to them, and said: "None will prevail over you this day, for I shall be near at hand." Yet when the two armies appeared face to face, he turned back and fled, saying: "I am not with you, for I can see what you cannot perceive. I fear God, for His punishment is severe
The hypocrites, and those who had doubts in their hearts, said: "Their faith has misled them." But whoever places his trust in God will find God mighty and wise
If you could only see the infidels as the angels draw away their souls and strike their faces and their backs, (saying): "Taste the torment of burning
For what you have brought upon yourselves." God is surely not unjust to His creatures, (they are unjust to themselves)
Their case is like that of Pharaoh's people, and of those before them, who denied the revelations of God, and were punished for their sins by God, and God is all powerful and Severe His punishment
God does not withdraw a favour bestowed upon a people unless they change themselves, for God hears all and knows everything
This was the case with the people of Pharaoh and those before them, who rejected the signs of their Lord and were destroyed for their sins, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh as they were oppressors
Verily the worst of creatures in the sight of God are those who deny (the truth), and will not believe
As for those with whom you have made a treaty and who abrogate it every time, and do not fear God
If you meet them in battle, inflict on them such a defeat as would be a lesson for those who come after them, and that they may be warned
If you apprehend treachery from a people (with whom you have a treaty), retaliate by breaking off (relations) with them, for God does not like those who are treacherous
The infidels should not think that they can bypass (the law of God). Surely they cannot get away
Prepare against them whatever arms and cavalry you can muster, that you may strike terror in (the hearts of) the enemies of God and your own, and others besides them not known to you, but known to God. Whatever you spend in the way of God will be paid back to you in full, and no wrong will be done to you
But if they are inclined to peace, make peace with them, and have trust in God, for He hears all and knows everything
If they try to cheat you, God is surely sufficient for you. It is He who has strengthened you with His help and with believers
Whose hearts He cemented with love. You could never have united their hearts even if you had spent whatever (wealth) is in the earth; but God united them with love, for He is all-mighty and all-wise
God is sufficient for you, O Prophet, and the faithful who follow you
O Prophet, urge the faithful to fight. If there are twenty among you with determination they will vanquish two hundred; and if there are a hundred then they will vanquish a thousand unbelievers, for they are people devoid of understanding
God has lightened your burden as He knows you are weak: So, if there are a hundred men of firm determination among you, they will vanquish two hundred; and if there are a thousand of you they will vanquish two thousand by the will of God, for God is with those who are determined
No apostle should take captives until he has battled and subdued the country. You desire the vanities of this world, but God wills (for you the reward) of the world to come; and God is all-mighty and all-wise
Had this not been decreed by God in advance, you would have suffered a grievous punishment for what you took (as booty)
But now use such of the spoils as are lawful and good, and fear God, for God is forgiving and kind
O Prophet, tell the captives you have taken: "If God finds some good in your hearts, He will reward you with something better than was taken away from you, and forgive your sins, for God is forgiving and kind
If they try to deceive you, remember they have deceived God before. So He gave you mastery over them, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
Those who accepted the faith and set out of their homes, and fought in the way of God wealth and soul, and those who gave them shelter and helped them, are friends of one another. You are not responsible for protecting those who embraced the faith but did not leave their homes, until they do so. In ease they ask for your help in the name of faith, you are duty bound to help them, except against a people with whom you have a treaty; for God sees all that you do
Those who are infidels aid one another. Unless you do the same there will be discord in the land and anarchy
Those who accepted the faith and abandoned their homes, and struggled in the cause of God, and those who gave them shelter and helped them, are veritably true believers. For them is forgiveness and noble sustenance
Those who accepted the faith and left their homes and fought by your side, are your brothers; yet those who are related by blood are closer to one another according to the decree of God. Verily God knows everything
IMMUNITY is granted those idolaters by God and his Apostle with whom you have a treaty
(They can) move about for four months freely in the land, but should know they cannot escape (the law of) God, and that God can put the unbelievers to shame
A general proclamation is (made) this day of the Greater Pilgrimage on the part of God and His Apostle, that God is not bound (by any contract) to idolaters, nor is His Apostle. It is, therefore, better for you to repent. If you do not, remember that you cannot elude (the grip of) God. So announce to those who deny the truth the news of painful punishment
Except those idolaters with whom you have a treaty, who have not failed you in the least, nor helped anyone against you. Fulfil your obligations to them during the term (of the treaty). God loves those who take heed for themselves
But when these months, prohibited (for fighting), are over, slay the idolaters wheresoever you find them, and take them captive or besiege them, and lie in wait for them at every likely place. But if they repent and fulfil their devotional obligations and pay the zakat, then let them go their way, for God is forgiving and kind
If an idolater seeks protection, then give him asylum that he may hear the word of God. Then escort him to a place of safety, for they are people who do not know
How could there be a treaty between idolaters and God and His Apostle, except those you covenanted by the Sacred Mosque? Therefore as long as they are honest with you be correct with them, for God loves those who are godly
How (can they be trusted)? If they prevail against you they will neither observe pacts nor good faith with you. They flatter you with their tongues, but their hearts are averse to you, for most of them are iniquitous
They barter away the words of God for a petty price, and obstruct (others) from His path. How evil indeed are the things they do
They have no regard for kinship or treaties with believers, for they are transgressors
But if they repent and are firm in devotion and pay the zakat, then they are your brothers in faith. We explain Our commands distinctly for those who understand
If they break their pledge after giving their word and revile your faith, fight these specimens of faithlessness, for surely their oaths have no sanctity: They may haply desist
Will you not fight those who broke their pledge and plotted to banish the Apostle, and who were the first to attack you? Are you afraid of them? If you are believers you should fear God more
Fight them so that God may punish them at your hands, and put them to shame, and help you against them, and heal the wounds of the hearts of believers
And remove the anger from their breasts; for God turns to whosoever desires. God is all-knowing and all-wise
Do you think you will get away before God knows who among you fought and did not take anyone but God, His Apostle and the faithful, as their friends? God is cognisant of all that you do
The idolaters have no right to visit the mosques of God while bearing testimony to their disbelief. Meaningless will be their acts, and in Hell they will bide for ever
Only those who believe in God and the Last Day, who fulfil their devotional obligations, pay the zakat, and fear no one but God, can visit the mosques of God. They may hope to be among the guided
Do you think that giving a drink of water to the pilgrims and going on a visit to the Sacred Mosque, is the same as believing in God and the Last Day, and striving in the cause of God? In the eyes of God it is not the same; and God does not show the unrighteous the way
Those who accepted the faith and left their homes and fought in the way of God, wealth and soul, have a greater reward with God, and will be successful
Their Lord announces to them news of His mercy, acceptance, and gardens of lasting bliss
Which they will enjoy for ever. Indeed God has greater rewards with Him
O you who believe, do not hold your fathers and brothers as friends if they hold disbelief more dear than faith; and those of you who do so are iniquitous
You tell them: "If your fathers and sons, your brothers and wives and families and wealth, or the business you fear may fail, and the mansions that you love, are dearer to you than God, His Apostle, and struggling in His cause, then wait until God's command arrives, for God does not show transgressors the way
Indeed God has helped you on many occasions, even during the battle of Hunain, when you were elated with joy at your numbers which did not prove of the least avail, so that the earth and its vast expanse became too narrow for you, and you turned back and retreated
Then God sent down a sense of tranquility on His Apostle and the faithful; and sent down troops invisible to punish the infidels. This is the recompense of those who do not believe
Yet God may turn (even) after this to whomsoever He please, for God is compassionate and kind
O believers, the idolaters are unclean. So they should not approach the Holy Mosque after this year. In case you fear indigence (from the stoppage of business with them), then God will enrich you of His bounty if He will, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
Fight those people of the Book who do not believe in God and the Last Day, who do not prohibit what God and His Apostle have forbidden, nor accept divine law, until all of them pay protective tax in submission
The Jews say: "Ezra is the son of God;" the Christians say: "Christ is the son of God." That is what they say with their tongues following assertions made by unbelievers before them. May they be damned by God: How perverse are they
They consider their rabbis and monks and the Christ, son of Mary, to be gods apart from God, even though they had been enjoined to worship only one God, for there is no god but He. Too holy is He for what they ascribe to Him
They wish to extinguish the light of God by uttering blasphemies; but God will not have it so, for He wills to perfect His light, however the unbelievers be averse
It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the true faith in order to make it superior to other systems of belief, even though the idolaters may not like it
O believers, many rabbis and priests devour the possessions of others wrongfully, and keep men away from the path of God. To those who accumulate gold and silver, and do not spend in the way of God, announce the news of painful punishment
On the day We shall heat up (their gold) on the fire of Hell and brand their foreheads, sides and backs (and say to them): "It is this you stored up for yourselves; so now taste of what you had stored
The number of months with God is twelve in accordance with God's law since the day He created the heavens and the earth. Of these four are holy. This is the straight reckoning. So do not exceed yourselves during them; but fight the idolaters to the end as they fight you in like manner; and remember, God is with those Who preserve themselves from evil and do the right
Intercalating a month is adding to unbelief. The unbelievers are misguided by this, for they take the same month to be sacred one year and sacrilegious the next, thus making the number of months sanctified by God accord with theirs in order to make what God has forbidden, lawful. Attractive seem to them their evil deeds; but God does not show the unbelievers the way
What has happened to you, O believers, that when you are asked to set out in the cause of God your feet begin to drag? Do you find the life of the world so pleasing that you forget the life to come? Yet the profit of the life of this world is but meagre as compared to the life to come
Unless you go out (to strive), God will inflict grievous punishment on you, and bring other people in your place, and you will not be able to harm Him in the least, for God has the power over all things
If you do not help (the Prophet, remember) God had helped him when the infidels had forced him to leave (and he was) one of two. When both of them were in the cave, he said to his companion: "Do not grieve, for God is with us." Then God sent divine peace on him, and invisible armies for his help, and made the unbelievers' purpose abject. Most exalted is God's word, for God is all-mighty and all-wise
O believers, go out in the cause of God, (whether) light or heavy, and strive in the service of God, wealth and soul. This is better for you if you understand
(O Prophet), had the gain been close at hand, and easy the journey, they would surely have followed you; but hard was the journey and long the going. Even then they swear by God (and say): "If we had the strength we would surely have gone out with you." They are only ruining themselves, for God is aware they lie
May God forgive you. Why did you allow them (to stay behind) without ascertaining who spoke the truth and who were liars
Those who believe in God and the Last Day, do not ask your leave to be excused from fighting wealth and soul (in the cause of God), for God knows the pious and devout
Only they ask (for leave) who do not believe in God and the Last Day, whose hearts are full of doubt; and doubting they waver (between gain and loss)
If they had intended to go out (to fight) they would surely have made preparations. But God did not like their setting forth, and they were held back and told: "Stay at home with those who stay behind
Had they gone out with you, they would only have been a hindrance and let loose confusion among you to create discord; for there are some in your midst who spy for them. But God knows who are the wicked
They had tried to create disorder before and intrigued against you, but truth came out in the end and God's will prevailed, even though they did not like it
And (many a one) there is among them who says: "Allow me (to stay back at home), and put me not on trial." Surely they have put themselves on trial already, and Hell will enclose the unbelievers from all sides
If good comes your way they are vexed, but if calamity befalls you, they say: "We had taken precautions in advance;" and pleased, turn away
Tell them: "Nothing can befall us except what God decrees. Our protector is He, and in God should the faithful place their trust
Say: "Are you waiting for anything else but one of two good things for us, (victory or martyrdom)? Yet what we are waiting for you is the punishment of God, direct or through us. So keep waiting; we are waiting with you
Tell them: "You may spend (in the way of God), whether willingly or with reluctance, it will not be accepted from you, for you are reprobates
Nothing prevents the acceptance of what they spend except that they do not believe in God and His Apostle, and come to worship but languidly and spend only grudgingly
Do not marvel at their wealth and children. God intends to punish them through these in the world; and their souls will depart in a state of disbelief
They swear by God they are with you, though in fact they are not. They are only a frightened lot
If they find a place of shelter or a cave or hole to hide, they will turn to it
There are some among them who blame you (of partiality) in distributing the offerings made in the name of God. In case they receive some of these they are pleased, if not, they are incensed
They should rather have been pleased with what God and His Prophet had given them, and said: "God is sufficient for us; He will give us of His largesse as will His Apostle. We supplicate no one but God
Charities are meant for the indigent and needy, and those who collect and distribute them, and those whom you wish to win over, and for redeeming slaves (and captives) and those who are burdened with debt, and in the cause of God, and the wayfarers: So does God ordain. God is all-knowing and all-wise
There are some among them who talk ill of the Prophet by saying: "He listens to everyone." Tell them: "He listens for your good, and trusts in God and trusts the faithful, and he is a blessing for those who believe. For those who offend the Apostle of God there is painful punishment
They swear by God to please you; but if they are believers it would have been worthier to have pleased God and His Apostle
Have they not realised that anyone who opposes God and His Prophet, will abide in Hell for ever? And that is the worst disgrace
The hypocrites fear lest a Surah is revealed concerning them, exposing what is in their hearts. Say to them: "Mock as much as you like; God will surely expose what you dread
But if you ask them, they will say: "We were only gossiping and jesting." You ask them: "Were you jesting with God, His revelations and His messengers
Do not make excuses: You turned unbelievers after having come to faith. If We pardon a section of you (for being frivolous), We shall punish the other for being guilty (of deliberate sin)
The hypocrites (are the same) whether men or women, the one of them being of the other. They encourage what is bad and dissuade from the good, and tighten their purses (when it comes to spending in the way of God). Of God they are oblivious; so He is oblivious of them. The hypocrites are indeed transgressors
God has reserved for hypocrites, whether men or women, and for unbelievers, the fire of Hell, where they will abide for ever. This is sufficient for them: They have God's condemnation and lasting torment
Like those before you who were greater in strength, had more wealth and children than you, who enjoyed their lot in this world, as you have enjoyed your share like them. You indulge in idle talk, as they had indulged in vain discourse. Yet nothing of what they did remains in this world or will in the next, and they are the losers
Has not the account of those before them come to them, -- of the people of Noah and 'Ad and Thamud, of Abraham and Midian, and all the habitations that were destroyed? Their apostles had come to them with clear proofs; and God did not surely wrong them, they wronged themselves
Those who believe, men and women, befriend one another, and enjoin what is right and prohibit what is wrong. They observe their devotional obligations, pay the zakat, and obey God and His Apostle. God will be merciful to them, for God is all-mighty and all-wise
God has promised men and women who believe gardens with streams of running water where they will abide for ever, and beautiful mansions in the Garden of Eden, and the blessings of God above all. That will be happiness supreme
Strive, O Prophet, against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and deal with them firmly. Their final abode is Hell: And what a wretched destination
They swear by God: "We never said this." But they surely said words disbelieving the truth, and they turned unbelievers after having come to faith, and designed what they could not accomplish. They did it only out of vengeance for God and His Apostle had enriched them by their grace. So, if they repent it is better for them. If they turn away then God would afflict them with painful punishment in this world and the next; and none will they have on the face of the earth to protect or help them
Some of them made a covenant with God: "If You give us in Your bounty we shall give alms and be upright
But when He gave them of His bounty they became greedy, and then turned away
As a consequence of breaking their promise made to God, and telling lies, he filled their hearts with hypocrisy which will last till the day they come before Him
Have they not realised that God knows their secrets and their confidential talk, and that God has the knowledge of unknown things
They who defame those of the believers who give alms willingly, and deride those who have nothing besides what they earn by their labour (to give in charity), will be derided by God, and will suffer painful punishment
Whether you plead forgiveness for them or not, God will not forgive them, even though you plead seventy times, for they disbelieved in God and His Apostle; and God does not show transgressors the way
Those who were left behind rejoiced that they stayed at home against the wishes of God's Apostle, being averse to fighting in the way of God with their wealth and lives, and said: "Do not go in this heat." Tell them: "The heat of Hell is far more intense." If only they had cared to instruct themselves
So let them laugh a little, for weep they will, more as retribution for what they have done
If you come back to them by (the grace of) God, and they seek your permission to go (to fight), you should tell them: "You will never go out nor fight the enemy with me any more. You preferred to stay back on the first occasion, so stay at home with those who stay behind
Do not invoke blessings on any of them who die, nor stand to pray at their graves, for they disbelieved in God and His Prophet, and died transgressors
And let not their wealth and children astonish you. God wishes to punish them through these in the world, and their souls will depart in a state of disbelief
Whenever a Surah is revealed (which says): "Believe in God and fight along with His Prophet," the well-to-do among them ask for leave to stay at home, and say: "Leave us with those who are left behind
They prefer to be with women who (are allowed to) stay at home during war, and their hearts are sealed; so they fail to understand
But the Prophet and those who have embraced the faith with him, and have fought wealth and soul (in the way of God), are blessed and will be successful
God has provision for them of gardens with Streams of running water, where they will abide for ever. This will be the supreme triumph
Some Arabs of the desert came with ready excuses, asking for leave to stay behind. But those who had lied to God and His Prophet stayed at home doing nothing. So the punishment for those who disbelieve among them will be painful
No blame will attach to the old and the sick, or those without means to spend on good acts, if they stay behind provided they are sincere to God and His Apostle; There is no way to blame those who are doers of good, for God is forgiving and kind
Nor will they be blamed who came to you for transport, to whom you said: "I cannot find any means of conveyance for you," and they went away in tears, grieving that they lacked the means to spend (on carriage)
Blame will lie on those who are rich yet ask your leave to stay behind. They prefer to stay with women who stay at home, and God seals their hearts; so they do not understand
When you come back they will offer excuses to you. Tell them: "Make no excuses; we do not believe you. God has informed us about you; and God and His Apostle shall watch your conduct. Then you will be brought to Him who knows what is hidden and what is manifest. He will tell you of what you did
They will beg you in the name of God, on your return, to forgive them; but you keep away from them: They are scum; their abode is Hell: Requital for what they had done
They will plead on oath that you accept them. Even if you accept them, remember God does not accept people who are disobedient
The village Arabs are more obstinate in disbelief and hypocrisy, and impervious to ordinances revealed to His Apostle by God; yet God is aware of everything and is wise
Some of these rustics take whatever they spend in the way of God as a penalty, and wait for an adverse turn in your fortune. For them will be the adverse change, as God hears all and knows everything
Yet some Arabs of the desert believe in God and the Last Day, and consider what they spend to be a means of bringing them nearer to God and the blessings of the Prophet. This is certainly a means of achieving nearness (to God), and God will admit them to His mercy, for God is forgiving and kind
Those among the migrants (from Makkah) and helpers (in Madina) who were the first to believe, and those who followed them in goodness, have been accepted by God and they follow His way. For them He has gardens with streams of running water where they will abide for ever; and that is happiness supreme
Some of the Arabs of the desert around you are hypocrites, and some of the people of Madina are stubborn in hypocrisy. You are not aware of them; We know them, and will punish them twice, and they will be sent to a harrowing doom
But there are others who admit their sins of mixing good deeds with evil. It may be that God will accept their repentance, for God is forgiving and kind
Accept the offerings they make from their wealth in order to cleanse and purify them for progress, and invoke blessings upon them. Your blessings will surely bring them peace, for God hears all and knows everything
Do they not know that God accepts the repentance of His creatures and receives what they offer in charity, and that He is forgiving and kind
Say to them: "Act. God will see your conduct, and so will His Apostle and the faithful; for you will in the end go back to Him, who knows the unknown and the known, who will tell you of what you were doing
There are still some others whose affairs await the dispensation of God. He may punish or pardon them, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
There are those who built a mosque on opposition and disbelief, and to cause rifts among the faithful, and to serve as an outpost for those who have warred against God and His Apostle before this. Yet they will surely swear: "We had only meant well." But God is witness that they are liars
Never set foot in that place. Only a mosque whose foundations have been laid from the very first on godliness is worthy of your visiting it. There you will find men who wish to be purified; and God loves those who are pure
Is the man who lays the foundations of his sanctum on his allegiance to God and the wish to seek His favour, better, or he who lays the foundations of his building on the edge of a bank eroded by water, which will collapse with him into the fire of Hell? But God does not guide the people who are wilfully unjust
The edifice they have built will always fill their minds with perturbation (which will not cease) till their hearts are rent to pieces, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
God has verily bought the souls and possessions of the faithful in exchange for a promise of Paradise. They fight in the cause of God, and kill and are killed. This is a promise incumbent on Him, as in the Torah, so the Gospel and the Qur'an. And who is more true to his promise than God? So rejoice at the bargain you have made with Him; for this will be triumph supreme
To those who repent and pay homage, give praise and are devout, who kneel in prayer and bow in supplication, who enjoin good deeds and prohibit the bad, and keep to the limits set by God, announce the news of rejoicing to the faithful
It is not worthy of the Prophet and those who believe to seek forgiveness for those who are idolaters, even though they may be their relatives, after they have come to know that they are destined for Hell
As for Abraham's prayer for his father, he was fulfilling a promise he had made to him. Yet when it became evident to him that (his father) was an enemy of God, he broke away from him, though Abraham was soft hearted and kind
God never leads men astray after guiding them, until He makes quite clear to them what they should avoid, for God indeed knows each and everything
Verily God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He alone is the giver of life and death; and none do you have besides God as friend and helper
God was kind to the Prophet, the emigrants, and the helpers of the faithful who followed him in the hour of distress. When a section of them were about to lose courage He turned to them in His mercy, for He is compassionate and kind
He has relented towards the three also (who had refused to go to the battle of the Ditch) whose case was left undecided, and even the earth with all its expanse had become narrow for them, and their lives were confined, and they came to realise there was no refuge for them except in God. So He softened towards them that they may repent; for God surely accepts repentance and is merciful
O believers, do not stray from the path of God, and be with those who are truthful
It was not worthy of the people of Madina, and the Arabs of the desert around them, to abandon the Prophet of God, and to care more for themselves than for him; for there is no hardship or thirst or hunger that they know in the service of God, and no place they walk on where walking provokes the unbelievers, and no harm they receive from the enemy, but is put down as a good deed in their favour. Surely God does not let the recompense of those who do good to go waste
There is not a sum, large or small, that they spend, not a piece of land that they traverse (in the service of God) which is not put down in their favour, so that God could reward them for what they had done
It is not possible for all believers to go out (to fight). So a part of each section (of the population) should go (to fight) in order that the others may acquire understanding of law and divinity, and warn their companions on return so that they may take heed for themselves
O believers, fight the unbelievers around you, and let them realise that you are firm: Remember, God is with those who are pious and obedient to Him
When a Surah is revealed some of them remark: "Whose faith among you has it increased?" It does increase the faith of those who believe, and they rejoice
But it adds disbelief to disbelief for those whose hearts are filled with doubt, and they die disbelieving
Do they not know that they are tried every year once or twice? Even then they do not repent and take heed
Whenever a Surah is revealed they look at each other (so as to ask): "Is anyone looking at Us?" and then turn away. Indeed God has turned their hearts away (from the truth), for they cannot discern the law of heaven
To you has come an Apostle from among you. Any sorrow that befalls you weighs upon him; He is eager for your happiness, full of concern for the faithful, compassionate and kind
So, if they turn away, say to them: "God is sufficient for me. There is no God but He; I depend on Him alone, the Lord of the glorious Throne
ALIF LAM RA. These are the verses of the authoritative Book
Are the people astonished that a man who is one of them was commanded by Us to warn them and to bring glad tidings to those who believe that they have a true precedence with their Lord? (Yet) the unbelievers say: "He is a clear sorcerer
Your Lord is God who created the heavens and the earth in six spans, then assumed His power, dispensing all affairs. None can intercede with Him except by His leave. He is God, your Lord, so worship Him. Will you not be warned
To Him will you all return: God's promise is true. It is He who originates creation, then will revert it, so that He may reward those who believe and do good things in all justice. But those who deny the truth will receive boiling water to drink and grievous punishment, for they disbelieved
It is He who gave the sun its radiance, the moon its lustre, and appointed its stations so that you may compute years and numbers. God did not create them but with deliberation. He distinctly explains His signs for those who can understand
In the alternation of night and day, and all that He has created in the heavens and the earth, are certainly signs for people who fear God
As for those who do not hope to meet Us (after death), and are content with the life of this world, who are oblivious of Our signs
Will have Hell as their abode for what they have earned
But those who believe and act for a beneficial end will be guided by their Lord for their good faith. At their feet shall flow streams of running water in gardens of delight
Their invocation will be: "All glory to you, O God," and "Peace" will be their salutation, and the end of their prayer (will be): "All praise be to God, the Lord of all the worlds
If God were to hasten the evil, as men try to hasten the good, their term would come to end. So We leave those who do not expect to meet Us to wander perplexed in transgression
When man is afflicted with adversity he calls to Us, whether lying on his side, or sitting or standing. But when We take away his troubles, he moves away, as though he had never called to Us in affliction. In the same way, attractive have been made their deeds to the prodigals
How many generations did We lay low before you when they became wilfully unjust. Their apostles had brought clear proofs to them, yet they never believed. So We punished the sinful people
Then We appointed you leaders in the land after them to see how you behaved
When Our clear messages are recited to them, those who do not hope to meet Us, say: "Bring a different Qur'an, or make amendments to this one." Say: "It is not for me to change it of my will. I follow (only) what is revealed to me. If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of an awful Day
Say: "Had God pleased I would never have recited it to you, nor would He have given you comprehension of it. (Remember that I am one of you) and have lived a whole life with you before (its revelation). Even then you do not understand
Who is more unjust than he who imputes lies to God or denies His revelations? The sinners will surely not be reprieved
They worship those besides God who cannot do them harm or bring them gain, and say: "These are our intercessors with God." Say: "Do you want to inform God of things in the heavens and the earth He does not know?" Glorious is He, and too exalted for what they associate with Him
Men were once a community of one faith; but they differed (and followed different ways). Had it not been for the word proclaimed by your Lord before, their differences would have been resolved
They say: "How is it that no sign was sent by his Lord (to His Prophet)?" Tell them: "Unknown things are only known to God. So watch and wait (for the sign); I am waiting and expecting with you
When We let them taste Our mercy after affliction, they contrive against Our signs. Say: "God is swifter at contriving," for Our angels record everything you plan
It is He who enables you to travel over land and sea. When you sail in ships in a favourable breeze, you rejoice. But when a gale begins to blow and the waves dash against them from every side they realise that they have been caught in it, (and) they call on God in all faith: "If You save us from this we shall ever be grateful
But when He rescues them, they commit excesses in the land unjustly again. Your rebellion, O people, shall recoil back on your own selves. The joys of the world (are only ephemeral): You have to come back to Us in the end. We shall then inform you what you were doing
The life of the world is like the rain that waters the crops of the earth which are used as food by men and cattle. But when the earth is embellished and adorned with gold, and its tillers begin to feel that (the crops) are under control, Our command descends suddenly at night or in the day, and We mow them down as though there was nothing there yesterday. This is how We distinctly explain Our signs to those who think
God invites you to mansions of peace, and guides whosoever He will to the path that is straight
For those who do good there is goodness and more, and no blot or disgrace will cover their faces. They are people of Paradise, where they will abide for ever
But those who earn evil shall be punished to an equal degree as their evil, and they will be covered with shame, and will have none to protect them against God: Their faces shall be blackened as though with patches of the night. They are the people of Hell, where they will abide for ever
The day We shall gather them all together We shall say to the idolaters: "Take your stand with the compeers you worshipped as the equals of God." We shall then create a rift between them, and the compeers will say: "You did not worship us
For God is sufficient as witness between us and you we were not aware of your worship
Then each will see what he had done in the past; and they will turn to God, their true Lord, and all the lies they had fabricated will be of no avail to them
Ask them: "Who gives you food and sustenance from the skies and the earth? Or, who is the lord of ear and eye? And who brings forth the living from the dead, the dead from the living? And who directs all affairs?" They will say: "God." So tell them: "Why do you not fear Him
Such then is God, your true Lord; and when truth is gone what is left but error? So why do you turn away
Thus the word of your Lord about those who disobey comes true, that they do not believe
Ask them: "Is there among the partners (you ascribe to God) one who first originates then reverts it? Say: "It is God alone who first creates and then reverts it. So where do you stray
Ask: "Is there one among those you associate with God who can show the way to the truth?" Say: "It is God who shows the way to truth." Then who is more worthy of being followed -- He who guides to the truth, or he who cannot find the path until shown the way? What has happened to you that you judge in such a wise
Many of them follow nothing but illusion; yet illusion cannot replace the reality. God verily knows what they do
This Qur'an is not such (a writ) as could be composed by anyone but God. It confirms what has been revealed before, and is an exposition of (Heaven's) law. Without any doubt it's from the Lord of all the worlds
Do they say (of the Prophet) that: "He has composed it?" Say to them: "Bring a Surah like this, and call anyone apart from God you can (to help you), if what you say is true
In fact, they deny what is beyond the reach of their knowledge, whose explanation has not reached them yet. So had those who have gone before them denied; but look at the fate of the unjust
Some of them will believe in it, some will not. Your Lord knows the transgressors well
If they (still) call you a liar, tell them: "For me my actions, for you yours. You are not answerable for my deeds, nor I for what you do
Some of them listen to you: But can you make the deaf hear who do not understand a thing
Some of them look toward you: But can you show the blind the way even when they cannot see
Surely God does not wrong anyone; they wrong themselves
The day He will gather them together it will appear to them that they had lived (in the world) but an hour of a day to make each other's acquaintance. Verily those who deny the meeting with God will be lost, and not find the way
Whether We show you some of the promise (of punishment in wait) for them, or take you to Ourself, their returning is to Us in the end; and God is a witness to all they do
For every people there is an apostle; and when their apostle is come the matter is decided between them equitably, and no one is wronged
They say: "When is this promise going to come, if what you say is true
Say: "I have no power over my own gain or loss other than what God may please." Every people have a certain term. When their time is come they can neither delay it an hour nor advance it a moment forward
Say: "Have you ever thought if His punishment befalls you at night or in the day, what would the sinners do to despatch it
Will you believe it when it comes to pass? Indeed, you will believe it then. How impatient you were to hasten it
Then will the sinners be told: "Now taste everlasting torment. Should you be rewarded for anything else but what you did
Yet they want to be informed if it is true. Say: "By my Lord, it is the truth. You cannot invalidate it
Even if every soul that has sinned possessed whatever is on the earth, it would surely offer it to ransom itself, and feel repentant on seeing the punishment. Yet the sentence would be passed with justice, and not one will be wronged
For all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God. Remember, the promise of God is true. But most of them do not know
He is the giver of life and death, and to Him you will return
O men, a warning has come to you from your Lord, a remedy for the (doubts) of the heart, and a guidance and grace for those who believe
Say: "It is the blessing and mercy of God; so rejoice in it. It is better than all that you amass
Say: "Have you thought of what God has sent you for food, of which you have labelled some as lawful and some forbidden?" And ask: "Has God commanded this, or you are imputing lies to God
What do those who invent lies of God think about the Day of Reckoning? (Will they escape the judgement?) In fact God is gracious to men; but most of them are not grateful
There is no state you are in, whether reading from the Qur'an, or doing something else, but We are watching you as you are engaged in it. There is not the weight of an atom on the earth and in the heavens that is hidden from your Lord, nor is there anything smaller or greater than this but is recorded in the perspicuous Book
Remember, there is neither fear nor regret for the friends of God
Those who believe and obey God
For them is good news in the life of the world and in the life to come. There is no changing the words of God. That will be the great triumph
You should not be grieved by what they say. All glory is wholly for God: He is the one who hears and knows everything
Remember, whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to God. Those who call on others they associate with God, follow nothing but conjecture, and only guess
It is He who made the night for you to rest, and made the day enlightening. Indeed there are signs in this for those who listen
They say: "God has begotten a son." Immaculate is He and self-sufficient." Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. You have no proof for this (assertion): Why do you say things of God you do not know
Say: "Those who fabricate lies about God will never succeed
Let them profit by the world (while they may): In the end they will come back to Us. Then We shall make them taste severe punishment for having denied (the truth)
Recount to them the story of Noah when he said to his people: "O people, if you find my staying with you and warning through God's signs, unbearable to you, know that I have reposed my trust in God. So plan your move, and call your associates, and make certain of your plan; then do whatever you intend against me, allowing me no respite
If you turn away from me (remember) I do not ask any recompense from you. My reward is with God; I have been commanded to be one of those who submit to Him
Even then they denied him; so We saved him and those with him, in the ark, and established them in the land, and drowned those who denied Our signs. So think of the fate of those who were warned (and took no heed)
Afterwards We sent many messengers who brought clear proofs to their peoples. But they were not prepared to believe what they had once denied. That is how We seal the hearts of the iniquitous
Then after them We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs to the Pharaoh and his nobles; but they behaved arrogantly, for they were a people full of guilt
Thus, when the truth had come to them from Us, they said: "Surely this is nothing but pure magic
You say this of the truth," said Moses, "after it has come to you. Is this magic? But sorcerers do not ever prosper
Have you come," said they, "to turn us back from what we found our ancestors doing, so that the two of you may attain supremacy in the land? We shall not believe in what you say
Bring the cleverest magicians to me," said the Pharaoh
So when the magicians arrived, Moses said to them: "Cast whatever (spell) you have to cast
When they had cast (their spell) Moses said: "What you have cast is only a charm which God will surely nullify. God does not verily render the deeds of evil-doers righteous
God vindicates the truth by His commands, however the sinners may dislike it
But none of them put faith in Moses except some youths among his people who were nonetheless afraid lest the Pharaoh and his nobles should persecute them; for the Pharaoh was mighty in the land, and guilty of excesses
Moses said: "O my people, if you do believe in God place your trust in Him if you are obedient
They answered: "We have placed our trust in God. O Lord, do not make us a target of oppression for these tyrannical people
And deliver us by Your grace from a people who do not believe
We commanded Moses and his brother: "Build homes for your people in Egypt, and make your houses places of worship, perform your acts of prayer and give happy tidings to those who believe
And Moses said: "O Lord, have You bestowed on the Pharaoh and his nobles pomp and plenty in the life of this world that they might mislead people from Your path? Destroy their possessions, O Lord, and harden their hearts that they may not believe until they face the painful punishment
Said (the Lord): "Your prayer is answered. Therefore persist and do not follow the path of those who are ignorant
And We brought the people of Israel across the sea, but the Pharaoh and his army pursued them wickedly and maliciously till he was on the point of drowning, and he said: "I believe that there is no god but He in whom the people of Israel believe, and I submit to Him
Yes, now" (was the answer), "though before this you were disobedient and rebellious
We shall preserve your body today that you may be a lesson for those who come after you; as many a man is heedless of Our signs
We gave the people of Israel a settled abode, and bestowed good things on them to eat and use. So they did not differ until they came to have knowledge. Your Lord will assuredly settle their differences on the Day of Resurrection
If you are in doubt of what We have sent down to you, then ask those who have been reading the Book (for a long time) before you. The truth has indeed come to you from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt
And do not be one of those who deny the signs of God, or you will be among the losers
Verily those against whom the word of your Lord is pronounced will never believe
Even though all the signs came to them, not till they face the grievous punishment
Why has there been no habitation that believed and profited by their faith, except the people of Jonah? When they came to believe, We removed from them the affliction of shame in the world, and made them prosperous for a time
If your Lord had willed, all the people on the earth would have come to believe, one and all
Are you going to compel the people to believe except by God's dispensation? He puts doubt in (the minds of) those who do not think
Say: "Observe all there is in the heavens and the earth." But signs or warnings will be of no avail to those who do not believe
Can they expect anything but what the people before them had known? Say: "Then wait. I am waiting with you
Thus do We deliver our apostles and those who believe. As a matter of duty We save the believers
Say: "O men, if you have doubt about my faith, then (know) I do not worship those you worship apart from God, but I worship God who makes you die; and I am commanded to be a believer
And to set my face toward the way, as one upright, and not be one of those who associate others with God
And not to invoke any other than God, who can neither help nor hurt me; for if I do, I would surely be unjust
Should God bring you harm there is none but He who could deliver you from it, and if He wish you good there is none who could take away His blessings: He showers them on those of His creatures as He please, and He is forgiving and kind
Say: "O men, the truth has come to you from your Lord, so he who follows the right path does so for himself, and he who goes astray errs against himself, and I am not a guardian over you
Follow what is revealed to you, and persist until God pronounce His judgement; for He is the best of all judges
ALIF LAM RA. This is a Book whose verses are indeclinable and distinct, which comes from One who is most wise and all-knowing
(Proclaiming) that you should worship none but God. Verily I bring to you from Him a message of warning and rejoicing
And that you should seek His forgiveness and turn towards Him. He will bestow the best things of life on you for a time ordained, and favour those with blessings who are worthy of grace. But if you turn away, I fear the punishment of a terrible Day for you
To God have you to go back, and He has power over everything
Look, how they double up their breasts in order to hide from Him. But when they cover themselves up with their garments, He knows what they hide and what they expose. Indeed, He knows the secrets of the hearts
There is not a creature that moves on the earth whose nourishment is not provided by God, whose place of sojourning and depositing is not known to Him. All things conform to a manifest law
It is He who created the heavens and the earth In six spans, and has control over the waters (of life) so that he may bring out the best that everyone of you could do. Yet if you said to them: "You shall certainly be raised from the dead," the unbelievers will say: "This will be nothing but sorcery
If We defer their punishment for a certain time, they will say: "What is keeping it back?" And yet, the day it comes, they will not be able to avert it; and what they used to laugh at will encompass them
If We allow man to enjoy Our favours, and then take them away from him, he becomes despondent and ungrateful
If We let him taste Our favours after adversity, he says: "Misfortune has left me," and begins to brag and exult
Except those who endure with patience and do the right, who will have pardon and a great reward
You may haply omit some of what has been revealed to you, and may be disheartened because they say: "Why was no treasure sent down to him, or an angel accompanied him?" Yet you have been sent to warn alone, for God takes care of everything
Do they say (of the Prophet): "He has forged (the Qur'an)?" Say: "Then bring ten Surahs like it, and call anyone except God to help you, if what you say is true
If they do not answer you, then know it has been revealed with the knowledge of God, and that there is no god but He. (And say:) "Will you now submit
To those who desire the life of this world and its many allures, We shall pay them in full for their acts herein and will not withold any thing
Yet these are the people for whom there is nothing but Fire in the world to come. Fruitless will be what they have fashioned, and whatever they have done will perish
Will he who has a clear proof from his Lord, which acts as evidence from Him, before which the Book of Moses was a way-giver and a grace, (not believe in it)? Whoever among the partisans does not believe in it shall have Hell as the promised award. So have no doubt about it, for surely it's the truth from your Lord, though most men may not believe
Who is more wicked than he who invents lies about God? Such men shall be arraigned before their Lord, and the witnesses will testify: "These are those who imputed lies to God." Beware! The scourge of God will fall on the unjust
Who obstruct others from the way of God and seek obliquity in it, and do not believe in the life to come
They shall not weaken (the power of) God on earth, nor find any other protector but God. Their punishment will be doubled, for they could neither hear nor see
They are verily those who exceeded themselves, and the (gods) they invented abandoned them
Undoubtedly they will be losers in the life to come
But those who believe and do things good, and are humble before their Lord, are men of Paradise where they will abide for ever
The semblance of these two groups is that of a man who is deaf and blind, and the other who can hear and see. Can they be equal? Why do you not reflect
We sent Noah to his people (and he said): "I give you a clear warning
Do not worship anyone but God; for I fear the punishment of a dreadful day for you
The leaders of the people who were unbelievers, replied: "We see that you are but a man like us, and see that none among us follows you but the meanest and immature of judgement, and do not see any excellence in you above us. In fact, we think you are a liar
He said: "O my people, think. If I have a clear proof from my Lord, and He has bestowed on me His grace, though unknown to you, can we force it upon you when you are averse
I do not demand for it any wealth from you, O my people. My reward is with God. And I will not drive those away who believe. They have also to meet their Lord. But I see you are an ignorant people
O my people, who will save me from God if I drive them away? Do you not understand
I say not that I have the treasures of God, or that I possess the knowledge of the unknown. I do not claim to be an angel, nor can I say that God will not bestow any good on those you disdain, for God is cognisant of what is in their hearts. If I say this, I will surely be unjust
They said: "O Noah, you have argued with us, and disputed at length; so bring that (retribution) you promise, if you speak the truth
He replied: "Only God will bring it on you if He please, and you cannot prevail against Him
Even if I wish to advise you aright, my counsel will not profit you if God intend that you go astray, for He is your Lord and to Him you will return
Do they say you have fabricated it? Tell them: "If I have fabricated it, then mine is the guilt; but I am clear of what you are guilty
And Noah was informed through revelation: "Apart from those who have come to believe already not one of your people is going to believe. So grieve not for what they are doing
Build an ark under Our eye and as We instruct. Do not plead for those who have been wicked, for they shall certainly be drowned
So he built the ark; and when groups of his people passed by him, they scoffed at him. He said to them: "Though you laugh at us (now), we shall laugh at you, as you are laughing at us
You will soon come to know who suffers the punishment that would put him to shame, and who suffers lasting torment
When Our command was issued and the waters gushed forth from the source, We said: "Take into (the ark) a pair of every species, and members of your family other than those against whom the sentence has been passed already, and those who come to believe." But only a few believed in him
And (Noah) said: "Embark. In the name of God be its course and mooring. My Lord is surely forgiving and kind
It sailed on waves like mountains (high), and Noah called to his son who was separated from him: "Embark with us, O my son, and be not one of those who do not believe
I shall go up a mountain," he said, "which will keep me from the water." "There is no getting away," said Noah, "from the decree of God today, except for those on whom be His mercy." And a wave came between them, and he was among those who were drowned
Then it was said: "O earth, swallow back your water; and, O sky, desist." And the water subsided, and the decree was accomplished. The ark came to rest on Judi (Mount Ararat), and it was said: "Away with the cursed people
Noah called on his Lord and said: "O Lord, my son is surely a member of my family, and verily Your promise is true, as You are the most just of all judges
O Noah", He answered, "truly he is not of your family. He is surely the outcome of an unrighteous act. So ask Me not of what you do not know. I warn you not to be one of the ignorant
Preserve me, O Lord," said (Noah), "from asking You that of which I have no knowledge. If You do not forgive me and have mercy on me I shall be among those who perish
(And the Lord) said: "O Noah, disembark with peace and safety from Us and blessings on you and the people with you. As for some (of them), We shall bestow advantages for a time, then send a grievous punishment on them
This is news of the Unknown We reveal to you, which neither you nor your people knew before. So endure with patience. The future is for those who keep away from evil and follow the straight path
We sent to the people of 'Ad their brother Hud, who said: "O my people, worship God; you have no other god but He. (As for the idols,) you are only inventing lies
O my people, I ask no recompense of you for it: My reward is with Him who created me. Will you not, therefore, understand
O my people, beg your Lord to forgive you, and turn to Him in repentance. He will send down rain in torrents for you from the shies, and give you added strength. So do not turn away from Him as sinners
They said: "O Hud, you have come to us with no proofs. We shall not abandon our gods because you say so, nor believe in you
All we can say is that some of our gods have smitten you with evil." He replied:" I call God to witness, and you be witness too, that I am clear of what you associate (in your affairs)
Apart from Him. Contrive against me as much as you like, and give me no respite
I place my trust in God who is my Lord and your Lord. There is no creature that moves on the earth who is not held by the forelock firmly by Him. Verily the way of my Lord is straight
If you turn away, then (remember) I have delivered to you the message I was sent with. My Lord will put other people in your place, and you will not be able to prevail against Him. Indeed my Lord keeps a watch over all things
So, when Our command was issued We rescued Hud by Our grace, and those who believed, with him, and saved them from a dreadful doom
These were the people of 'Ad who denied the word of their Lord and rebelled against His apostles, and followed the bidding of every perverse tyrant
So they were accursed in the world, and they will be damned on the Day of Doom. Beware! The 'Ad turned away from their Lord
Be warned! Accursed are the people of 'Ad who were Hud's. To Thamud We Sent their brother Saleh. "O my people," he said, "worship God; you have no other god but He. It is He who raised you from the earth and settled you upon it. So beg your Lord to forgive you, and turn to Him in repentance. Surely my Lord is near and answers
They said: "O Saleh, we had placed our hopes in you, but you forbid us from worshipping that which our fathers worshipped, and we are suspicious of what you are calling us to
He said: "O my people, have you considered that if my Lord has clearly shown me the way, and I have His blessings too, who will save me then from God if I disobey? You will only add to my ruin
O my people, this she-camel of God is a token for you. So leave her alone to graze on God's earth, and do not molest her, otherwise the swiftest punishment would befall you
But they hamstrung her. Then (Saleh) said: "You have but three days to enjoy life in your homes. Infallible is this promise
So, when Our command (of punishment) came We delivered Saleh by Our grace, and those who believed, with him, from the disgrace of that day. Verily your Lord is mighty and powerful
The sinners were seized by a blast from heaven, and lay overturned in their homes in the morning
As though they had never lived there at all. Beware! The people of Thamud turned away from their Lord. Beware! Accursed are the people of Thamud
Our angels came to Abraham with good news, and said: "Peace on you. "Peace on you too," said Abraham, and hastened to bring a roasted calf
When they did not stretch their hands towards it he became suspicious and afraid of them. They said: "Do not be afraid. We have been sent to the people of Lot
His wife who stood near, laughed as We gave her the good news of Isaac, and after Isaac of Jacob
She said: "Woe betide me! Will I give birth when I am old and this my husband be aged? This is indeed surprising
Why are you surprised at the command of God? God's mercy and blessings be upon you, O members of this household," they said. "Verily He is worthy of praise and glory
When Abraham's fear was dispelled, and the good news had come to him, he pleaded for the people of Lot with Us
Abraham was kind, compassionate, and penitent
Desist from pleading, O Abraham," (they said). "Your Lord's command has verily been issued, and a punishment that cannot be averted is bound to fall on them
So when Our angels came to Lot, he grieved for them, and felt powerless to help them, and said: "This is a day of sorrow
His people came excited to him. They were addicted to sin already. Said (Lot): "O my people, these daughters of mine are cleaner (and lawful) for you. Have fear of God, and do not shame me before my guests. Is there no man of discernment among you
They said: "You know we have no need for your daughters, and know well what we want
I wish I had the power to resist you," said (Lot), "or powerful support
(The angels) said: "O Lot, we have verily been sent by your Lord. They will never be able to harm you. So, leave late at night with your family, and none of you should turn back to look; but your wife will suffer (the fate) they are going to suffer. Their hour of doom is in the morning: Is not the morning nigh
So when the decreed moment arrived, We turned the habitations upside down, and rained upon them stones of hardened lava in quick succession
Impressed with (the signs) of your Lord. And such (punishment) is not far for the (other) transgressers
We sent to Midian their brother Shu'aib. He said: "O my people, worship God; you have no other god but He. So do not give in short measure nor underweigh. I see you are prosperous, but I fear the doom of an overwhelming Day for you
So, O my people, weigh and measure with justness, and do not withhold things due to men, and do not spread corruption in the land, despoiling it
That which is left to you by God is better, if you are true believers; yet I am not a warden over you
They said: "O Shu'aib, does your piety teach that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped, or desist from doing what we like with our goods? How gracious a man of discernment you are indeed
He said: "O my people, think. I have a clear sign from my Lord, who has also given me a goodly provision, and I do not wish for myself what I forbid you: I only wish to reform you as best I can. My success is from God alone. In Him I have placed my trust, and to Him I turn
O my people (I fear) lest your opposition to me should bring you the like of what befell the people of Noah or Hud or Saleh; and the people of Lot are not distant from you
Beg your Lord to forgive you, and turn to Him. Indeed my Lord is compassionate and loving
They said: "O Shu'aib, much of what you say is meaningless to us, and then (for sure) you are powerless among us. But for your clan we would have stoned you to death. You have no power over us
He said: "My clan seems mightier to you than God whom you neglect and push behind your backs. Surely what you do is within the power of my Lord
Do on your part what you can, O people, I will do what I will. You will come to know who suffers the punishment that would put him to shame, and who is the liar. So watch; I am watching with you
And when Our word came to pass, We rescued Shu'aib and those who believed, with him, by Our grace, but those who were wicked were seized by a punishment from heaven, and lay overturned in their homes in the morning
As though they had not dwelt there at all. Beware! Condemmed were the people of Midian as those of Thamud had been before them
We sent Moses with Our signs and full authority
To the Pharaoh and his nobles, but they followed the bidding of Pharaoh, though the bidding of Pharaoh was unrightful
He shall be at the head of his people on the Day of Resurrection, and drive them into Hell like cattle driven to water -- what an evil watering-place to reach
Damned will they be in this world, and on the Day of Doom how evil the gift that they will receive
These are a few accounts of settlements that We narrate to you. Some still survive, and some have been mowed down
We did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. When your Lord's chastisement descended upon them, their gods, on whom they called apart from God, were not of the least avail, and all they did was only to add to their destruction
Such is the punishment of your Lord when He seizes human settlements in the acts of wickedness. Surely His hold is grievous and terrible
In this surely is a sign for him who fears the torment of the Hereafter, the day when mankind will be assembled together, which will be a day when all things would become evident
We are deferring it only for a time ordained
The day it comes no soul will dare say a word but by His leave; and some will be wretched, some will be blessed
And those who are doomed, will be in Hell: For them will be sighing and sobbing
Where they will dwell so long as heaven and earth endure, unless your Lord will otherwise. Verily your Lord does as He wills
Those who are blessed will be in Paradise, where they will dwell so long as heaven and earth survive, unless your Lord wills otherwise: This will be a gift uninterrupted
So, you should not entertain any doubt about those whom they worship: They only worship what their fathers had worshipped before them. We shall verily give them their meed without diminution
Verily We gave to Moses the Book, but there was disagreement about it. Had the decree of your Lord (delaying it) not been issued the matter would have been settled between them. They are still suspicious of it and in doubt
Surely your Lord will reward everyone in accordance with his deeds. He is certainly aware of all they do
So, you and those who turned to God with you, should walk along the straight path as you have been commanded, and do not transgress, for He verily sees whatsoever you do
Do not lean towards the wicked, or you will be caught in the flames of Hell, and have none to befriend you other than God, nor will you be given help
Stand up for the service of prayer at the two ends of day and the first watch of night. Remember that good deeds nullify the bad. This is a reminder for those who are observant
Be steadfast, for verily God does not let the reward of those who are upright and do good to go waste
If only there had been men endued with virtue in the ages before you, who could preserve men from doing evil in the world, other than the few We saved from among them. Those who were wicked followed that which made them dissolute, and became sinners
Your Lord would not surely destroy unjustly human habitations so long as the people are righteous
But if your Lord had pleased He could have made all human beings into one community of belief. But they would still have differed from one another
Except those on whom your Lord had mercy for which He has created them. But fulfilled shall be the word of your Lord. "I will fill up Hell with jinns and men
The histories of apostles that We relate to you are (meant) to strengthen your heart. Through them has the truth come to you, and guidance, and reminder to those who believe
Say to the infidels. "Act as best you can, we are acting too
And wait (for what is to come), we are also waiting (to see)
To God belong the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and all things will go back to Him. So worship Him and put your trust in Him; your Lord is not heedless of what you do
ALIF LAM RA. These are the verses of the immaculate Book
We have sent it down as a clear discourse that you may understand
Through the revelation of this Qur'an We narrate the best of histories of which you were unaware before
When Joseph told his father: "O my father, I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon bowing before me in homage
He said: "O son, do not narrate your dream to your brothers, or they will plot against you. Surely Satan is man's acknowledged foe
Your Lord will choose you and teach you to interpret events, and confer His favours on you and the house of Jacob, as He had done in the case of two ancestors of yours, Abraham and Isaac, before you. Indeed your Lord is all-knowing and all-wise
In the story of Joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire
Surely Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we," (said his half brothers) "even though we are a well-knit band. Our father is surely in the wrong
Let us kill Joseph or cast him in some distant land so that we may get our father's exclusive affection; then play innocent
One of them said: "If you must do so, then do not kill Joseph, but throw him into an unused well. Some passing caravan may rescue him
(Then going to their father) they said: "O father, why don't you trust us with Joseph? We are in fact his well-wishers
Let him go out with us tomorrow that he may enjoy and play. We shall take care of him
He said: "I am afraid of sending him with you lest a wolf should devour him when you are unmindful
They replied: "If a wolf should devour him when we are there, a well-knit band, we shall certainly be treacherous
So, when they took him out they planned to throw him into an unused well. We revealed to Joseph: "You will tell them (one day) of this deed when they will not apprehend it
At nightfall they came to their father weeping
And said: "We went racing with one another and left Joseph to guard our things when a wolf devoured him. But you will not believe us even though we tell the truth
They showed him the shirt with false blood on it. (Their father) said: "It is not so; you have made up the story. Yet endurance is best. I seek the help of God alone for what you impute
A caravan happened to pass, and sent the water-carrier to bring water from the well. He let down his bucket (and pulled Joseph up with it). "What luck," said the man; "here is a boy;" and they hid him as an item of merchandise; but what they did was known to God
And they sold him as worthless for a few paltry dirham
The Egyptian who bought him instructed his wife: "House him honourably. He may be of use to us. We may even adopt him as a son." So, We firmly established Joseph in the land, and taught him the interpretation of dreams. God dominated in his affairs, though most men do not know
When he reached the prime of life We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus We reward those who are good
But she in whose house he resided wished to seduce him and, closing the doors, said: "Come into me. "God forbid!" he said; "he is my master who has approved my stay. Surely those who act wrongly do not prosper
But the woman desired him, and he would have desired her but for the indication he received from his Lord. This was so that We may avert both evil and lechery from him, for he was one of Our chosen devotees
Both of them raced to the door, and she (grabbed and) rent his shirt from behind. They met her lord outside the door. "There is no other penalty for a man," said she, "who wanted to outrage your wife but imprisonment or grievous punishment
(Joseph) said: "It was she who wanted to seduce me." And a witness from her family testified: "If the shirt is torn from the front then the woman is speaking the truth, and he is a liar
But if the shirt is torn from behind then she is a liar, and he speaks the truth
When the husband saw the shirt torn at the back, he said: "Surely this is a woman's ruse, and the wiles of women are great
Ignore this affair, O Joseph; and you, O woman, ask forgiveness for your sin, for you were surely errant
In the city the women gossiped: "The minister's wife longs after her page. He has captured her heart. We think she is in clear error
When she heard their slanderings, she sent for them and prepared a banquet, and gave each of them a knife (for paring fruit), and called (to Joseph): "Come out before them." When they saw him, the women were so wonderstruck they cut their hands, and exclaimed: "O Lord preserve us! He is no mortal but an honourable angel
She said: "This is the one you blamed me for. I did desire his person, but he preserved himself from sin. Yet in case he does not do my bidding he will be put into prison and disgraced
(Joseph) prayed: "O Lord, dearer is prison than what they invite me to. Unless You turn their guiles away from me I shall succumb to their charms and thus become a pagan
His Lord heard his prayer, and averted the women's wiles from him. He verily hears and knows everything
And yet in spite of having seen these clear proofs they found it proper to incarcerate him for a time
Two other youths were imprisoned along with him. Said one of them: "I dreamt that I was pressing grapes;" and the other: "I dreamt that I was carrying bread on my head, and the birds were pecking at it. You tell us the meaning of this. You seem to be a righteous man
(Joseph) answered: "I will give you its interpretation before the food you are served arrives. This knowledge is one of the things my Lord has taught me. I have given up the religion of those who do not believe in God and deny the life to come
I follow the faith of my fathers, of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. We cannot associate anyone with God. This is among God's favours to us and to all mankind; but most men are not grateful
(Tell me) O fellow-prisoners, are a number of gods better, or one God omnipotent
(What) you worship besides Him are nothing but names that you and your fathers have assigned, for which no sanction has been sent down by God. Authority belongs to God alone. He commands that you worship none but Him. This is the right way; but most men are ignorant
O fellow-prisoners, one of you will serve wine to your master, the other will be crucified and the birds will peck at his brain. Determined is the matter of your inquiry
And (Joseph) asked the man he knew would be released: "Remember me to your lord;" but Satan made him forget to mention this to his lord, and Joseph remained in prison for a number of years
(One day) the king said (to his courtiers): "I saw seven fat cows in a dream being devoured by seven lean ones, and seven ears of corn that were green and seven others that were seared. O courtiers, tell me the significance of my dream, if you know how to interpret them
They were only confused dreams," they said; "we do not know how to interpret them
Then the servant, who of the two had been released, remembering (Joseph), said: "I will give you its interpretation; let me go for it
(And coming to the prison) he said: "O Joseph the truthful, tell us (the meaning of) seven fat cows being devoured by seven lean ones, and seven green ears of corn and seven seared, that I may go back to the people and tell them
He said: "Sow as usual for seven years, and after reaping leave the corn in the ears, except the little you need for food
Then there will come seven years of hardship which will consume the grain you had laid up against them, except a little you may have stored away
This will be followed by a year of rain, and people shall press (the grapes)
The king said: "Bring him to me. So when the messenger came to Joseph, he said: "Go back to your lord and ask him: 'How fare the women who had cut their hands?' My Lord is cognisant of their guile
The king asked the women: "What was the affair of seducing Joseph?" "God preserve us," they said; "we know no evil against him." The wife of the minister said: "The truth has now come out. It was I who desired to seduce him, but he is indeed a man of virtue
(At this Joseph remarked:) "From this (the Minister) should know that I did not betray him in his absence, and that God does not surely let the wiles of those who betray ever succeed
But I do not wish to absolve myself, for the soul is prone to evil, unless my Lord have mercy. Indeed my Lord is forgiving and kind
When the king heard this he said: "Bring him to me. I shall take him in my special service." When he had talked to him, he said: "Today you are established in a rank of trust with us
Appoint me over the granaries of the land," (he said); "I shall be a knowledgeable keeper
Thus We gave Joseph authority in the land so that he lived wherever he liked. We bestow Our favours on whomsoever We please, and do not allow the reward of those who are good to go waste
And certainly the recompense of the life to come is better for those who believe and follow the right path
The brothers of Joseph came (to Egypt) and visited him. He recognised them, though they did not recognise him
When he had supplied their provisions, he said to them: "Bring your (half) brother with you. Have you not seen that I have given full measure, and that I am the best of hosts
But if you do not bring him with you, then I shall have no grain for you, nor should you come back to me
They said: "We shall request his father, and will certainly do that
Then he ordered his servants: "Put their money back in their packs: They may find it on reaching home, and perhaps come again
When they returned to their father, they said: "O father, a further measure has been denied us. So send our brother with us that he may bring more grain. We shall take care of him
He replied: "Should I trust you with him as I did his brother? But God is the best of guardians, and most merciful of all
When they unpacked their goods they said: "O father, what more can we ask? Look, even our money has been returned. We shall go and bring a camel-load more of grain for our family, and take good care of our brother. That will be an easy measure
He said: "I will never send him with you until you swear by God that you will bring him back to me, unless all of you are overtaken (by misfortune)." When they had given their promise, he said: "God is witness to our conversation
(As they were leaving) their father said to them: "O my sons, do not seek one approach but employ different ways (of attaining your object). If anything should befall you from God I shall not be able to avert it, for all authority belongs to God. I have placed my trust in Him, and the trusting should rely on Him alone
When they entered as their father had advised them, nothing could avail them against (the will of) God, yet it confirmed a premonition Jacob had, for verily he had knowledge as We had taught him, though most men do not know
When they came to Joseph he made his brother his guest, and said: "I am your brother. So do not grieve for what they had done
When he had given them their provisions he put his goblet in his brother's saddle-bag. Then a crier announced: "O men of the caravan, you are thieves
They turned to them and asked: "What is it you have lost
We cannot find the master's goblet. Whoever comes up with it will be given a camel-load of grain; I vouch for it
They said: "We swear by God. You know we did not come to commit any crime in the land, nor are we thieves
What should be the punishment," they were asked, "in case you are liars
The punishment for that (should be)," they said, "that he in whose luggage it is found should be held as punishment. This is how we repay the wrong-doers
So he searched their saddle-bags before his brother's, then produced the cup from his brother's bag. That is how We planned an excuse for Joseph, for under the law of the king he could not detain his brother unless God so willed. We raise the status of whom We please. Over every man of knowledge there is one more knowing
Said the brothers: "If he has stolen (no wonder), his brother had stolen before." But Joseph kept this secret and did not disclose it to them, and said (to himself): "You are worse in the degree of evil, for God knows better of what you allege
They said: "O Minister, he has an aged father, so keep one of us in his place. We see you are a virtuous man
May God forgive us," he said, "if we hold any one but him with whom we found our property, or else we would be unjust
When they despaired of (persuading) him, they went aside to confer. The oldest of them said: "You know that your father has pledged you in the name of God, and you have been guilty of iniquity in the case of Joseph before. I will not leave this place unless my father permits or God decides for me, for He is the best of all judges
So, go to your father and tell him: 'O father, your son has committed a theft. We bear witness to only what we know; we could not prevent the unknown
Enquire from the people of that city, or ask the men of the caravan with whom we have come. We are verily speaking the truth
No," said (the father). "You have made up the story; but patience is best; God may bring them back to me. He is all-knowing and all-wise
He turned away from them and cried: "Alas for Joseph!" And his eyes turned white with grief which he bore in silence
By God," said they, "you will never stop thinking of Joseph till you are consumed or perish
He replied: "I cry my plaint and grief to God, and know from God what you do not know
O sons, go in search of Joseph and his brother, and do not despair of the mercy of God. Only they despair of God's mercy who do not believe
When they returned to him, they said (to Joseph): "O Minister, calamity has befallen us and our people. We have brought but a meagre sum, but give us full measure as alms bestowed. God surely rewards those who give alms
He said: "Do you know what you did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance
They said: "Surely you are not Joseph!" "I am Joseph," he said, "and this is my brother. God has been gracious to us; for God does not verily deprive those who fear Him and are patient of the recompense of those who are good
They said: "By God, God has favoured you above us, for we have indeed been sinners
There is no blame on you today," he said, "May God forgive you. He is the most merciful of all
Take my shirt and put it on my father's face; his eyesight will be restored; and bring your entire family to me
The caravan departed (from Egypt) and Jacob said (at home): "Say not that I am in my dotage, but I get the smell of Joseph
They said: "By God, you are still persisting in your old delusion
Then, as the harbinger of happy news arrived and put the garment over his face his eyesight was restored. He said: "Did I not tell you? I know from God what you do not know
Said (the sons): "O our father, pray for us that our sins be forgiven, for we are really sinners
I will ask my Lord to forgive you," he replied, "for He is forgiving and kind
When they went back to Joseph he gave his father and mother a place of honour, and said: "Enter Egypt in peace by the will of God
He seated his parents by his side on the throne; and they fell down before him in homage. "O my father," said Joseph, "this is the meaning of my earlier dream. My Lord has made it come true. He was gracious in getting me out of the prison, and bringing you out of the desert to me after the discord created by Satan between me and my brothers, for my Lord is gracious to whomsoever He please. He is indeed all-knowing and all-wise
O my Lord, you have given me dominion and taught me the interpretation of dreams; O Creator of the heavens and the earth, You alone are my saviour in this world and the world to come; let me die submitting to You, and place me among the upright
This is news of the unknown We reveal to you, for you were not present when Joseph's brothers agreed on their course of action, and devised their plot
Many men will not believe howsoever you wish
Even though you ask no recompense (for it). It is only a warning for all mankind
How many a sign there is in the heavens and the earth which most men pass by and ignore
Not only do they not believe in God, but also associate others with Him
Do they really believe that an all-embracing punishment of God will not come upon them, or the Day of Doom overtake them suddenly while they remain unaware
Say: "My way, and that of my followers, is to call you to God with full perception. All glory to God, I am not an idolater
All the apostles We had sent before you were men of those regions, to whom We sent Our revelations. Have they not travelled on the earth and seen what befell the people before them? Surely the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who fear straying from the right path. Do you not understand
When the apostles despaired and thought they were made false promises, Our help arrived, and We delivered whom We pleased; but never will Our punishment be averted from the sinners
Verily in their accounts is a lesson for men of wisdom. This is not a fictitious tale, but a verification of earlier Books, and a clear exposition of everything, and a guidance and grace for those who believe
ALIF LAM MIM RA. These are the verses of the Scripture. Whatsoever is sent down to you from your Lord is the truth; but most men do not believe
It is God who raised the skies without support, as you can see, then assumed His throne, and enthralled the sun and the moon (so that) each runs to a predetermined course. He disposes all affairs, distinctly explaining every sign that you may be certain of the meeting with your Lord
It is He who stretched the earth and placed upon it stabilisers and rivers; and made two of a pair of every fruit; (and) He covers up the day with the night. In these are signs for those who reflect
On the earth are tracts adjoining one another, and vineyards, fields of corn and date-palm trees, some forked, some with single trunks, yet all irrigated by the self-same water, though We make some more excellent than the others in fruit. There are surely signs in them for those who understand
If you are surprised, then astonishing is the speech (of those who say:) "Having turned to dust shall we be raised as a new creation?" They are the ones who deny their Lord, and they will have collars around their necks. They are the inmates of Hell, where they will abide for ever
They want you to hasten the evil before the good, even when there have been examples of retribution before them. Though certainly your Lord forgives human beings for their iniquities, your Lord is severe of retribution
The unbelievers say: "Why no miracle was sent down to him by his Lord?" But you are only a bearer of warnings, and a guide for every nation
God is cognisant of what every female carries in her womb, or what the wombs want or exceed (of their disburdening time). With Him all things are in determined measure
He is the knower of the known and the unknown, the mighty and most high
He who keeps his secret among you is the same to Him as he who speaks out publicly, and he who hides himself in the night and walks freely in the day
His angels keep watch over him in succession (night and day), in front and behind, by God's command. Verily God does not change the state of a people till they change themselves. When God intends misfortune for a people no one can avert it, and no saviour will they have apart from Him
It is He who makes the lightning flash for fear and hope, and raises massive clouds
The thunder sings His praises, and the angels too, for awe of Him. He sends thunder-bolts and strikes whosoever He will with them: Even then it is God they contend about! But mighty is He in (His) power
To call on Him is true (supplication). For those they invoke other than Him do not answer them at all, except like a man who stretches his hands towards the water that it reach his mouth, but it will never reach it. Not more than error are the prayers of infidels
Whosoever is in the heavens and on earth bows to God in submission with a will or perforce, as do their shadows in the morning and evening
Ask them: "Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?" (They will) say: "God." Say: "Then why do you take protectors besides Him who have no power over their own gain or loss?" Say: "Can a blind man and one who can see be equal? Or, darkness and light be the same? Or, have those they have appointed equal of God created, as He has created, so that the (two) creations look alike to them?" Say: "God is the creator of everything. He is One, the omnipotent
He sends down water from the skies, which flows in channels according to their capacity, with the scum borne on the surface of the torrent, as rises the scum when metals are heated on the fire for making ornaments and household utensils. This is how God determines truth and falsehood. The scum disappears like the foam on the bank, and that which is useful to man remains on the earth. That is how God sets forth precepts of wisdom
For those who obey their Lord is excellence. For those who fail to obey, the reckoning will be hard, even if they possess and give as ransom all that there is on the earth, and as much more; and Hell will be their abode: How wretched is its wide expanse
Can a man who knows what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, and one who cannot see, be the same? They alone take warning who are wise
Who fulfil their covenant with God and do not break their agreement
Who keep together what God has ordained held together, and fear their Lord and dread the hardship of the Reckoning
Who persevere in seeking the way of their Lord, who fulfil their devotional obligations, and spend of what We have given them, secretly or openly, who repel evil with good: For them is the recompense of Paradise
Perpetual gardens which they will enter with those of their fathers, spouses and children who were virtuous and at peace, with angels coming in through every door
Saying: "(Welcome,) peace on you, for you persevered." How excellent the recompense of Paradise
As for those who break God's covenant after validating it, and sever relations which God ordained cohered, and spread corruption in the land, there is condemnation for them and an evil abode
God increases or decreases the fortunes of whosoever He will, and they rejoice in the life of this world. Yet the life of this world is nothing but a merchandise as compared to the life of the next
The unbelievers say: "How is it that no miracle was sent down to him by his Lord?" Say: "God leads whosoever He wills astray, and guides whoever turns to Him in repentance
Those who believe and find peace in their hearts from the contemplation of God: Surely there is peace of heart in the contemplation of God
Those who believe and do the right, have happiness, and an excellent resting place
That is how We have sent you to a people before whom many a people have come and gone, so that you may announce to them whatever We have revealed to you. But they do not believe in Ar-Rahman. Tell them: "He is my Lord. There is no other god but He. In Him have I placed my trust, and to Him is my reversion
Had there been a Qur'an which could have made the mountains move, or the earth to cleave asunder, or the dead to speak, yet all authority belongs to God. Have the believers not learnt that if God had so willed He could have guided all mankind? As for unbelievers, they will be visited by misfortune endlessly for what they have done; or it would sit in their homes till the promised threat of God comes to pass. Surely God does not go back on His promise
Many an apostle have they mocked before you; but I allowed the unbelievers respite, then I seized them. How severe was My punishment then
Who is it who stands (watch) over every soul for what it does? Yet they ascribe compeers to God. Say: "Then name them. Or are you announcing to God what He does not know on the earth? Or is it only empty talk? In fact, the unbelievers' plots are made to look attractive to them, so that they are held back from the right path. Whosoever God allows to go astray has none to show him the way
For them is punishment in this world; and the punishment of the world to come is far more severe. They will have no one to save them from God
The likeness of Paradise promised the pious and devout is (of a garden) with streams of rippling water, everlasting fruits and shade. This is the recompense of those who keep away from evil; but the recompense of those who deny the truth is Hell
Those to whom We have given the Scriptures rejoice in what We have sent down to you; but some of their factions reject some of it. Tell them: "I am commanded to worship only God, and not to associate compeers with Him. To Him I call you, and to Him is the destination
That is how We have sent down this (Qur'an) as a code of clear judgement. But if you follow their caprices, now that you have been given knowledge, you will have no friend or protector against God
We sent many apostles before you, and bestowed on them wives and children, but it was not for any apostle to come up with a miracle unless by the leave of God. For every age there is a law
God abrogates or confirms whatsoever He will, for He has with Him the Book of Books
Whether We allow you to see (the punishment) We have promised them, or end your life before (its execution), it is certainly for you to convey the message; the reckoning is for Us to do
Do they not see Us advancing from all sides into their land and reducing its frontiers? It is for God to judge; and there is none to reverse His judgement. He is swift at reckoning
Surely those who had gone before them had also plotted; but God's is all the planning, for He has knowledge of what each does. The unbelievers will soon learn for whom is the guerdon of Paradise
Yet those who are disbelievers say: "You are not the apostle sent (by God)." Tell them: "God is sufficient as witness between me and you, and he who has knowledge of the Book
ALIF LAM RA. A Book We have sent down to you that you may lead men out of darkness into light, by their Lord's command, to the path of the mighty, the worthy of praise
God, to whom belongs all there is in the heavens and the earth. Woe to the unbelievers for the terrible punishment (that awaits)
Those who hold the life of this world dearer than that of the next, who obstruct the path of God and seek obliquity in it, have wandered far into error
We never sent a messenger who did not speak the tongue of his people, that he may explain to them distinctly. God leads whosoever He wills astray, and shows whoever He wills the way: He is all-mighty and all-wise
Remember when We sent Moses with Our signs (We said): "Bring your people out of darkness into light, and remind them of the visitations of God. Indeed there are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful soul
So Moses said to his people: "Remember the favours of God when He saved you from the people of Pharaoh who afflicted you with oppression, slaying your sons but keeping alive your women, which was a great trial from your Lord
Remember, your Lord proclaimed: "I shall give you more if you are grateful; but if you are thankless then surely My punishment is very great
And Moses said: "What if you and all the people of the world deny, God is unconcerned and worthy of praise
Has not the news of those before you, the people of Noah and 'Ad and Thamud, and those who came after them, come to you? None knows (about) them except God. Their apostles came to them with clear proofs, but they tried to silence them and said: "We do not believe in what you have been sent with, and we are in doubt of what you call us to, about which we are in disquiet
Said their apostles: "Can there be doubt about God, the originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you to forgive some of your sins, and give you respite for a time ordained." They said: "You are only men like us, and yet you wish to turn us away from what our fathers worshipped. Bring to us then a clear proof
Their apostles said to them: "Indeed we are men like you, but God bestows His favours on whomsoever He wills among His creatures. It is not in our power to bring a miracle for you without the leave of God. The believers should only place their trust in God
And why should we not repose our trust in God when He has shown us our paths of duty to Him? We shall bear with fortitude the hardships you inflict upon us. The trusting place their trust in God
The unbelievers said to their apostles: "We shall drive you out of our land, or else you come back to our fold." Their Lord then communicated to them: "We shall annihilate these wicked people
And establish you in their place. This is for him who fears My station, and dreads My commination
Then (the apostles) asked of God's assistance, and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated
Before him is Hell, and he will get putrid liquid to drink
He will sip it, yet will not be able to gulp it down. Death will crowd in upon him from every side, but die he will not. A terrible torment trails him
Like ashes are the deeds of those who deny their Lord, which the wind blows away on a windy day. They shall have no power over what they earned. This is the farthest limit of going astray
Do you not see that God has created the heavens and the earth with ultimate reason? If He so wills He could take you away from the earth and raise a new creation (in your place)
This is well within the power of God
When they will all appear before God together, the weak will say to those who were arrogant: "We were your followers, so can you now save us a little from God's punishment?" They will say: "If we had been guided by God we would surely have shown you the way. To lament or endure is all the same to us now. No getting away is there for us
When the reckoning is over Satan will say: "The promise that was made to you by God was indeed a true promise; but I went back on the promise I had made, for I had no power over you except to call you; and you responded to my call. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. Neither can I help you nor can you give me help. I disavow your having associated me earlier (with God). The punishment for those who are wicked is painful indeed
Those who believed and did the right, will be admitted to gardens with rivers flowing by, where they will abide by the leave of their Lord, with 'Peace' as their salutation
Do you not see how God compares a noble act to a healthy tree whose roots are firm and branches in the sky, which yields
By the leave of its Lord its fruit in all seasons, God presents words of wisdom to men that they might reflect
An evil act is like a rotten tree torn out of the earth with no (base or) firmness
With immutuble words God makes the faithful dauntless in the life of the world and the life to come, but leads the unjust into error, for God does as He pleases
Have you not looked at those who repaid God's favours with ingratitude; who pulled their people down to ruin
Hell, where they will roast in the fire? And what an evil repository
They have appointed equals of God to mislead people from His path. Tell them: "Enjoy yourselves (so long as you may). In the end you have to go to Hell
Tell those of My creatures who believe: "Observe your devotional obligations and give of what We have given you in charity, secretly or openly, before the Day arrives when there will be no buying or selling or befriending
It is God who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down rain from the sky producing fruits for your food thereby, and made you master of the ships that ply in the oceans by His command, subjected the rivers to your control
And subjugated the sun and moon for you so that they perform their tasks diligently; and subdued the night and day for your service
He gave you whatsoever you asked. If you try to count the favours of God you will not be able to calculate. Man is most unjust indeed, full of ingratitude
Remember when Abraham prayed: "O Lord, make this a city of peace, and preserve me and my progeny from worshipping idols
Many a man have they led astray, O Lord. So he who follows me is truly of me; but as for him who disobeys me, surely You are forgiving and kind
I have settled some of my children, O Lord, in a barren valley near Your sacred House, so that, O our Lord, they may be constant in devotion. So put in the hearts of men some kindness for them, and provide fruits for them: They may haply be grateful
O Lord, You have knowledge of what we hide and what we reveal, for nothing on the earth or in the skies is hidden from God
All praise be to God who bestowed on me Ishmael and Isaac in old age. Verily my Lord listens to prayer
Grant, O Lord, that I and my offspring may remain constant in devotion. Grant, O Lord, my supplication
O Lord, forgive me, my parents and the faithful on the Day the reckoning is done
Think not God is oblivious of the deeds of the wicked. He has only allowed them respite till the Day on which all eyes would stare aghast
(And) they would hasten forward, heads lifted upwards, gazes fixed, and emptied out their hearts
Warn the people of that Day when the punishment would be inflicted upon them. Then will the wicked say: "O our Lord, give us respite a while more. We shall heed Your call and follow the apostles." (But they will be told,): "Are you not those who used to swear: 'There is no reverse for us
Yet you dwelt in the dwellings of those who had exceeded themselves, and it was evident to you how We had dealt with them; and We held out examples before you
Still they are plotting their plots, but evident are their plots to God, even though they are so adroit as to make the mountains move
Think not that God would go back on His promise (made) to the apostles. Indeed God is mighty, the Lord of retribution
The day when the earth will he replaced by some other than the earth, as will be the skies, and every one will appear before God the one and omnipotent
You will see the wicked on that day bound together in chains
Of molten pitch shall be their garments, their faces covered with flames
That God may reward each soul for its deeds. Indeed God is swift at reckoning
This is a message for mankind that they may take a warning from it, and may know that He is the one and only God, and that men of wisdom may reflect
ALIF LAM RA. These are the verses of the Book and the perspicuous oration
The unbelievers would haply like to wish that they had submitted (and become Muslim)
Leave them to feast and revel, beguiled by hope; they will come to know soon
Not one habitation have We destroyed but at the time determined for it
No people can hasten or delay the term already fixed for them
And yet they say: "You, to whom this Exposition has been sent are surely possessed of the Devil
If you are a man of truth, why can't you bring the angels to us
But then We never send the angels down save with the purpose (of enforcing their doom), after which they will not be given more respite
We have sent down this Exposition, and We will guard it
We had also sent apostles to people of earlier persuasions
But never once an apostle came to them at whom they did not scoff
We place in the hearts of sinners (disbelief)
So, they will not believe in it: The example of former people is there
Even if We open a door in the heavens and they ascend through it in broad daylight
They will say all the same: "Our eyes were dazed (and clouded over). We were a people ensorcelled
We have placed the signs of the Zodiac in the sky, and decked it out for those who can see
And We have preserved it from every accursed devil
Except the ones who listen on the sly, yet they are chased away by a shooting flame
We stretched the earth and placed upon it firm stabilisers, and made all things grow upon it balanced evenly
We have provided on it sustenance for you, and for those you cannot provide
Of all things there are We have the stores, and send them down in determined measure
We send rain-impregnated winds, and water from the sky which you drink, but you are not the keepers of its store
It is We who give life and We who give death, and We are the One who will abide
We surely know those of you who go forward and those of you who lag behind
Your Lord will surely gather them together: Certainly He is all-wise and all-knowing
Man We fashioned from fermented clay dried tingling hard
As We fashioned jinns before from intense radiated heat
But when your Lord said to the angels: "I am verily going to create a human being from fermented clay dried tingling hard
And when I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, bow before him in homage
The angels bowed in homage in a body
Except Iblis. He refused to bow with the adorers
How is it, O Iblis," said (the Lord), "you did not join those who bowed in homage
How could I bow," said he, "before a mortal whom You created from fermented clay dried tingling hard
Go hence, execrable," (said the Lord), "from this place
Condemned till the day of Doom
O my Lord," said he, "give me respite till the day the dead are raised
You are among the reprieved," (said the Lord)
Till the predetermined time
O my Lord," he said, "since You have led me into error I'll beguile them with the pleasures of the world and lead them astray
Except the chosen ones among Your creatures
(To which God) said: "This way is right by Me
No power shall you have over (all) My creatures except those who fall into error and follow you
For whom the ordained place is surely Hell
Which has several gates, and each gate is marked for every section of them
Verily those who keep away from evil and follow the straight path shall be in the midst of gardens and springs of water
Enter in peace and tranquility," (they will be told)
We shall cast out any grudge they may have in their hearts. (There) they will sit on couches face to face like brothers together
No weariness will come upon them, nor will they be sent away from there
Announce to My creatures that I am indeed forgiving and kind
But My punishment is surely a painful one
Inform them about the matter of Abraham's guests
When they came to him and said: "Peace," he answered: "Truly we are afraid of you
Have no fear," they said. "We bring you news of a son full of wisdom
You bring me the good news now," he said, "when old age has come upon me. What good news are you giving me then
We have given you the happy tidings of a truth," they replied. "So do not be one of those who despair
Who would despair of the mercy of his Lord," he answered, "but those who go astray
And asked them: "What matter, O angels, brings you here
We have been sent," they said, "to (punish) a sinful people
Except the family of Lot whom we shall save
Other than his wife who, it is decreed, will remain with those who will stay behind
When the messengers came to the family of Lot
He said: "You are people I do not know
We have come to you with news," they said, "of what your people doubt
Yet we bring to you the truth, and we are truthful
So leave with your family late in the night, yourself remaining in the rear, and let none turn back to look, and go where you will be commanded
We issued this command to him, for they were going to be destroyed in the morning
Then came the people of the city, exulting at the news
Said Lot: "These are my guests; do not put me to shame
And do not disgrace me. Have some fear of God
Did we not restrain you," they said, "from (entertaining) creatures from the outside world
Here are my daughters," said Lot, "if you are so active
Verily by your life they were utterly confused in their (lustful) drunkenness
So they were seized by the mighty blast at break of day
And We turned the city upside down, and rained on them stones of hardened lava
Herein are really signs for those who discern
This (city) lies on a road that still survives
Indeed there is a portent in this for those who believe
The dwellers of the Wood (near Midian) were also wicked
So We punished them too. They are both situated by the highway, clearly visible
The people of Al-Hijr denied Our apostles
And though We had given them Our signs they turned away from them
They used to hew dwellings in the mountains to live in security
But they were seized by the mighty blast towards the morning
And all that they had done (for security) availed them nothing
We have not created but with reason the heavens and the earth and all that lies within them. The Hour (of the great change) is certain to come. So turn away (from them) with a grace
Surely your Lord is the Creator and knows (everything)
We have indeed given you the seven oft-repeated (examples), and the majestic Qur'an
So covet not things We have bestowed on a portion of them to enjoy, and do not grieve for them, and protect those who believe
And say: "I am a distinct warner
Like (those) We had sent to those schismatics who slandered their Books
And severed their Scripture into fragments
By your Lord We shall question them one and all
About their deeds
So declare to them what We have enjoined, and turn away from idolaters
We are surely sufficient to deal with those who scoff at you
Who place other gods besides God. They will come to know soon
We are well aware that you are disheartened by what they say
But you should glorify your Lord with praises, and be among those who bow in submission
And go on worshipping your Lord till the certainty (of death) comes upon you
THE DECREE of GOD will surely come; so do not try to hasten it: Too glorious and high is He for what they associate with Him
He sends the angels with revelation by His command, to any of His creatures as He please, (saying): "Warn that there is no god but I, so fear Me
He created the heavens and the earth with reason. Too glorious and high is He for what they associate with Him
Man He created from a drop of semen; and still he becomes an open contender
He created the cattle from whom you get warm clothing and (other) advantages, and some you eat
There is life and cheer for you as you drive them home in the evening, and lead them out in the morning to graze
They carry your burdens to lands so distant you could not have reached without much hardship. Indeed your Lord is compassionate and kind
He created horses, mules and donkeys for riding and for splendour. He created other things too which you do not know
To God leads the right path, though some deviate. If He willed He could guide you all to the right way
It is He who sends down water from the sky of which you drink, and which nourishes the plants you feed your cattle
With which He makes crops grow, and olives, dates and grapes and fruits of every kind for you. In this is a sign for those who think
He harnessed the day and night for you, as also the sun, the moon and the stars, by His command. In this are signs for men who understand
And other things of different shades has He produced on the earth for you. In this are signs for those who reflect
It is He who has subdued the sea that you may eat fresh meat from it, and obtain ornaments to wear. You see the ships plough through it that you may seek of His bounties and, perhaps, be grateful
He placed stablisers in the earth so that while it revolves you live undisturbed, and rivers and tracks so that you may find your way
As well as many other signs, as by the stars (you) find direction
So, could one who creates be like one who cannot? Will you not then contemplate
If you count the favours of God you will not be able to calculate. Assuredly God is forgiving and kind
God knows what you hide and disclose
As for those they call besides God, they cannot create a thing, and have themselves been created
Dead, without life they are, and do not know when they will be raised
Your God is one God. But the hearts of those who believe not in the life to come are filled with denial, and they are puffed up with pride
Surely God knows what they hide and what they disclose. He certainly does not love the proud
For when they are asked: "What has your Lord sent down?" they say: "Tales of long ago
On the Day of Resurrection they will carry their own burden and some of the load of those they have led astray without any knowledge. Oh, how evil a burden they will carry
Those who have gone before them had also conspired; then God uprooted their structure from its foundation; the roof fell over them from above, and punishment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect
On the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and ask: "Where are My compeers for whom you contended?" Those endowed with knowledge will say: "Shame and evil surely are for unbelievers today
They whose souls are drawn out by the angels while they are sinning, shall offer submission: "We did no evil." But God knows well what you did
So enter the gates of Hell, and dwell there for ever. How dreadful a dwelling for the haughty
When those who took heed for themselves would be asked: "What did your Lord send down?" They will answer: "The best." For those who do good there is good in the world, but certainly the abode of the next is better. How excellent the home of the virtuous
They will enter perennial gardens with streams of water and all they wish. Thus will the pious and devout be rewarded
When the angels receive the souls of those who are blameless they will say: "Peace on you. Enter Paradise as recompense for what you did
What! Do the (unbelievers) expect that the angels should descend, or the sentence of your Lord come to pass? So had the people done before them; yet God did not wrong them, they wronged themselves
The evil they perpetrated overtook them, and what they mocked has turned upon them
The idolaters say: "If God had willed we would not have worshipped anything apart from Him, nor would our fathers have done, nor would we have forbidden any thing without His (leave)." So had the people done before them. Therefore it is binding on the prophets to convey the message in clearest terms
To every community We have sent an apostle. (saying:) "Worship God, and keep away from all other deities." Thus some of them were guided by God, and ruin was justified on some. Travel over the earth and see what befell those who accused (the apostles) of lies
Even if you are eager to guide them, God does not surely guide those who have gone astray: They will have no one to help them
They swear emphatically in the name of God that God will not raise the dead. On the contrary, it is a promise incumbent on Him, though most men do not understand
For (they fear) He might make what they differed about plain to them, and that the infidels may realise that they were liars
Yet when We will a thing We have only to say: "Be", and it is
Those who left their homes in the cause of God after having been oppressed, will be given by Us a better place in the world, and if they knew, the guerdon of the next would be greater
(For) those who persevere and place their trust in their Lord
We sent before you none (as apostles) but men, to whom We sent revelations. In case you are unaware, enquire of those who are keepers of the Oracles of God
We had Sent them with miracles and Books; and We have sent to you this Reminder so that you may explain distinctly to men what was sent down to them: They may haply reflect
Have the plotters of mischief become unafraid that God will not split the earth to swallow them, or that punishment will not fall upon them from somewhere they do not (even) suspect
Or that He will not seize them as they move about, and they will not be able to elude (His grasp)
Or He may seize them by diminishing their portion. Yet your Lord is compassionate and kind
Do they not see the shadows of all things God has created incline to the right and the left, bowing in obeisance to God
All things that move on the earth and in the heavens, and the angels, bow in homage to God, and do not behave with pride
They have fear of God for His power over them, and act as commanded
God says: "Do not take to two gods, for there is only one God. So fear Me
Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him, and His the judgement for ever. So will you fear any other than God
Whatsoever the blessings you enjoy are surely from God, and when in trouble you turn to Him in supplication
Yet when He has delivered you from affliction, some of you ascribe companions to your Lord
So as to deny what We have bestowed on them. Well, enjoy yourselves, you will come to know soon
They set aside a portion of the food We have given them for those they do not know. By God, you will surely have to answer for all you contrive
They attribute daughters to God, the glorious, but for themselves whatsoever they please
Yet when news of the birth of a daughter reaches one of them, his face is darkened, and he is overwhelmed with silent grief
And hides from people for shame at the news, (at a loss) whether he should keep her with shame, or bury her in the ground. How bad is the judgement that they make
The semblance of those who believe not in the life to come is that of the meanest; but the semblance of God is the most sublime, for He is all-mighty and all-wise
If God were to punish men for their inequity He would not leave a single moving thing on earth. Yet He gives them latitude for a time ordained. When that time is come, there will not be a moment's delay nor a moment's haste
Yet they attribute to God what they find detestable; and their tongues assert the lie that for them is only good. On the contrary, there is Fire for them, and they will be thrown into it
By God, We sent apostles to many a people before you, but Satan made their acts seem attractive to them, and he is their friend this day, and a painful torment awaits them
We have sent down this Book to you that you may explain to them what it is that they are differing about, and as guidance and a grace for those who believe
God sends down water from the skies and quickens the dead earth to a new birth. Here is a sign for those who listen
And surely in cattle there is a lesson for you: We give you a drink from the extract of food in their bellies and blood-purest milk so delicious to drink
And in fruits of the date-palm and the vine, from which you obtain inebriating drinks and excellent food. In this indeed are signs for those who understand
Your Lord predisposed the bees to make their hives in mountains, trees and trellices
And suck from all fruits and flit about the unrestricted paths of their Lord. A drink of various hues comes out of their bellies which contains medicine for men. In this is a sign for those who reflect
It is God who creates you, then makes you die; and some reach the age of dotage when they forget what they had known before. God is indeed all-knowing and all-powerful
God has favoured some of you over others in the means of subsistence. But those who have been favoured with more do not give of their means to their dependents so that they may become equal with them. Do they then deny God's beneficence
God has provided mates for you of your own kind, and has bestowed on you sons and daughters from your mates, and has given you good things for food. Will they even then believe in the false and deny God's grace
Yet they worship those apart from God who cannot provide for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth, nor will they have power to do so
So do not invent similitudes for God. Indeed God knows, and you do not know
God presents the example of a man who is a hired servant with no power over anything, and another on whom We have bestowed a handsome fortune, who spends from it in private and in public: Can they be equal? Praised be God! But most men do not understand
God presents another example of two men, one dumb and unable to do a thing and is a burden on his master. Wherever he is sent he returns without any good (result). Could he be equal to one who enjoins what is just, and follows the right path
To God belong the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and the Hour of Doom is a matter of the winking of an eye, even less, for God has certainly power over all things
God produced you from your mothers' wombs knowing nothing, but gave you ears and eyes and hearts so that you may be grateful
Do you not see the birds held high between the heavens and the earth? Nothing holds them (aloft) but God. There are verily signs in this for those who believe
God has given you homes to live in, and tents (made) from the hides of cattle convenient for days of travelling and halting; and from their wool and fur and hair you make domestic articles and goods that last a certain time
God has given you of things created, shade, and places of shelter in the mountains, and clothes for protection against the heat, and coats (of mail) for defence during war. He thus bestows His favours on you so that you may be grateful to Him
If they still turn away, your duty is to warn them in clear terms
They do know the favours of God, and yet they deny them, for most of them are not grateful
The day We shall call a witness from every people, the unbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses
And when the wicked shall face the torment it will not be decreased, nor will they be reprieved
When the idolaters see their partners they will call out: "O our Lord, these are the partners we invoked instead of You;" but they will retort: "You are liars
They will offer submission to God that Day, and the lies they fabricated will not be of the least avail
For those who deny the truth and obstruct (others) from the way of God, We shall add torment to torment as they were perpetrating corruption
Remind them of the Day when We shall call from every people a witness against them, and make you a witness over them, for We have revealed to you the Book as an exposition of everything, and as guidance and grace and happy tidings for those who submit
Verily God has enjoined justice, the doing of good, and the giving of gifts to your relatives; and forbidden indecency, impropriety and oppression. He warns you so that you may remember
Fulfil your covenant with God, having made the covenant, and do not break your oaths once you have sworn them, as you have made God a witness over you. Indeed God knows what you do
And do not be like her who untwists her yarn having spun it into durable thread. Do not use your oaths deceitfully because one party has ascendency over you. God surely tries you in this way: He will make it clear to you on the Day of Resurrection what you were differing about
If God had pleased He would surely have made you a single community of belief; but He leads whosoever He wills astray, and guides whosoever He please. But you will surely be questioned about what you used to do
So do not make your oaths a means of deceiving one another, lest your foot should slip after having found its hold, and you taste of evil for having hindered (others) from the way of God, and suffer a grievous punishment
And do not trade God's covenant for a paltry price. Remember, what is with God is better for you, if only you knew
For what you possess will pass, but what is with God will abide. We shall certainly award those who persevere a recompense in keeping with their deeds
We shall invest whosoever works for good, whether man or woman, with a pleasant life, and reward them in accordance with the best of what they have done
So, when you recite the Qur'an seek refuge in God from Satan the execrable
He does not have power over those who believe and place their trust in their Lord
His power is only over those who take him as their patron, and those who ascribe equals (to God)
When We replace a message with another -- and God knows best what He reveals -- they say: "You have made it up;" yet most of them do not know
You say: "It has been sent by divine grace from your Lord with truth to strengthen those who believe, and as guidance and good news for those who have submitted (to God)
Yet We know what they say: "It is only a man who instructs him." The speech of the man they imply is obscure while this is clear Arabic
Those who do not believe in the words of God are verily not guided by God. For them is severe punishment
They alone invent lies who do not believe in the words of God, and they are liars
Whosoever denies having once believed -- unless he is forced to do so while his heart enjoys the peace of faith -- and opens his mind to disbelief will suffer the wrath of God. Their punishment will be great
For they loved the life of this world more than the life to come; and God does not guide those who do not believe
They are the ones whose hearts and ears and eyes have been sealed by God; and these are the heedless
They will surely be losers in the life to come
But (to) those who were victimised and left their homes and then fought and endured patiently, your Lord will surely be forgiving and kind
On the day when every soul will come pleading for itself, and every soul will be recompensed for what it had done, no one will be wronged
God presents the example of a town which enjoyed peace and security, its provisions coming from everywhere in abundance, but it denied the favours of God; so God acquainted it with intimate hunger and fear (as punishment) for what they had done
An apostle came to them who was one of them, but they called him a liar. Then they were seized by torment for they were sinners
Eat the good and lawful of things that God has given you, and be grateful for the bounty of God, if you really worship Him
He has forbidden carrion and blood and the flesh of the swine, and what has been killed in the name of any other but God; but if one is driven by necessity (to eat it) without craving or reverting to it, then God is forgiving and kind
Do not utter the lies your tongues make up: "This is lawful, and this is forbidden," in order to impute lies to God; for they who impute lies to God will not find fulfilment
For them there is some enjoyment, but the punishment is painful
We have already told you what We have forbidden the Jews. We did not wrong them, they wronged themselves
To those who do wrong out of ignorance, then repent and correct themselves, your Lord is indeed forgiving and kind
Abraham was certainly a model of faith, obedient to God and upright, and not one of idolaters
Grateful to Him for His favours; so He chose him and guided him to the path that is straight
And gave him what is good in the world, and in the Hereafter he will be among the righteous and the good
So We commanded you to follow the way of Abraham the upright who was not of idolaters
As for the Sabbath, it was imposed on those who had differed about it; and your Lord will tell them on the Day of Resurrection what it was they had differed about
Call them to the path of your Lord with wisdom and words of good advice; and reason with them in the best way possible. Your Lord surely knows who strays from His path, and He knows those who are guided the right way
If you have to retaliate, do so to the extent you have been injured; but if you forbear it is best for those who bear with fortitude
Endure with patience, for your endurance is not without the help of God. Do not grieve for them, and do not be distressed by their plots
God is verily with those who are pious and devout, and those who are doers of good
GLORY TO HIM who took His votary to a wide and open land from the Sacred Mosque (at Makkah) to the distant Mosque whose precincts We have blessed, that We may show him some of Our signs. Verily He is all-hearing and all-seeing
We gave Moses the Book, and made it a guidance for the children of Israel that they should not take another protector apart from Me
O you, the offspring of those We bore (in the ark) with Noah, he was indeed a grateful votary
We announced to the children of Israel in the Book: "You will surely create disorder twice in the land, and become exceedingly arrogant
So, when the time of the first prediction came, We sent against you Our creatures full of martial might, who ransacked your cities; and the prediction was fulfilled
Then We gave you a chance against them, and strengthened you with wealth and children, and increased your numbers (and said)
If you do good, you will do so for your own good; if you do ill, you will do it for your own loss." So, when the time of the second prediction comes, (We shall rouse another people) to shame you, and enter the Temple as they had done the first time, and to destroy what they conquered utterly
Your Lord may haply be merciful to you. But if you repeat it, We shall do the same. We have constituted Hell as prison for unbelievers
Verily this Qur'an directs you to the path that is straight, and gives happy tidings to those who believe and do the right: For them is a great reward
As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have prepared a painful punishment
Man prays for evil as he prays for good, for man is hasty
We have created night and day as two signs, then We efface the sign of the night, and make the sign of the day resplendent that you may seek the bounty of your Lord, and know the computation of years and numbers. We have expounded most distinctly everything
Round each man's neck We have hung his ledger of deeds, and on the Day of Resurrection will present it as a book spread out (and say)
Read your ledger; this day you are sufficient to take your own account
He who finds the right path does so for himself; and he who goes astray does so to his own loss; and no one who carries a burden bears another's load. We never punish till We have sent a messenger
And when We destroy a human habitation We send Our command to (warn) its people living a life of ease; and when they disobey, the sentence against them is justified, and We destroy them utterly
How many generations have We laid low after Noah, for your Lord knows and notices well enough the sins of His creatures
Whosoever desires what hastes away, We hasten to give him (in this life) as much as We please to whosoever We will; but afterwards there is Hell for him in which he will burn, disgraced and ostracised
But he who desires the Hereafter, and strives for it with a will, and is a believer, will be favoured for his endeavour
We bestow from the gifts of your Lord on these and on those, for the gifts of your Lord are not restricted
See, how We favour one over the other; and in life to come are higher ranks and favours greater still
Do not set up another god with God, or you will remain disgraced and destitute
So your Lord has decreed: Do not worship anyone but Him, and be good to your parents. If one or both of them grow old in your presence, do not say fie to them, nor reprove them, but say gentle words to them
And look after them with kindness and love, and say: "O Lord, have mercy on them as they nourished me when I was small
Your Lord knows what is in your heart. If you are righteous, then He is indeed forgiving to those who turn (to Him) in repentance
So give to your relatives what is their due, and to those who are needy, and the wayfarers; and do not dissipate (your wealth) extravagantly
Those who dissipate (their wealth) are the brethren of the devils, and the Devil was ungrateful to his Lord
If you neglect (your parents) while seeking the bounty of your Lord, of which you are hopeful, speak to them softly
Do not be niggardly, nor extravagant that you may later feel reprehensive and constrained
Certainly your Lord provides with open hands whosoever He will, but according to capacity, for He knows and watches His creatures
Do not abandon your children out of fear of poverty. We will provide for them and for you. Killing them is certainly a great wrong
And do not go near fornication, as it is immoral and an evil way
And do not take a life, which God has forbidden, except in a just cause. We have given the right (of redress) to the heir of the person who is killed, but he should not exceed the limits (of justice) by slaying (the killer), for he will be judged (by the same law)
And do not touch the property of the orphans except for bettering it, until they come of age; and fulfil the promise made: You will surely be questioned about the promise
Give full measure when you are measuring, and weigh on a balanced scale. This is better, and excellent its consequence
Do not follow that of which you have no knowledge. Verily the ear, the eye, the heart, each will be questioned
And do not strut about the land with insolence: Surely you cannot cleave the earth, nor attain the height of mountains in stature
All these are evil and odious to your Lord
This is some of the wisdom your Lord has revealed to you. So do not take another god apart from God, or you will be cast into Hell, reproved, ostracised
Has God chosen to give you sons, and taken for Himself daughters from among the angels? You utter grievous things indeed
We have explained (the truth) in various ways in this Qur'an, that they may be warned; but it only increased their refractoriness
Say: "Had there been other gods with Him, as they assert, they would surely have sought a way (of opposition) against the Lord of the Throne
Too glorious and high is He, too exalted for what they say
The seven skies, the earth, and all that lies within them, sing hallelujas to Him. There is nothing that does not chant His praises, but you do not understand their hymns of praise. He is verily clement and forgiving
When you recite the Qur'an, We place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter
And We put covers over their hearts and deafness in their ears that they should not understand it. So when you invoke your Lord alone in the Qur'an they turn their backs and walk away
We know well with what (intent) they hear you, for when they confer privately the wicked say: "You follow but a man deluded
See, what comparisons they coin for you, and go astray, and thus cannot find the way
Yet they say: "When we are turned to bones and bits, shall we be raised as a new creation
Tell them: "(Even if) you turn to stones or steel
Or some other created thing which may seem to you most difficult (to create)!" They will then say: "Who will revert us back?" Say: "He who originated you in the first place." They will shake their heads at you and say: "When will that be?" Say: "In the near future, perhaps
On the day when He will call you, and you will answer with His praises and imagine you did not tarry but a while
Tell My creatures only to speak words that are good. Verily Satan sows dissensions: Satan is indeed the acknowledged enemy of mankind
Your Lord knows you better: He may have mercy on you if He please, or punish you if He will. Yet We have not sent you as warden over them
Your Lord knows whoever is in the heavens and the earth. We exalted some of the prophets over the others; and to David We gave the Book of Psalms
Say: "Call those whom you imagine to be gods besides Him; yet they have no power to relieve you of any distress or to avert it
Those they invoke themselves seek the way to their Lord, (striving) which one of them shall be nearest (to Him); and hope for His grace, and dread His punishment. Indeed, the punishment of your Lord is to be feared
There is not a habitation We shall not destroy before the Day of Resurrection, or not inflict severe punishment upon it. This is in accordance with the law (of God)
Nothing could stop Us from sending signs except that the earlier people had rejected them as lies. We sent to Thamud the she-camel as a token to make it clear to them, but they treated her cruelly; and We send signs only to deter
When We said to you: "Verily your Lord circumscribes mankind," and showed you the vision and the accursed tree of the Qur'an, it was as a bone of contention for men. Thus do We (instil) fear in them; but they only transgress the more
When We asked the angels to bow before Adam, they all bowed but Iblis, who said: "Can I bow before him whom You created from clay
(And) said: "Look! This is what you have honoured above me! If You defer (my term) till the Day of Resurrection, I will bring his progeny into complete subjugation, barring a few
(And God) said: "Away! Whosoever of them follows you will surely have Hell with you as requital -- an ample recompense
Mislead any of them you may with your voice, attack them with your cavalry and soldiers on foot, share their wealth and children with them, and make promises to them." -- But the promises of Satan are nothing but deceit
You will surely have no power over My devotees: Your Lord is sufficient as their protector
It is your Lord who drives your ships across the seas that you may seek of His bounty. He is verily kind to you
When a calamity befalls you on the sea, all those you invoke fail you except Him. But when He brings you safely to the shore, you turn away, for man is most ungrateful
Have you then become so sure that He will not cleave the earth and sink you in it by the shore, or send a gale against you, when you will not find any protector
Or you feel so secure that He will not send you back (to sea) again or send a gravel-hurtling storm against you, and drown you for your ingratitude? Then you will not find any avenger against Us
Indeed We have honoured the children of Adam, and carried them over land and sea, provided them with good things for their sustenance, and exalted them over many of Our creatures
The day We shall summon all men with their leaders, whosoever is given his record in his right hand will be able to read his account, and none will be wronged the breadth of a thread
But whoso has been blind in this world shall be blind in the world to come, even farther astray from the path
They had almost led you away from what has been revealed to you, that you may invent things about Us besides those revealed, when they would have taken you as friend
If We had not kept you constant you had almost leaned towards them
In that case We would have made you taste a double anguish of life and a double anguish of death, and then you would not have been able to find a helper against Us for yourself
They had nearly expelled you from the land and driven you away from it. But then, they too would have stayed but a little after you
This has been Our way with the apostles whom We sent before you. You will not find any variation in Our line of action
Observe the service of prayer from the sun's declining from the meridian to the darkening of the night, and the recitation at dawn. Indeed the Recitation at dawn is palpably evident
Say a supererogatory prayer at the hour of the first watch: Your Lord may raise you to a most exalted station
And pray: "O my Lord, let my entry be with honour, and let my exit be with honour, and grant me power from You which would help (sustain) me
And say: "Truth has come and falsehood nullified." Verily falsehood is perishable
What We have sent down of the Qur'an is a healing and a grace for the faithful, and adds only loss for the sinners
When We are gracious to man he turns away and moves aside; yet when evil befalls him he begins to despair
Say: "Each one acts according to his disposition, but your Lord knows well who follow the right path
They ask you about revelation. Say, revelation is by the command of your Lord, and that you have been given but little knowledge
If We pleased We could take away what We have revealed to you. Then you will not find any one to plead for it with Us
Unless your Lord have mercy. His blessings on you are great indeed
Say: "Surely if men and jinns get together to produce the like of this (Qur'an), they will not be able to produce the like of it, however they might assist one another
We have given examples of every kind to men in this Qur'an in various ways, and even then most men disdain everything but unbelief
And say: "We will not believe you until you make a spring of water gush forth from the earth for us
Or, until you acquire an orchard of date-palm trees and grapes, and produce rivers flowing through it
Or, let chunks of sky fall over us, as you assert (you will); or, bring God and the angels as a surety
Or, you come to possess a house of gold; or ascend to the skies, though we shall not believe in your having ascended till you bring down a book for us which we could read." Say: "Glory to my Lord. I am only man and a messenger
Nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them, other than (what) they said: "Has God sent (only) a man as messenger
Say: "If angels had peopled the earth and walked about in peace and quiet, We would surely have sent to them an angel as messenger
Tell them: "God is sufficient witness between me and you, for He knows His creatures well, and is well-informed
He is guided whom God guides. As for him He allows to go astray, you will not find a protector other than Him. We shall raise them on the Day of Resurrection in their own image, blind and dumb and deaf: Their habitation will be Hell. Every time (its fire) subsides We will intensify its flame
This will be their retribution for having denied Our signs and said: "Once we are turned to bones and bits, can we be raised as a new creation
Do they not perceive that God, who created the heavens and the earth, has the power to create the like of them? There is no doubt that. He has fixed a term for them. Even then the wicked disdain everything but unbelief
Say: "Even if you owned the stores of the mercy of my Lord, you would have held them back for fear of spending them, for man is niggardly
We gave Moses nine clear signs; so ask the children of Israel. When (Moses) came to them the Pharaoh said: "I think, O Moses, you have been deluded
He replied: "You know that none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth has sent these (signs) as cogent proof. I truly think, O Pharaoh, your days are done
Then he sought to turn them out of the land, but We drowned him and all his followers
After this We told the children of Israel: "Dwell in the land. When the promise of reckoning comes, We shall bring you together from a motley crowd
We have sent it down with truth, and with truth has (the Qur'an) come down. And We have sent you only to give good news and to warn
We have divided the Qur'an into parts that you may recite it to men slowly, with deliberation. That is why We sent it down by degrees
Say: "Believe in it or do not believe: Those who were given knowledge before it bow in adoration when it is read out to them
And say: "Glory be to our Lord. The promise of our Lord has indeed been fulfilled
And weeping they kneel down, and this increases their humility
Say: "Call Him Allah or call Him Ar-Rahman; whatever the name you call Him by, all His names are beautiful." Do not say your prayers too loudly or in too low a voice, but follow a middle coarse
And say: "All praise be to God who has neither begotten a son nor has a partner in His kingdom; nor has He need of any one to protect Him from ignominy. So extol Him by extolling His majesty
ALL PRAISE BE to God who has revealed to His votary the Book which is free of all obliquity
Immutable, so that it may warn of a severe punishment from Him; and give happy tidings to those who believe and do the right that there is a better reward (of Paradise) for them
Where they will abide for ever
And that it may warn those who say: "God has begotten a son
They have no knowledge of this, as their fathers did not have. How terrible are the words they utter! They speak nothing but lies
Will you kill yourself for grief of them if they do not believe in this presentation
We have made whatever exists on the earth its adornment to test and try them (and) know who acts better
For We shall certainly turn it to barren dust
Do you think the men of the cave and Ar-Raqim were so strange among Our signs
When those young men took shelter in the cave, and prayed: "O Lord, grant us Your favour and dispose our affair aright
We sealed off their ears in the cave for a number of years
Then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could account for the period they had stayed
We narrate their story to you in all truth. They were a few young men who believed in their Lord; so We gave them greater guidance
And strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said: "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We shall invoke no god beside Him, for we shall have uttered a blasphemy then
As for these our people here, they have taken to other gods apart from Him. Then why do they not bring a clear authority for them? Who is more wicked than he who fabricates a lie against God
(And they said to each other:) "Now that you have withdrawn from them and what they worship beside God, it is better to take refuge in the cave. Your Lord may bestow of His mercy on you, and facilitate your affair
You may well have seen when the sun came up it moved away to the right of the cave, and when it went down it turned away to the left, and they stayed in its open space. This was among the signs of God. Whoever is guided by God follows the right path; and whosoever goes astray will not find a guide to show him the way
You may have thought that they were awake, yet they were asleep. We made them turn right and left, while their dog lay with his forelegs stretched across the threshold. If you had looked at them you would have surely turned away and fled with horror at the sight
Even so We roused them that they may question one another. One of them asked: "How long have you stayed here?" They said: "A day or less than a day." "Your Lord knows best," they said, "how long you have stayed. So send one of you to the town with this money of yours to look for wholesome food and bring it for you; but he should be careful not to let your presence known
If they come to know of you they will stone you to death, or force you to go back to their creed; then you will never succeed
Thus did We inform the people about them that they may know the promise of God is true, and there is no doubt that the Hour will come. As they were arguing among themselves as to what should be done with them, (some) said: "Erect a monument over them. Their Lord is best cognisant of them." Those who prevailed, said: "We shall build a place of worship over their (sepulchre)
Some will say: "They were three, and their dog was the fourth;" and some will also say: "They were five and their dog was the sixth," -- guessing in the dark. And some will even say: "They were seven, and their dog the eighth." Say: "My Lord alone knows best their number; none but only a few know of them." So do not argue about it with them but lightly, and do not enquire about them from any one of them
Do not say of any thing: "I will do it tomorrow
Without (adding), "if God may please;" and think of your Lord in ease you forget, and say: "Perhaps my Lord will show me a nearer way to rectitude
(It is said) they stayed in the cave three hundred years and nine
You say: "God only knows how long they stayed. He alone knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. How distinctly He sees and hears! They have no other guardian but Him, and He does not share His authority with any one
Recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of your Lord. There is no one who can change the word of God; and you will not find refuge except in Him
Persevere with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His magnificence. Do not turn your eyes away from them, seeking the splendours of this world, and do not follow him whose heart We have made oblivious to Our remembrance, who follows his own lust and exceeds the bound
Say: "The truth is from your Lord: So believe if you like, or do not believe if you will." We have prepared for the sinners a fire which will envelope them in its tent. If they ask for water they will be helped to liquid like molten brass that would scald their mouths. How evil the drink, and evil the resting-place
But surely We do not let the reward of those who believe and do the right to go waste
There will be gardens of Eden for them, with rivers flowing by, where they will be decked in bracelets of gold, with silken robes of green and of brocades to wear, reclining on couches. How excellent the guerdon, and excellent the resting-place
Tell them the parable of two men. We gave one two gardens of grapes surrounded by date-palm trees, with corn fields in between
Each of the gardens yielded its fruit and did not withhold the least; and We made a stream flow in between them
So he became rich. Arguing one day with his friend he said: "I have more wealth than you and more powerful kinsmen
And he walked into his garden, and, (forgetting) his limit, said: "I cannot imagine that this will ever be ruined
Nor can I think that the Hour (of Doom) will come, And even if I am brought back to my Lord, I will surely find a better place there than this
Disputing with him, his companion said: "Do you disbelieve in Him who created you from dust, then a drop of semen, then formed you into a man
And He is God, my Lord, and I do not associate any one with my Lord
When you entered your garden, why did you not say: 'As God may please;' for no one has power except given by God? Though you see me poorer in wealth and children than you
Yet, my Lord may haply give me a garden better than yours, and He may send a thunder-bolt, from the skies and in the morning it will be a barren plain
Or else of a morning its water may sink underground, and you will not find a trace of it
And his vines were overtaken (with disaster), and he began to wring his hands (at the loss) of what he had spent on them, for the vines had fallen upon their trellises; and he said: "Would to God that I had not associated any one with my Lord
He had no body to help him other than God, nor was he able to save himself
The jurisdiction in this province belongs to God. His is the best reward, and His the best requital
Present to them the example of the life of this world so like the water We send down from the skies that mingles with the earth to nourish its vegetation, which then on the morrow turns to stubble and is blown away by the wind. God has power over everything
Wealth and children are only the gloss of this world, but good deeds that abide are better with your Lord for recompense, and better for expectation
The day We shall move the mountains, and you see the earth an open plain, We shall gather them together, leaving none behind
They will be arraigned before their Lord row on row, (and He will say): "Well, you have come to Us as We had first created you, even though you imagined We had fixed no time for this meeting
The ledger (of their deeds) would be placed before them. Then you will see the sinners terrified at its contents, and say: "Alas, what a written revelation this, which has not left unaccounted the smallest or the greatest thing!" They will find in it whatsoever they had done. Your Lord does not wrong any one
When We said to the angels: "Bow before Adam in adoration," they all bowed but Iblis. He was one of the jinni and rebelled against his Lord's command. And yet you take him and his offspring as your friends instead of Me, even though they are your enemies. How sad a substitute for the evil-doers
I did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation. I would not take as helpers those who lead (men) astray
The day He will say: "Call those you had called My compeers," they will call them, but will get no response, and We shall place a gulf between them
The sinners will see the Fire and know that they will be thrown into it and will not find a way of escape from it
We have explained in various ways all things to men in this Qur'an; but of all things man is most contentious
There is nothing to prevent men from believing when the guidance has come to them, and asking for their Lord's forgiveness, unless they want the example of earlier people visited upon them, or the punishment to appear right before their eyes
We never send apostles but to convey happy tidings, and to warn. But those who disbelieve contend with false arguments to nullify the truth. They make a mockery of My revelations and of what they had been warned
Who is more unjust than he who, on being reminded of his Lord's revelations, turns away from them, and forgets the evil deeds he had committed in the past. Verily We have placed a covering on their hearts so that they do not understand, and a deafness in their ears so that however you may call them to guidance they will never be guided aright
But your Lord is forgiving, full of benevolence. If He had pleased to punish them for their doings He would have punished them immediately. But a term is fixed for them from which they will find no escape
As for these habitations, We destroyed them only when they transgressed; even so We had fixed a time for their annihilation
When Moses said to his servant (Joshua): "I will not give up till I reach the confluence of two oceans, or I will journey on and on
When they reached the confluence they forgot the fish (they had brought as food) which swiftly made its way into the sea
When they had gone past (the confluence), Moses said to his servant: "Give me my breakfast. I am exhausted from this journey
He said: "You see, I forgot the fish on the rock where we had stopped. Only Satan made me forget to mention this; but the wonder is the fish escaped to the sea
Moses said: "But that is exactly what we were seeking." So they retraced their steps
Then they found one of Our votaries, whom We had blessed and given knowledge from Us
Moses said to him: "May I attend upon you that you may instruct me in the knowledge you have been taught of the right way
He said: "You will not be able to bear with me
How can you bear that which is beyond your comprehension
You will find me patient if God wills," said Moses; "and I will not disobey you in any thing
If you must follow me," he said, "do not ask me any thing until I speak of it to you myself
So they set out till they (came to the quay) and went on board a ship in which he made a hole, (and Moses said:) "You have made a hole in the boat to drown its passengers? You have done a strange thing
Did I not tell you," he replied, "that you will not be able to bear with me
(Moses) said: "Do not hold me for having forgotten, and do not reprove me and make my task difficult
The two went on till they came to a boy, whom he killed. Moses exclaimed: "You have killed an innocent soul who had taken no life. You have done a most abominable thing
He said: "Did I not tell you you will not be able to bear with me
Moses said: "If I ask you any thing again then do not keep me with you. You have my apology
The two went on till they came upon some villagers, and asked the people for food, but they refused to entertain them. There they found a wall that was crumbling, which he repaired. Moses remarked: "You could have demanded wages for it if you liked
This is the parting of our "ways," he said. "But I will now explain the things you could not bear
That boat belonged to poor people who used to toil on the sea. I damaged it because there was a king after them who used to seize every ship by force
As for the boy, his parents were believers, but we feared that he would harass them with defiance and disbelief
We hoped their Lord would give them a substitute better than him in virtue and goodness
As for that wall, it belonged to two orphan boys of the city, and their treasure was buried under it. Their father was an upright man. So your Lord willed that on reaching the age of maturity they should dig out their treasure as a favour from their Lord. So, I did not do that of my own accord. This is the explanation of things you could not bear with patience
They ask you about Dhu'l-Qarnain
Say: "I will cite before you his commemoration." We gave him authority in the land and means of accomplishing every end
So he followed a certain road
Till he reached the point of the setting sun, and saw it set behind a muddy lake, and near it found a people. We said: "O Dhu'l-Qarnain, you may either punish them or treat them with kindness
He said: "I shall punish whosoever is wicked. He will then be sent back to his Lord who will inflict on him a terrible punishment
But he who believes and does the right will have an excellent reward, and we shall make things easy for him
He then followed (another) road
Till he reached the point of the rising sun, and saw it rise over a people for whom We had provided no shelter against it
It was so, for We were fully informed about him
He then followed (another) road
Till he reached a place between two mountains, and found this side of it a people who understood but little of what was spoken
They said: 'O Dhu'l-Qarnain, Gog and Magog are oppressing the land. May we pay you some tribute so that you could build a rampart between us and them
He said: "The ability my Lord has given me is better. So help me with your manual labour; I will build a wall between you and them
Bring me ingots of iron," (which they did) until the space between two mountain sides was filled up. "Blow your bellows," he said; (and they blew) until it was red hot. "Bring me molten brass," he said, "that I may pour over it
Thus (Gog and Magog) could neither climb over it nor dig a hole through (the rampart)
This is the benevolence of my Lord," he said; "but when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will reduce it to a mound of dust; and the promise of my Lord is true
We shall leave them on that day surging like waves pressing one against the other, and the trumpet blast will be sounded, when We shall gather them all together
Then We shall bring Hell right before the infidels
Whose eyes were veiled against My warning, and they could not hear
Do the unbelievers think they can make My own creatures their protectors against Me? We have prepared Hell for the hospitality of infidels
Say: "Shall I tell you whose labour will be wasted
Theirs whose effort is misspent in pursuit of the pleasures of the world, even though they think they are doing good things
They are those who reject the signs of their Lord, and the meeting with Him. So their good deeds will be fruitless, and on the Day of Judgement We shall not appoint any weighing for them
Their requital will be Hell, because they disbelieved and mocked My signs and messengers
But surely those who believe and do the right will have gardens of Paradise as gift
Where they will abide for ever, never wanting a change
Say: "If the ocean turned to ink for writing down the colloquy of my Lord, the ocean itself would be exhausted ere the words (and wonders) of my Lord come to end, even if we brought another like it for replenishment
Say: "I am only a man like you, but it has been communicated to me that your Lord is one and single God, and that whosoever hopes to meet his Lord should do what is right, and not associate any one in the worship of his Lord
KAF HA YA 'AIN SAD
Commemorate the beneficence of your Lord on Zachariah, His devotee
When he called to his Lord inwardly
And said: "O my Lord, my bones decay, my head is white and hoary, yet in calling You, O Lord, I have never been deprived
But I fear my relatives after me; and my wife is barren. So grant me a successor as a favour from You
Who will be heir to me, and heir to the house of Jacob; and make him obedient to You, O Lord
O Zachariah," (it was) said, "We give you good news of a son by name of John.' To none have We attributed the name before
How can I have a son, O Lord" he said, "when my wife is barren and I am old and decrepit
(The angel) answered: "Thus will it be. Your Lord said: 'This is easy for Me; for when I brought you into being you were nothing
He said: "O Lord, give me a token." "Though sound," He answered, "you will not talk to any one for three nights running
So he came from the chamber to his people, and suggested to them (by signs) to sing the praises of the Lord morning and evening
(We said:) "O John, hold fast to the Book;" and We gave him wisdom right from boyhood
And compassion from Us, and goodness. So he was devout
And kind to his parents, neither arrogant nor disobedient
So peace on him the day he was born, the day he will die, and the day that he will be raised from the dead
Commemorate Mary in the Book. When she withdrew from her family to a place in the East
And took cover from them, We sent a spirit of Ours to her who appeared before her in the concrete form of a man
I seek refuge in the Merciful from you, if you fear Him," she said
He replied: "I am only a messenger from your Lord (sent) to bestow a good son on you
How can I have a son," she said, "when no man has touched me, nor am I sinful
He said: "Thus will it be. Your Lord said: 'It is easy for Me,' and that: 'We shall make him a sign for men and a blessing from Us.' This is a thing already decreed
When she conceived him she went away to a distant place
The birth pangs led her to the trunk of a date-palm tree. "Would that I had died before this," she said, "and become a thing forgotten, unremembered
Then (a voice) called to her from below: "Grieve not; your Lord has made a rivulet gush forth right below you
Shake the trunk of the date-palm tree, and it will drop ripe dates for you
Eat and drink, and be at peace. If you see any man, tell him: 'I have verily vowed a fast to Ar-Rahman and cannot speak to any one this day
Then she brought the child to her people. They exclaimed: "O Mary, you have done a most astonishing thing
O sister of Aaron, your father was not a wicked person, nor your mother sinful
But she pointed towards him. "How can we talk to one," they said, "who is only an infant in the cradle
I am a servant of God," he answered. "He has given me a Book and made me a prophet
And blessed me wherever I may be, and enjoined on me worship and zakat for as long as I live
And be dutiful to my mother. He has not made me haughty or rebellious
There was peace on me the day I was born, and will be the day I die, and on the day I will be raised from the dead
This was Jesus, son of Mary: A true account they contend about
It does not behove God to have a son. Too immaculate is He! When He decrees a thing He has only to say: "Be", and it is
(Jesus only said:) "Surely God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is the straight path
Yet the sectarians differed among themselves. Alas for the unbelievers when they see the Terrible Day
How keenly would they hear and see when they come before Us then, even though today the evil-doers are lost in palpable error
Warn them of that day of pining when all matters will have been settled, though they would still be unaware and unbelieving (of the truth)
Verily We shall inherit the earth and whosoever is on it, and to Us they will return
Commemorate Abraham in the Book: He was upright, a prophet
Remember, when he said to his father: "O my father, why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor even profit you the least
O my father, to me has come such knowledge as never came to you. So follow me that I may show you the right path
Why do you worship Satan, O father? Verily Satan was disobedient to Ar-Rahman
O my father, I fear lest a punishment from Ar-Rahman should befall you, and you should become a friend of the Devil
He said: "Are you averse to my gods, O Abraham? If you do not desist, I shall have you stoned to death. So go away for a while from me
He answered: "Peace be on you. I will seek forgiveness of my Lord for you. He has been gracious to me
I will leave you and those you invoke apart from God, and pray to my Lord. Haply in praying to my Lord I will not be deprived
Thus, when he left them and the (idols) they worshipped, We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and made each of them a prophet
And bestowed on them some of Our blessings, and gave them high renown
Commemorate Moses in the Book. He was a chosen one, both an apostle and a prophet
We called him from the right side of the Mount, and brought him close for communion
And bestowed on him his brother Aaron, a prophet, through Our benevolence
Commemorate Ishmael in the Book. He was true of his promise, and a messenger, a prophet
He enjoined on his household worship and zakat, and he was obedient to his Lord
Commemorate Enoch in the Book. He was a truthful person and a prophet
And We raised him to an exalted station
These are (some of) those who were favoured by God among the prophets of the progeny of Adam, and of those We bore in the ark with Noah, and the offspring of Abraham and Israel, and of those We guided and We chose, for they bowed weeping in adoration when the revelations of Ar-Rahman were recited to them
But they are succeeded by a generation who neglect their devotional obligations and follow only earthly pleasures; but they will reach the wrong road and meet destruction
Except those who repent and come to believe and do the right. These will enter Paradise and will not be wronged the least
In the gardens of Eden promised by Ar-Rahman to His creatures in the unknown (future). Verily His promise will come to pass
They will hear no vain talk there, but only salutations of peace, and they will have their sustenance morning and evening
This is the Paradise those of Our creatures will inherit who take heed and fear the displeasure of God
We do not come down," (will the angels say) "but only by your Lord's command." To Him belongs whatever lies before us and behind us, and the space in between. Your Lord does not ever forget
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them. Therefore worship Him, and be constant in His worship. Do you know any namesake of His
Yet man says: "When I am dead, will I come to life again
Does man not remember that before We created him he was nothing
By your Lord, We shall gather them and the devils together, then bring them crawling on their knees around Hell
We shall pull out of every section those who were most perversely rebellious against Ar-Rahman
We know best who deserve to be burnt in (the Fire)
There is not one among you who will not reach it. Your Lord has made this incumbent on Himself
We shall deliver those who took heed for themselves, and leave the evil-doers kneeling there
When Our lucid revelations are read out to them, the infidels say to those who believe: "Which of the two groups is better in standing, and whose company is more excellent
How many generations that had far more wealth and ostentation have We laid low before them
Say: "Ar-Rahman extends the life of those who are astray until they come to realise what had been promised them was either (physical) affliction or (the terror) of Resurrection. Then will they know who is worse in position, and who is weak in supporters
God gives greater guidance to those who are guided; and good deeds that endure are better with your Lord for reward, and better for consequence
Have you seen him who denies Our revelations, and says: "I will certainly be given wealth and children
Has he peeped into the Unknown, or obtained a promise from Ar-Rahman
Never so. We shall certainly write down what he says, and prolong the extent of his punishment
All that he claims will revert to Us, and he will come before Us all alone
They have taken other gods apart from God that they might be a strength to them
Never. They will deny their devotion and become their adversaries
Do you not see that We have set the devils against the infidels to rouse and instigate them
So, do not be hasty with them. We are counting their number (of days)
The day We shall usher the righteous before Ar-Rahman like envoys into the presence of a king
And drive the wicked into Hell like cattle driven to water
None will have power to intercede for them except one who obtains a promise from Ar-Rahman
They say: "God has begotten a son
You have uttered a grievous thing
Which would cleave the skies asunder, rend the earth, and split the mountains
For they have attributed a son to Ar-Rahman
When it does not behove the Merciful to have a son
There is no one in the heavens and the earth but comes before Ar-Rahman in all obedience
He has counted them and calculated their number
Every one of them will come before Him all alone on the Day of Resurrection
Surely Ar-Rahman will show love for those who believe and do the right
So We have made this (Qur'an) easy in your tongue that you may give good news to those who take heed, and warn the people who are contentious
How many generations have We laid low before them. Do you see any sign of them, or hear the least whisper of them
TA HA
We have not sent down the Qur'an to you that you should be burdened
But as admonition for him who fears
A revelation from Him who created the earth and the high ascending skies
The ever-merciful, established on the throne (of authority)
Whatever is in the heavens and the earth and in between them, belongs to Him, as whatever lies under the earth
Whether you say a thing aloud or inaudibly, He has knowledge of the secret and the hidden
God: There is no god but He. To Him belong the attributes most beautiful
Has the story of Moses come to you
When he saw a fire he said to his family: "You wait here. I have seen a fire. I may haply be able to bring an ember from it, or find direction by the fire
When he approached it, a voice called out
O Moses, I am verily your Lord, so take off your shoes, for you are in the holy plain of Towa
I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed to you
I am God, and there is no god but I, so serve Me, and observe acts of prayer to remember Me
Verily the Hour (of the great change) is about to come. I keep it secret that every soul may be rewarded for its endeavour
So do not let those who do not believe in it and follow their vain desires, turn you away from it
What is that in your right band, O Moses
It's my staff," he answered; "I lean on it, and fell leaves for my goats with it, and I have other uses for it
Throw it down, O Moses," said (the Voice)
So he threw it down, and lo, it became a running serpent
Catch it," said He, "and have no fear; We shall revert it to its former state
And face what is to come with patience, your hand will not be tarnished with blame: Another sign
That We may go on showing you Our greater signs
Go to the Pharaoh as he has become exceedingly rebellious
Moses said: "O my Lord, enlarge my breast
And make my mission easy
Remove the defect of my tongue
That they may understand my speech
And give me as assistant from my family
Aaron my brother
To strengthen me
And share my task
That we may sing Your praises much
And remember you a great deal
Surely You know us well
He answered: "Granted is your prayer, O Moses
We have bestowed Our favour on you before this
When We told your mother what We relate
Put him in a wooden box and cast it in the river. The river will cast it on the bank. An enemy of Ours, and his, will retrieve it.' We bestowed Our love on you that you may be reared under Our eyes
Then your sister followed you, and said (to the people who had retrieved the child): 'Should I guide you to a person who can nurse him?' We thus brought you back to your mother that her heart may be cheered, and she may not grieve. (Remember) when you killed a man We saved you from anguish; and tested and steeled you (in other ways). Afterwards you sojourned for several years with the people of Midian; then you came up to the measure
And I chose you for Myself
Go with My signs, you and your brother, and do not be lax in remembering Me
Then go to the Pharaoh as he has become exceedingly rebellious
Speak to him gently. He may possibly take heed or may come to have fear
They said: "O our Lord, we are really frightened lest he behave insolently with us or become violent
(The Lord) said: "Be not afraid. I am verily with you, and I hear and see
So go to him and say: 'The two of us have indeed been sent by your Lord. So let the children of Israel come with us, and do not oppress them. We have come to you with a token from your Lord. Peace on him who follows the way of guidance
It has been revealed to us that punishment will befall him who denies and turns away
He asked: "Who then is that Lord of yours, O Moses
(Moses) said: "Our Lord is He who gave everything its natural form and directed it
(The Pharaoh) said: "And what about the former generations
(Moses) replied: "Knowledge of that is with my Lord (recorded) in the Book. My Lord neither errs nor forgets
It is He who made the earth a bed for you, and traced for you paths upon it, and sends down water from the sky, and brings out through it every kind of vegetation
To eat and feed your cattle. Surely there are signs in these for those who are wise
We created you from the earth and will revert you back to it; and raise you up from it a second time
So We showed him all Our signs, but he denied them and refused
And said: "Have you come to us, O Moses, to drive us out of our land with your witchery
We shall certainly meet you with like magic. So make an appointment when we and you could meet on common ground, which neither we nor you should fail to keep
Said (Moses): "Let your meeting be on the day of the Feast, and let people assemble in broad daylight
After this the Pharaoh withdrew and settled his stratagem, then came back
Moses said to them: "Woe betide you. Do not fabricate a lie against God, or He will destroy you with some affliction. For he who fabricates lies is doomed to failure
So they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately
(And) said: "These two are surely magicians. They want to deprive you of your land with their magic, and eradicate your distinct way (of life)
So prepare your strategy and come forward. He alone shall win today who is superior
They said: "Either you cast (your spell), O Moses, or we shall cast it first
Moses said: "No. You cast it first" Then it seemed to Moses that by their magic their cords and rods were flying
And Moses felt afraid within himself
We said to him: "Fear not. You will certainly be victorious
Throw down what is in your right hand: It will swallow up what they have conjured. For what they have fashioned is only a trick of the sorcerer; and a sorcerer does not succeed wherever he may come
The magicians, (seeing the miracle), fell down in prostration, saying: "We believe in the Lord of Moses and Aaron
(The Pharaoh) said: "You have come to believe without my dispensation. Surely he is your chief who taught you magic. I will have your hands and feet cut off on alternate sides and crucify you on the trunks of date-palm trees. You will come to know whose punishment is harder and protracted
They replied: "We cannot choose you in the face of the clear testimony we have received, and over Him who created us. So do what you are determined to do. All that you would do will only be confined to our life on earth
We have certainly come to believe in our Lord that He may forgive our trespasses and the magic you have forced us to perform, for God is nobler and abiding
Surely for him who comes before his Lord a sinner shall be Hell, where he will neither die nor live
But whoever comes before Him a believer having done good deeds, will be raised to higher stations
Gardens of Eden with rippling streams, where he will live for ever. This is the recompense of those who achieve integrity
We commanded Moses: "Journey by night with Our creatures, and strike a dry path for them through the sea. Do not fear being overtaken, nor have dread of any thing
Then the Pharaoh followed them with his army, but the sea overpowered and engulfed them
The Pharaoh had led his people astray, and did not rightly guide them
O children of Israel, We delivered you from your enemy, and made a covenant with you on the right side of the Mount, and sent down for you manna and quails
(And said): "Eat of the good things We have given you for food, and do not exceed the bounds (of law) in this, or My wrath will surely fall upon you; and he who incurs My wrath will fall into the abyss
Yet I am gracious to him who repents and believes, and does the right, and follows the straight path
What made you hurry away, O Moses, from your people
He said: "They are right behind me. I have hastened to You, O Lord, so that You may be pleased
He said: "We have put your people on trial in your absence; and Sameri has led them astray
So Moses returned to his people full of anger and regret. "O my people," he said, "did not your Lord make you a better promise? Did the time of covenant seem too long to you? Or did you wish the wrath of your Lord to fall upon you that you broke the promise you had made to me
They said: "We did not break our promise to you of our own will, but we were made to carry the loads of ornaments belonging to the people, which we threw (into the fire), and so did Sameri
Then he produced the image of a calf which mooed like a cow. And they said: 'This is your god and the god of Moses (whom) he has neglected
Did they not see that it did not give them any answer, nor had it power to do them harm or bring them gain
Aaron had indeed told them earlier: "O my people, you are being only misled with this. Surely your Lord is Ar-Rahman. So follow me and obey my command
They said "So long as Moses does not come back we are not going to give it up, and we will remain devoted to it
But (Moses) said: "O Aaron, when you saw that they had gone astray, what hindered you
From coming after me? Did you not disobey my command?" (And Moses pulled him by the hair)
O son of my mother," (Aaron cried), do not pull me by my beard or my hair! I was really afraid you may say that I had created a rift among the children of Israel, and did not pay heed to your command
Moses asked: "O Sameri, what was the matter
He said: "I saw what they did not see. I picked up a handful of dust from the messenger's tracks and threw it in, for the idea seemed attractive to me
(Moses) said: "Go hence! All your life you are (cursed) to say: 'Do not touch me; and a threat hangs over you which you will not be able to escape. Look at your god to whom you are so attached: We shall verily burn it, and disperse its ashes into the sea
Your god is only God. There is no other god but He. His knowledge extends over everything
Thus do We narrate some account to you of what has gone before, and We have truly given you a Reminder of Our own
Whoever turns away from it will surely carry a burden on the Day of Judgement
And will live for ever under it. How evil the burden they will carry on the Day of Doom
The day the trumpet blast is sounded We shall raise the sinners blind
Whispering to one another: "You have tarried but ten days
We know well what they will say when the most upright among them will say: "You did not tarry more than a day
They will ask you about the mountains. Tell them: "My Lord will uproot them from the base
And turn them into a level plain
Over which you will see no curves or elevations
That day they will follow the summoner from whom there will be no receding; and their voices will be hushed before Ar-Rahman, and you will not hear a sound but faint shuffling
On that day no intercession will matter other than his whom Ar-Rahman grants permission and accepts
He knows what is before them and hidden from them, but they cannot grasp it with their knowledge
All heads will be bowed before the Living, the Eternal; and whosoever bears a load of iniquity will be full of despair
But he who has done good things and believes, will have no fear of either being wronged or deprived
That is why We have sent it down as an eloquent Qur'an, and explained in different ways the intimidations through it that they may haply take heed, or perhaps it may lead them to contemplate
Exalted then be God, the real King; and do not try to anticipate the Qur'an before the completion of its revelation, but pray: "O Lord, give me greater knowledge
We had commanded Adam before, but he disregarded it: We found him lacking in resolution
When We said to the angels: ''Bow before Adam,'' they all bowed but Iblis, who refused
So We said; "O Adam, he is truly your enemy and your wife's. Do not let him have you turned out of Paradise and come to grief
Verily you will have no hunger or nakedness there
Nor thirst nor exposure to the sun
But then Satan tempted him by saying: "O Adam, should I show you the tree of immortality, and a kingdom that will never know any wane
And both ate of (its fruit), and their hidden parts were exposed to one another, and they patched the leaves of the garden (to hide them). Adam disobeyed his Lord, and went astray
Then his Lord chose him and relented towards him, and showed him the way
(And) said: "Go down hence together, one the enemy of the other. Then will guidance come to you from Me; and whoever follows My direction will neither be disgraced nor be miserable
But he who fails to heed My warning will have his means restricted; and on the Day of Resurrection We shall raise him blind
He will ask: "O Lord, why have you raised me blind when I was able to see
(God) will say: "Because Our signs came to you, but you disregarded them. So shall We disregard you this day
And that is how We requite him who is extravagant and does not believe the signs of his Lord; and surely the punishment of the Hereafter is far more severe and persistent
Did they not learn from the many generations that We destroyed before them, whose habitations they now frequent? Verily there are signs in this for men of understanding
If the decree (of respite) had not been pronounced by your Lord, (the inevitable judgement would have ensued); but a term is fixed (for everything)
So you bear with patience what they say, and sing the praises of your Lord before the rising and setting of the sun, and honour Him in the watches of the night, and then at the two ends of day, that you may find acceptance
Do not covet what We have granted myriads of people of the pomp and glitter of this world to tempt them. The means your Lord has given you are better far and more enduring
Enjoin on your people service to God, and be yourself constant in it. We do not ask you to provide: It is We who provide for you. The reward is for piety and fear of God
Yet they say: "Why does he not bring a sign from his Lord?" Have not clear proofs come to them in what is contained in the earlier Books
If We had destroyed them by some calamity sooner than this, they would have surely said: "O Lord, if You had sent to us a messenger we would have followed Your command before being humbled and disgraced
Say: "Each one awaits the consequence; so you wait. You will come to know soon who are the men of the straight path and who have come to guidance
NEAR HAS COME the reckoning for men, but they turn away in remissness
Never does a new reminder come to them from their Lord but they listen to it with dalliance
Their minds are lost in frivolous pastimes; and the evil-doers discuss secretly: "Is he not but only a man like you? Then why are you taken in by magic seeingly
He said: "My Lord knows whatever is spoken in the heavens and the earth. He hears all and knows everything
Yet they say: "These are only confused dreams," or rather: "He has invented them;" or: "He is only a poet. Let him therefore bring a miracle to us as the earlier (apostles) were sent with
Not one habitation that We destroyed before them had believed. So how can they believe
Never did We send a message before you but through a man, whom We inspired. If you do not know, then ask the keepers of the oracles of God
We did not make their bodies immune to hunger, nor were they immortal
Then We made Our promise good to them and delivered whomsoever We pleased, and destroyed the transgressors
We have sent down to you a Book which has a reminder for you. Do you not understand
How many habitations that were sinful have We demolished utterly, and raised other people after them
Whensoever they sensed Our punishment they fled from them
Do not flee; go back to your halls of pleasure and your habitations, so that you may be interrogated
Woe, alas," they said, "we were really sinful
And this remained their lament till We mowed them down and made them extinct
We have not created the heavens and the earth, and all that lies between them, out of fun
If We had pleased to make a plaything We could have made it Ourself, if We had cared to do so
In fact We strike the truth against the false, which shatters it, and it disappears. Woe to you for what you attribute (to Him)
Whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him; and those who are near Him do not disdain to worship Him or weary (of His service)
Nor cease to endeavour praising Him night and day
Or have they taken gods from the earth who can raise the dead
Had there been gods apart from God, both (the heavens and the earth) would have been despoiled. Much too glorious is God, the Lord of the mighty throne, for things they assert
He cannot be questioned about what He does, but they will be questioned
Have they taken gods besides God? Say: "Then bring your proof. Here is the Book of those who are with me, and the Book of those who have gone before me." But most men do not know the truth and turn away
We have not sent an apostle before you without instructing him that there is no god but I, so worship Me
And yet they say: "Ar-Rahman has begotten a son." Too exalted is He! In fact, those (they call His sons) were His honoured votaries
They did not precede Him in their speech, and acted on His command
He knows what was there before them and what came after them; and they did not intercede for any one but whom He willed, and they were filled with awe of Him
If any one of them said: "I am God besides Him," We should award him Hell; for this is how We requite the evil-doers
Do not these unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were an integrated mass, then We split them and made every living thing from water? Will they not believe even then
We placed stabilisers in the earth so that as it revolved with them you lived undisturbed; and We provided passageways between them so that men may find their way
And We made the sky a well-protected roof. Still they turn away from His signs
It is He who created night and day, the sun and the moon, revolving on its orbit
We have given no man everlastingness before you. So then if you die, will they live ever after
Every soul will know the taste of death. We tempt you with evil and with good as a trial; and to Us you will return
But when the unbelievers see you they make fun of you (and say): "Is this the one who mentions your gods (deridingly)?" Yet in Ar-Rahman they disbelieve
Man is made of inordinate haste. We will show you Our signs, then you will not desire to hasten (the punishment)
Yet they say: "When will the promised threat come to pass, if you speak the truth
If only the unbelievers could apprehend the moment when they would neither be able to ward off the fire from their faces and their backs, nor help reach them
It will come upon them unawares confounding them, and they will not be able to keep it back, nor will they be given respite
Many apostles have been scoffed before you; but they who scoffed were themselves caught by what they had ridiculed
Say: "Who guards you from Ar-Rahman by night and by day?" Yet from a mention of their Lord they turn away
Or do they have lords of their own besides Us who can defend them? But they are not able to help themselves, nor can they find protection against Us
We allowed them and their fathers time to enjoy till the very end of their lives. Do they not see Us advancing into the land, reducing its frontiers? Would they still prevail
Say: "I am warning you by God's command." But the deaf do not hear the call when they are warned
Even if a whiff of the Lord's chastisement were to touch them they would surely say: "Ah woe, alas, we were surely sinful
We shall fix the scales of justice on the Day of Resurrection, so that none will be wronged in the least; and even if it were equal to a mustard seed in weight We shall take it (into account). We are sufficient for computation
We gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion, and a light and reminder for those who take heed for themselves
Who are fearful of their Lord inwardly and dread the Hour
And this is a blessed reminder that We have sent down. Will you then deny it
We had earlier given Abraham true direction, for We knew him well
When he said to his father and his people: "What are these idols to which you cling so passionately
They replied: "We found our fathers worshipping them
He said: "You and your fathers were in clear error
They said: "Are you speaking in earnest, or only jesting
He said: "In fact it was your Lord, the Lord of the heavens and the earth, who created them; and I bear witness to this
I swear by God I will do something to your idols when you have turned your backs and gone
So he smashed them up to pieces with the exception of the biggest, so that they may turn to it
They asked (on return): "Who has done this to our gods? He is surely a mischief-monger
They said: "We heard a youth talk about them. He is called Abraham
Bring him before the people," they said, "that they may bear witness
Did you do this to our gods, O Abraham?" they enquired
No," he said. "It was done by that chief of theirs. Ask him in case they can speak
Then they thought and observed: "Surely you are yourselves unjust
Then crestfallen (they confessed): "Truly, as you know, they cannot speak
(So Abraham) said: "Then why do you worship something apart from God that cannot profit you or do you harm
Fie on you and those you worship besides God! Will you not understand
They said: "Burn him, and save your gods, if you are men of action
Turn cold, O fire," We said, "and give safety to Abraham
They wished to entrap him, but We made them greater losers
So We delivered him and Lot, and brought them to the land We had blessed for all the people
And We bestowed on him Isaac, and Jacob as an additional gift, and made them righteous
And We made them leaders to guide (the people) by Our command; and We inspired them to perform good deeds and observe their moral obligations and pay the zakat; and they obeyed Us
To Lot We gave wisdom and knowledge, and saved him from a people who acted villainously and were certainly wicked and disobedient
Thus We admitted him to Our grace. He is surely one of the righteous
Remember Noah when he called to Us before this. We heard him and saved him and those with him from great distress
And We helped him against the people who rejected Our signs as lies. They were a wicked people indeed, so We drowned them one and all
(Remember) David and Solomon, when they pronounced judgement about the field which was eaten up at night by sheep belonging to certain people. We were witness to their judgement
We made Solomon understand the case, and bestowed on each wisdom and knowledge, We subdued the al-jibal (mountains) with David to sing Our praises, and at-tair (birds). It is We who did it
And We taught him the art of making coats of mail to shield you from each other's violence. Will you not be grateful even then
We made tempestuous winds obedient to Solomon which blew swiftly to sail at his bidding (with his ships) to the land We had blessed. We are cognisant of everything
And many of the devils (We also made obedient to him) who dived for him, and did many other things; and We kept watch over them
(Remember) Job when he called to his Lord: "I am afflicted with distress, and You are the most compassionate of all
So We heard his cry and relieved him of the misery he was in. We restored his family to him, and along with them gave him others similar to them as a grace from Us and reminder for those who are obedient
(Remember) Ishmael, Edris and Dhu'l-Kifl. They were men of fortitude
And they were admitted to Our grace. Verily they were among the doers of good
And (remember) Dhu'n-Noon (Jonah of the fish), when he went away in anger and imagined We will not test him (with distress). Then he called out from the darkness: "There is no god other than You. All glory to You; surely I was a sinner
We heard his cry, and saved him from the anguish. That is how We deliver those who believe
(Remember) Zachariah when he called to his Lord: "Do not leave me alone (and childless), for you are the best of givers
So We heard him and gave him John, and cured his wife (of barrenness). These were men who vied in good deeds with one another, and prayed to Us with love and awe, and were meek before Us
(Remember) her who preserved her chastity, into whom We breathed a new life from Us, and made her and her son a token for mankind
Verily this your order is one order, and I am your Lord; so worship Me
But they split up the order among themselves; (yet) all of them have to come back to Me
So he who does the right and is a believer, will not have his labour denied, for We are congnisant of it
It is imperative that a habitation We have destroyed will not desist (from unbelief)
Until when the way is opened up for Gog and Magog and they press from every elevated place
And the certain promise (of Doom) comes near. Then the eyes of unbelievers will be fixed in horror, (and they will cry:) "Ah, woe betide, we were indeed heedless of this, and were oppressors and unjust
Verily you and those you worship other than God will be faggots for Hell; and come to it you will
Had they really been gods they would not have entered it: They will all abide in it for ever
There will only be groaning for them, and they will not hear any thing
But those for whom a good reward had been fore-ordained by Us, will be far removed from it
And will not hear its hissing, and will live for ever in the midst of what their hearts desire
They will have safety from the mighty terror, and angels will receive them, (saying:) "This is your day which had been promised you
The day We shall roll up the heavens like a written scroll, We shall revert it (to nothing) as it was before We first created it. This is a promise incumbent on Us; We will certainly fulfil it
We had prescribed in the Book of Psalms after the reminder and admonition, that those of Our creatures who are good will in the end rule the earth
Verily there is a message in this for people who are devout
We have sent you as a benevolence to the creatures of the world
Say: "This is what has been revealed to me: 'Your God is one and only God.' So will you bow in homage to Him
If they turn away, tell them: "I have warned you all alike. I do not know if what has been promised you is near or far away
He knows surely what you say aloud, and what you hide within your breasts
I do not know if this be a trial for you, or a little advantage for a while
Judge in truth (between us), O Lord," he said. "Our Lord is merciful, whose help we seek against what you attribute
O YOU PEOPLE, fear your Lord. The great upheaval of the Hour will indeed be terrible
The day you see it every suckling female will forget her suckling, and every pregnant female will discharge her burden. You will see men drunk, yet it will not be intoxication. The torment of God will be severe
And yet there are men who contend about God without understanding, and follow every wayward devil
Who, it is inscribed, will beguile whoever follows him, and lead him to the torment of Hell
If you have any doubt, O men, about being raised to life again, (remember) that We created you from dust, then a drop of semen, then an embryo, then a chewed up lump of flesh shaped and shapeless, that We may reveal (the various steps) to you. We keep what We please in the womb for a certain time, then you come out as a child, then reach the prime of age. Some of you die, some reach the age of dotage when they forget what they knew, having known it once. You see the earth all withered, then We send down rain upon it, and it bestirs itself, swells, and brings forth every kind of beauteous verdure
That is so for God is the undeniable Reality. It is He who brings the dead to life, for He has power over everything
The Hour will come without a doubt, and God will raise those who are dead
Yet there are some who contend about God without any knowledge or guidance or enlightening Book
Turning their backs that they may lead away from the path of God. For such there is disgrace in the world, and on the Day of Judgement We shall make them taste the torment of burning
That is on account of what you had done in the past; yet God is not unjust to His creatures
There are some men who worship God only from the margin. If there is some profit they are content; but if calamity befalls them they turn about, thus losing both this world and the next. This is indeed a palpable loss
Leaving God they pray to those who cannot harm or profit them. That is the limit of going astray
They pray to him whose bane is more imminent than his boon: How bad the protector and how bad the associate
God will admit those who believe and do the right to gardens full of rippling streams. Verily God does as He pleases
He who thinks that God will not help him in this world and the next should stretch a rope to the sky then cut it off and see if his mind is relieved (of doubts) by this stratagem
That is why We have sent down these clear revelations, for God gives guidance whomsoever He please
God will judge between those who believe and the Jews, the Sabians, Christians and the Magians and the idolaters, on the Day of Judgement. Verily God is witness to everything
Do you see how all things in heavens and the earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, trees and beasts, and men in abundance, pay homage to God? Yet there are many who deserve the punishment. And whosoever God disgraces will have none to raise him up in honour. God does verily as He will
These two (believers and unbelievers) are disputants, who contend about their Lord. But they who disbelieve will be fitted out with garments of flames. Boiling water will be poured down over their heads
Which will dissolve everything within their bellies, and their skins
There are iron maces for them
As often as they try to escape from its anguish they would be put back into (the fire), and taste the torment of burning
God will surely admit those who believe and do the right to gardens with rivers running by, where they will be decked in bracelets of gold and of pearls; and of silk will be their garments
They will be guided with gentle words, and guided to the commended path
As for those who disbelieve, and obstruct the way of God and the holy Mosque which We have set down for all men, the native and the visitor alike. Whoever puts obstructions in this mischievously will taste of painful punishment
When We chose the site of the House for Abraham (We said:) "Associate no one with Me, and clean My House for those who will circumambulate it, stand (in reverence), and bow in homage
Announce the Pilgrimage to the people. They will come to you on foot and riding along distant roads on lean and slender beasts
In order to reach the place of advantage for them, and to pronounce the name of God on appointed days over cattle He has given them for food; then eat of the meat and feed the needy and the poor
Let them then attend to their persons and complete the rites of pilgrimage, fulfil their vows and circuit round the ancient House
Apart from this, whoever respects the sacred ordinances of God, will find a better reward for him with his Lord. You are allowed to eat all cattle except those already mentioned to you. Avoid the repugnance of idols, and false and frivolous talk
Turn uprightly to God without ascribing compeers to Him; for he who associates any one with God is like a thing that falls from the sky and is either snatched away by birds or carried far away by the wind
All this, and honouring the offerings to God, comes from purity of heart
There are advantages for you in these (cattle) up to a time, then their place is the ancient House for sacrifice
For every community We have ordained certain rites that they may commemorate the name of God by reading it over the cattle We have given them for sacrifice. Your God is one God, so be obedient to Him. Give good tidings to those who bow in obedience to God
Whose hearts are filled with awe when the name of God is mentioned before them, who endure with fortitude what befalls them, and fulfil their moral obligations, and expend of what We have given them
We have made the camels signs of God for you. There is good for you in this. So pronounce the name of God over them as they stand with their forefeet in a line. When they have fallen (slaughtered) on their sides, eat of (their meat) and feed those who are content with little, and those who supplicate. That is why We have brought them under your subjugation so that you may be grateful
It is not their meat or blood that reaches God: It is the fealty of your heart that reaches him. That is why He has subjugated them to you that you may glorify God for having shown you the way. So give glad tidings to those who are doers of good
God will certainly defend the believers. Surely God does not like the traitors who deny the truth
Permission is granted those (to take up arms) who fight because they were oppressed. God is certainly able to give help to those
Who were driven away from their homes for no other reason than they said: "Our Lord is God." And if God had not restrained some men through some others, monastries, churches, synagogues and mosques, where the name of God is honoured most, would have been razed. God will surely help those who help Him, -- verily God is all-powerful and all-mighty
Those who would be firm in devotion, give zakat, and enjoin what is good and forbid what is wrong, if We gave them authority in the land. But the resultance of things rests with God
If they accuse you of falsehood, (remember that) the people of Noah, 'Ad and Thamud had accused (their apostles) before
And the people of Abraham and Lot
And the people of Midian too. Moses was also accused of lies. So I allowed the infidels respite and then seized them. How was My reprobation then
How many a habitation given to wickedness have We destroyed, whose roofs tumbled down, which fell into ruins. How many a well and fortress reinforced lie abandoned
Have they not travelled in the land that they could have the heart to understand, and ears to hear? It is not the eyes alone that do not see, oblivious are the hearts within their breasts
That is how they ask you to hasten the punishment; but God does not go back on His promise. Verily a day with your Lord is equal by your reckoning to a thousand years
To how many habitations did We give respite, though given to wickedness, and then seized them. To Me they had to come back in the end
Tell them: "O men, it's my duty to warn you clearly
For those who believe and do the right is forgiveness and gracious provision
But those who try to defeat Our signs are people of Hell
We have sent no messenger or apostle before you with whose recitations Satan did not tamper. Yet God abrogates what Satan interpolates; then He confirms His revelations, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
This is in order to make the interpolations of Satan a test for those whose hearts are diseased and hardened: Surely the sinners have gone far in dissent
At the same time those who have been given knowledge may know that this is the truth from your Lord, and come to believe in it, and their hearts become submissive to Him. Verily God guides those who believe, to the even path
The infidels will remain in doubt about it till the Hour overtakes them unawares, or the punishment of the barren day destructive should come upon them
The order will be God's on that Day; He will judge between them. Then those who had come to believe and done the right will be in gardens of delight
But those who did not believe and called Our revelations lies, will be given disgraceful punishment
Those who left their homes in the way of God, and then were killed or died, will surely be given a better provision by God, for God is surely the best of providers
God will surely lead them to a place with which they will be gratified. Verily God is all-knowing and forbearing
Whosoever retaliates to the extent of injury suffered by him, and is wronged again, will certainly be helped by God. Verily God is forgiving and kind
That is so for God turns night into day and day into night, for God is all-hearing and all-seeing
That is so for God is the undeniable truth, and what they invoke apart from Him is false; yet God is all-high and supreme
Do you not see how God sends down water from the sky and in the morning the earth turns green? Truly God is benign and well-informed
Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him. Surely God is all-sufficing, worthy of praise
Do you not see God has harnessed all that is in the earth, to your service? And the boats ply in the ocean by His command. He holds the sky in position lest it should fall upon the earth save by His dispensation. Verily God is compassionate and kind to men
It is He who gives you life, then makes you die; then He will bring you back to life again. Man is surely most ungrateful
We have determined for each community a way of worship which they follow. So they should not contend with you in this matter; and you should go on calling them to your Lord. You are surely on the right path
If they argue with you, tell them: "God knows well what you are doing
God will judge between you on the Day of Judgement in what you are at variance
Do you not know that God knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth? This is surely in accordance with the law. This is certainly how (the law of) God works inevitably
Yet they worship in place of God that for which no authority has been sent to them, and of which they have no knowledge. The wicked will have none to help them
When Our clear messages are read out to them you can see denial on the faces of unbelievers. They can hardly restrain themselves from attacking those who recite Our revelations. Tell them: "Should I give you news of something worse than this?" -- Hell, which God has promised the infidels. How evil a destination
O men, give ear to this parable: Those you worship other than God can never create as much as a fly, even if they get together to do so; and if the fly were to rob them of a thing they would not be able to snatch it away from it. How weak the seeker and how weak the sought
They do not esteem God with the right estimation. God is surely all-powerful and all-mighty
God chooses messengers from the angels and human beings. Verily God is all-hearing and all-seeing
He knows what is before them and what lies behind them, and all things go back to God
O you who believe, bow in adoration, Worship your Lord and do what is good that you may find success
Strive in the way of God with a service worthy of Him. He has chosen you and laid no hardship on you in the way of faith, the faith of your forbear Abraham. He named you Muslim earlier, and in this (Qur'an), in order that the Prophet be witness over you, and you be witness over mankind. So be firm in devotion, pay the zakat, and hold on firmly to God. He is your friend: How excellent a friend is He, how excellent a helper
THE TRUE BELIEVERS will be successful
Who are humble in their service
Who shun all frivolities
Who strive for betterment
Who guard their sex
Except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame
But those who covet more than this will be transgressors
And those who fulfil their trusts and keep their promises
And those who are watchful of their acts of prayer
These are the real gainers
Who will inherit Paradise, and live in it for ever
We created man from the finest extract of clay
Then We placed him as a sperm in a firmly established lodging
Then We fashioned the sperm into an embryo, then fashioned the embryo into a shapeless lump of flesh; then from the lump of flesh We fashioned bones, then clothed the bones with flesh. Thus We formed him into a new creation. So blessed be God the best of Creators
And then you will certainly die
Then will be raised up on the Day of Resurrection
We made several highways one over the other above you. We are not neglectful of creation
We send down water from the sky in determined measure, and store it up in the earth; and We have power to drain it away
We grow orchards of dates and grapes from it for you, Which yield fruits in abundance that you eat
The tree that grows on Mount Sinai yields oil and seasoning for those who eat
There are lessons for you in the cattle from whose bellies We give you milk to drink, and there are other advantages that you derive from them, and some of them you eat
And you are carried on them and on boats
We sent Noah to his people. He said: "O my people, worship God, for you have no other god but He. Will you not take heed for yourselves
The chiefs of his people, who did not believe, said: "He is only a man like you. He wishes to acquire ascendancy over you. If God had willed He would have sent down angels. We never heard this from our elders
He is only a man possessed; so wait and watch him for a time
O my Lord," prayed (Noah), "help me against them, for they accuse me of lies
So We asked him to build the ark under Our eyes and guidance, (and said): "When Our command is issued and the source of water boils over, put a pair of every species in it, and your family except those for whom Our sentence has been passed already; and do not speak to Me for those who are wicked: They will be drowned
When you and those with you have boarded the ark, say: 'All praise be to God who has delivered us from the people who were sinful
And say: 'O Lord, disembark me in a welcome place; You are the best of deliverers
There were surely signs in this; We will surely put you to the test
After them We raised a new generation
Then We sent to them an apostle from among them (who said): "Worship God, for you have no other god but He. Will you not take heed and fear God
The chiefs of the people who did not believe and denied the life to come, though We had given them good things of this life to enjoy, (said): "He is only a mortal like you. He eats as you do, and drinks as you drink
So if you follow a man like yourself you will certainly be doomed
Does he give you a promise that when you are dead and turned to dust and bones, you will be raised to life again
How far-fetched what you are promised
There is only the life of this world: We die and we live: there is no rising from the dead for us
He is just a man who invents a lie about God; we cannot believe in him
(The apostle prayed): "O Lord, deliver me, for they accuse me of lies
Answered (the Lord): "They shall wake up repenting soon
So they were rightly seized by a mighty blast; and We turned them into mouldy rubbish: A good riddance of the wicked people
Then after them We raised other generations
No nation can live beyond its allotted time, or lag behind
Then We sent Our apostles one after the other. Every time an apostle came to a people they denied him. So We made one follow the other (to its doom), and turned them into bygone tales. Cursed be the people who do not believe
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our miracles and clear proofs
To Pharaoh and his nobles who behaved with arrogance, for they were a conceited lot
And said: "Should we believe in two men like yourselves, whose people are our subjects
Then they accused them of lies, and joined the company of those who were destroyed
And We gave the Book to Moses so that they may be guided
And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and gave them shelter on an elevated ground, sequestered, watered by a spring
O you apostles, eat things that are clean, and do things that are good. We are surely cognisant of what you do
Verily this your order is one order, and I am your Lord, so fear Me
But then they divided up their order into different creeds, each section rejoicing in what it had come to have
So leave them to their ignorance for a time
Do they think that by increasing their wealth and children
We are hastening to reward them for good deeds? No. They do not comprehend
Surely those who live in awe of their Lord
Who believe in their Lord's revelations
Who do not associate any one with their Lord
Who give whatsoever they give (in His way), and their hearts tremble with fear that they have to go back to their Lord
Are the ones who hasten to goodness and outpace the others
We do not burden a soul beyond capacity, for We have a record that tells the truth. No wrong will be done to any one
Yet their hearts are oblivious of this; and besides, they are busy with other things
So that when We seize the affluent among them with affliction, they will begin to implore for help
Do not supplicate for help today; you will not be rescued by Us
For when My revelations were read out to you, you turned back on your heels and fled
Insolently, treating them like tales told at night
Why did they not think over the message? Or has something come to them which had not come to their fathers
Or did they not recognise their apostle, and rejected him
Or do they say that he is possessed? In fact, he has brought the truth to them, but most of them abhor the truth
Had truth been subject to their whims the heavens and the earth and all those within them would have been depraved. In fact We had sent them their reminder, but they turned away from good advice
Or do you ask of them any tribute? In that case the tribute of your Lord is better, for He is the best of providers
You are surely calling them to the right path
But those who believe not in the Hereafter turn away from the straight path
If We took compassion on them and removed the affliction they are in, they would only wander lost in confusion
We had seized them with the punishment, but they did not bow before their Lord nor turned to Him in humility
So that when at last We open up the gate of severe punishment on them they will be overwhelmed with despair
It is He who gave you hearing, sight, and hearts, but only few of you give thanks
It is He who multiplied you on the earth, and it will be before Him that you will be gathered
It is He who gives you life and death, and His the alternation of night and day. Even then you do not understand
And talk as did the people of old
They say: "When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, shall we be raised to life again
We and our fathers were promised this before; it is nothing but ancient lore
Say: "To whom does the earth and whosoever is upon it then belong, if you know
They will say: "To God." Say: "Then why do you not bethink yourselves
Say: "Then who is the Lord of the seven skies? And who is the Lord of the mighty Throne
They will say: "God." Say: "Then why do you not obey and fear Him
Say: "Whose is the sovereignty over all things, who protects, and against whom there is no protection? {Answer) if you have knowledge
They will say: "God's." Say: "Then why are you so deluded
In fact We have sent the truth to them, but they are liars
God has not begotten a son, nor is there any god besides Him. Had this been so, each god would have taken away what he had created with him, and some would have risen over the others. God is much too glorious for what they attribute (to Him)
The knower of the absent and the present, too exalted is He for what they associate (with Him)
Say: "O Lord, if I am made to see what has been promised them
Then do not, O Lord, put me among the sinners
We have certainly the power to make you see what We have promised them
Dispel evil with what is good. We know well what they attribute (to Us)
Say: "My Lord, I seek refuge in You from the evil promptings of the devils
I seek refuge in You lest they come to me
(But the unbelievers will persist) until when death comes to one of them he will say: "O Lord, send me back again
That I may do some good I did not do (in the world)." Not so. These are only words he utters. Behind them lies the intervening barrier (stretching) to the day of their resurrection
When the trumpet blast is sounded no ties of lineage will hold among them, nor will they ask after one another
Only those whose scales are heavier in the balance will find happiness
But those whose scales are lighter will perish and abide in Hell for ever
Their faces will be scorched by flames, and they will grin and scowl within it
Were not My messages read out to you? But you denied them
They will say: "O Lord, our misery overwhelmed us, so we remained a people astray
Get us out of this, O Lord. If we transgress we will surely be sinful
He will say: "Remain condemned in it, and do not speak to Me
There was a section among My creatures that said: 'O Lord, we believe. Forgive us and have mercy upon us, for You are the best of the merciful
But you ridiculed them. So much so that out of (spite) for them you forgot to remember Me and laughed at them
I have rewarded them this day for they were constant, and they have come to attainment
They will be asked: "How long did you live on the earth in terms of years
They will say: "A day or less than a day. Ask the enumerators of numbers
He will say: "You stayed there only a moment, if you knew
Do you think We created you for nothing, and that you will not return to Us
Exalted then be God, the King, the Real. There is no god but He, the Lord of the glorious throne
Whoever worships another god apart from God, for which he holds no proof, will have to account for it before his Lord. Verily the unbelievers will not prosper
Say: "My Lord, forgive and have mercy. You are the best of the merciful
WE HAVE REVEALED this Surah and made it obligatory as We have sent down clear injunctions in it that you may be warned
The adulteress and adulterer should be flogged a hundred lashes each, and no pity for them should deter you from the law of God, if you believe in God and the Last Day; and the punishment should be witnessed by a body of believers
The adulterer can marry no one but an adulteress or his partner (in the act), and the adulteress cannot marry any but an adulterer or her partner (in the act). This is forbidden the believers
Those who defame chaste women and do not bring four witnesses should be punished with eighty lashes, and their testimony should not be accepted afterwards, for they are profligates
Except those who repent after this and reform; and God is surely forgiving and kind
Those who accuse their wives and do not have any witnesses except themselves, should swear four times in the name of God, the testimony of each such person being that he is speaking the truth
And (swear) a fifth time that if he tell a lie the curse of God be on him
The woman's punishment can be averted if she swears four times by God as testimony that her husband is a liar
Her fifth oath being that the curse of God be on her if her husband should be speaking the truth
(This would not have been possible) if the grace and benevolence of God were not upon you; but God is compassionate and wise
Those who spread lies were a clique among you. Do not think that it was bad for you: In fact it has been good for you. Each of them will pay for the sin he has committed, and he who had greater share (of guilt) will suffer grievous punishment
Why did the faithful men and women not think well of their people when they heard this, and said: "This is a clear lie
Why did they not bring four witnesses (in support of their charge)? And since they did not bring the four witnesses they are themselves liars in the sight of God
Were it not for the grace of God and His mercy upon you in this world and the next, you would have suffered a great affliction for the false accusation
When you talked about it and said what you did not know, and took it lightly -- though in the sight of God it was serious
Why did you not say when you heard it: "It is not for us to speak of it? God preserve us, it is a great calumny
God counsels you not to do a thing like this, if you are believers
God explains His commands to you clearly, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
There is painful punishment in this world and the next for those who like that immorality should spread among the believers, for God knows and you do not know
But for the grace of God and His mercy (much harm would have been done); yet God is compassionate and kind
O you who believe, do not follow in the footsteps of Satan, for he who follows in the footsteps of Satan will be induced by him to what is shameful and forbidden. But for the grace of God and His mercy upon you none of you would have escaped undefiled; but God makes whosoever He will grow in goodness, for God is all-hearing and all-knowing
Let not those who are men of plenty and means among you swear that they will not give to their relatives and the poor and those who leave their homes in the service of God. They should forgive and overlook (their failings). Would you not like God to forgive you? And God is forgiving and kind
Verily those who blaspheme unsuspecting chaste believing women will be cursed in this world and the next; and for them there will be severe punishment
The day their tongues and hands and feet bear witness to what they had done
God will pay them on that day their just due in full, and they will come to know that God is the tangible Reality
Bad women deserve bad men, and bad men are for bad women; but good women are for good men, and good men for good women, for they are innocent of what people say. There is forgiveness for them and a gracious provision
O you who believe, do not enter other houses except yours without first asking permission and saluting the inmates. This is better for you: You may haply take heed
If you find that no one is in, then do not enter unless you have received permission. If you are asked to go away, turn back. That is proper for you. God is aware of what you do
There is no harm in going into uninhabited houses where there is some convenience for you, as God has knowledge of what you hide and what you disclose
Tell the believing men to lower their eyes and guard their private parts. There is for them goodness in this. God is aware of what they do
Tell the believing women to lower their eyes, guard their private parts, and not display their charms except what is apparent outwardly, and cover their bosoms with their veils and not to show their finery except to their husbands or their fathers or fathers-in-law, their sons or step-sons, brothers, or their brothers' and sisters' sons, or their women attendants or captives, or male attendants who do not have any need (for women), or boys not yet aware of sex. They should not walk stamping their feet lest they make known what they hide of their Ornaments. O believers, turn to God, every one of you, so that you may be successful
Marry off those who are single among you, and those of your male and female servants who are righteous. If they are poor, God will enrich them of His grace, for God is bounteous and all-knowing
Those who cannot afford to marry should abstain from what is unlawful until God enriches them by His grace. And free those slaves you possess who wish to buy their freedom after a written undertaking, if you know they have some goodness, and give them out of the riches God has given you. Do not force your maids to prostitution if they wish to lead married lives, in order to get the benefits of this world. But if someone forces them, surely God (will forgive them) after their forced helplessness, for He is forgiving and kind
We have sent down clear instructions to you, and illustrations from (the accounts) of those who have gone before you, and a warning for those who take heed for themselves
God is the light of the heavens and the earth. The semblance of His light is that of a niche in which is a lamp, the flame within a glass, the glass a glittering star as it were, lit with the oil of a blessed tree, the olive, neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil appears to light up even though fire touches it not, -- light upon light. God guides to His light whom He will. So does God advance precepts of wisdom for men, for God has knowledge of everything
(The light is lit) in houses of worship which God has allowed to be raised, and His name remembered in them. His praises are sung there morning and evening
By men not distracted from the remembrance of God either by trade and commerce or buying and selling, who stand by their devotional obligations and pay the zakat, who fear the day when hearts and eyes would flutter with trepidation
That God may reward them for the best of their deeds, and bestow more on them of His bounty, for God gives whom He please without measure
As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage in the desert which the thirsty takes for water till he reaches it to find that there was nothing, and finds God with him who settles his account, for God is swift at the reckoning
Or like darkness in a wide, wide sea, waves surging upon waves, with clouds overhanging, darkness on darkness. If you stretch your hand, you could hardly see it. For him whom God does not give any light, there is no light
Have you not seen that all those who are in the heavens and the earth, and the birds on the wing, sing the praises of God. Each one knows its obligations and its duties, and God knows whatever they do
For God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and the returning is to God
Have you not seen that God drives the clouds, then joins them together and puts them fold on fold. Then you see the rain fall through them; and He sends down hail from the sky where there are mountains of it, and strikes those with it whom He will, and wards it off from whomsoever He please. His lightning could snatch away their eyes
It is God who alternates night and day. There is surely a lesson in this for men of sight
God created every moving thing from water: One crawls on its belly, one walks on two legs, another moves on four. God creates whatsoever He will. Indeed God has power over everything
We have surely sent down clear signs. It is God who guides whom He will to the path that is straight
They say they believe in God and the Prophet, and have come to believe, yet a section of them turns back even after this; and these are not believers
When they are called to God and His Prophet, that he may judge between them, a section of them turns away
Had right been on their side they would have come to him submissively
Is there a malady in their hearts, or they are deluded, or afraid that God and His Prophet would be unjust in dealing with them? Not so; they are themselves unjust
The answer of the believers when they are called to God and His Apostle that he may judge between them, is: "We hear and obey." And they are the ones who will prosper
Whoever obeys God and His Prophet, fears God and does his duty to Him, will surely find success
They swear solemnly by God: "If you command us we shall go forth." Say: "Do not swear. What is wanted is obedience, as should be. God is certainly aware of what you do
Say: "Obey God and obey the Apostle. If you turn away, then for him is his duty to fulfil, and for you the burden that you carry; yet if you obey him you will be rightly guided. The duty of the Messenger is to convey the message clearly
God has promised to make those of you who believe and do the right, leaders in the land, as He had made those before them, and will establish their faith which He has chosen for them and change their fear into security. They will worship Me and not associate any one with Me. But those who disbelieve after this will be reprobates
So observe your devotional obligations, pay the zakat, and obey the Apostle so that you may be shown mercy
Do not think that unbelievers will subvert (the authority of God) on earth. Their abode is Hell; and what an evil destination
O you who believe, let your dependants and those who have not yet reached the age of puberty, ask permission (to enter your presence) on three occasions: Before the early morning prayer; when you disrobe for the mid-day siesta; and after prayer at night. These are the three occasions of dishabille for you. There is no harm if you or they visit one another at other times (without permission). God thus explains things to you clearly, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
When your children have reached the age of puberty, they should similarly ask your leave (for entering) as others did before them. God thus clearly explains His commands to you, for God is all-knowing and all-wise
As for your women past the age of bearing children, who have no hope of marriage, there is no harm if they take off their outer garments, but in such a way that they do not display their charms; yet if they avoid this it would be better for them. God is all-hearing and all-knowing
There is no harm if the blind, the lame, the sick, or you yourselves, eat in your own houses or the houses of your fathers, mothers, or your brothers' houses, or those of your sisters, or your fathers' brothers' or sisters', or your mothers' brothers' or sisters', or in the houses whose care is entrusted to you, or the houses of your friends
There is no harm in your eating together or separately. But when you enter the houses, salute the inmates with a greeting in the name of God, invoking blessings and good health. That is how God explains things to you clearly so that you may understand. They alone are true believers who believe in God and His Apostle, and when they are with him on a matter of common concern, do not depart without obtaining his leave. Surely those who ask leave of you are the ones who believe in God and His Apostle. Therefore when they ask leave of you for personal business give leave to those you please, and seek God's forgiveness for them. Surely God is forgiving and kind
Do not consider your being summoned by the Apostle to be like your summoning one another. God knows those of you who go away surreptitiously. So let those who act in contravention of his command take heed lest a trial should befall them or a grievous punishment come upon them
Does not everything in the heavens and the earth belong to God? He surely knows what state you are in; and on the day they go back to Him. He will tell them what they used to do, for God has knowledge of everything
BLESSED IS HE who revealed the Criterion (of right and wrong) to His votary that it may be a warning for the world
He to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, who has neither begotten a son nor has He a partner in His kingdom, (who) created everything and determined its exact measure
Yet they choose apart from Him gods who have not created any thing and have themselves been created, who possess no power over their loss or gain, or their death or life or being raised to life again
Yet the unbelievers say: "This is nothing but a lie he has concocted in which others have aided him." They have come down to mischief and lies
And they say: "These are fables of antiquity he has invented, which are dictated to him morning and evening
Say: "He who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth has revealed it to me; and He is surely forgiving and kind
But they say: "What sort of prophet is this who eats food and walks the market places? Why was no angel sent to him to act as admonisher with him
Or a treasure should have been given to him, or he should have had an orchard from which he could eat." And these wicked people say: "You only follow a man ensorcelled
Just see what comparisons they bring up for you! They are lost and cannot find the way
Blessed be He who, if He pleased, could give you better than that, -- gardens with rivers flowing by; and make palaces for you
Yet they reject the Hour as untrue. We have prepared a Fire for those who deny the Resurrection
When (Hell) appears to them from a distance they will hear it raging and roaring
And when they are cast within a narrow space of it chained together, they would plead for death
Do not ask for one death but many deaths on this day
Ask them: "Is this better or a garden for everlasting abode which has been promised the pious and devout? It would be their guerdon and their destination
There will they have whatever they wish, and there abide for ever." This is a promise incumbent on your Lord which will certainly be fulfilled
The day He will gather them together along with those they worshipped other than God, He will ask them: "Did you lure these creatures of Mine away, or did they themselves go astray
They will answer: "Glory to You. It was not worthy of us to seek any protector other than You. But You allowed them and their fathers a life of ease until they turned oblivious of the Reminder. They were a people impenitent
(The idolaters will be told): "Your gods have refuted your assertion. You can neither avert (your doom) nor receive any help. We shall make the wicked among you taste of severe punishment
We never sent before you apostles who did not eat food and walk the market places. We make some of you the means of trying the others. So will you persevere? Your Lord is always watching
Those who do not hope to meet Us say: "Why are no angels sent down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?" They are full of self-conceit and behave with intense arrogance
The day they see the angels there will be no happy tidings for the sinners; and they will say: "There is an insurmountable barrier
We shall turn to their deeds and scatter them like particles of dust
The inmates of Paradise will have a better abode that day, and a better resting place
The day the heavens splits asunder with a dazzling white cloud gathering and the angels descend in a continuous stream
The real sovereignty will belong to Ar-Rahman. How grievous will be the day for the infidels
The sinner will then bite his hand and say: "Would that I had taken the road with the Prophet
Woe alas, ah would I had not taken so-and-so as friend
He led me astray from the Warning after it had come to me. Satan always betrays man
The prophet will say: "O my Lord, my people had fettered the Qur'an
Thus do We keep opponents among the sinners for every apostle; yet your Lord is sufficient as a guide and helper
The unbelievers say: "Why was the whole Qur'an not sent down all at once to him?" It was sent thus that We may keep your heart resolute. So We enunciated it by steps and distinctly
There is not an example they advance to which We do not give you a right answer and a better explanation
Those who will be pushed faces forward into Hell will be in a worse position, farther away from the path
We gave Moses the Book, and made his brother Aaron his minister
Then We told them: "Go to the people who have rejected Our signs." Then We annihilated them completely
We had drowned the people of Noah when they had accused the apostles of lies, and turned them into an example for men. We have prepared a painful punishment for the wicked
(As for) 'Ad, Thamud and the people of ar-Rass, and many generations in between them
We administered warnings to each of them, and then destroyed them completely
They must have surely passed by the town on which We had rained the terrible rain of ruin. How could they not have seen it? Still they do not dread the Resurrection
When they see you they take you only in jest: "Is this the one whom God has sent as messenger
He would have surely turned us away from our gods if we had not adhered to them." They will know soon who is farther away from the path when they see the punishment
Have you considered him who takes his own lust for his god? Can you stand a surety for him
Or do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are no better than cattle; in fact they are farther astray from the path
Have you not seen how your Lord lengthens out the shadow? He could have kept it motionless if He liked. Yet We make the sun its pilot to show the way
Then We draw it back to Us, withdrawing it little by little
It is He who made the night a covering for you; and made sleep for rest, the day for rising
It is He who sends the winds with auspicious news in advance of His benevolence; and We send pure water down from the sky
To quicken a region that was dead, and to give it as drink to animals We have created and to men in plenty
And We distribute it among them in various ways that they may ponder and reflect; yet most men disdain everything but denial and thanklessness
Had We pleased We could have raised a warner in every town
So do not listen to unbelievers, and strive against them with greater effort
It is He who made two bodies of water flow side by side, one fresh (and) sweet, the other brine (and) bitter, and has placed an interstice, a barrier between them
It is He who created man from water, then gave him consanguinity and affinity. Your Lord is omnipotent
And yet they worship besides God what cannot bring them gain or do them harm. The unbeliever has always been an auxiliary against his Lord
Yet We have not sent you but to give good tidings and to warn
Tell them: "I do not ask any recompense of you for this other than (urging) whoever likes may take the way to his Lord
Have trust in God the Living, who will never die, and sing His hallelujas; for He is well aware of the sins of His creatures
He created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them in six spans then assumed His authority. He is the benevolent: Ask those who are well-informed
When you say to them: "Bow before Ar-Rahman," they say: "What is Ar-Rahman? Should we adore whoever you ask us to?" And their aversion increases further
Blessed is He who placed in the heavens constellations of stars, and placed a burning lamp in it and the luminous moon
It is He who made the night and day an alternation for him who cares to reflect and be grateful
Devotees of Ar-Rahman are those who walk with humility on the earth, and when they are addressed by the ignorant, say: 'Peace
And those who spend their nights bowed and standing before their Lord
Who say: "O our Lord, avert from us the torment of Hell: Its punishment is surely continuous
It is indeed an evil halt and an evil abode
Who are neither prodigal nor miserly in their spending but follow a middle path
Who do not invoke any god apart from God, who do not take a life which God has forbidden except for a cause that is just, and do not fornicate -- and any one who does so will be punished for the crime
Whose punishment will be doubled on the Day of Judgement, and he will live for ever in disgrace
Except those who repent and come to believe and do the right, for whom God will turn evil into goodness, for God is forgiving and kind
Whosoever repents and does the right, will have turned back to God by way of repentance
And those who do not give false evidence, and if they come across unbecoming talk ignore it and pass by in a sedate way
Who, when reminded of their Lord's revelations, do not fall for them like the deaf and blind
And those who say: "O Lord, give us comfort in our spouses and children, and make us paragons of those who follow the straight path
They will be rewarded for their perseverance with lofty mansions in empyrean where they will be received with greetings of peace and salutations
And abide there for ever: What an excellent destination and abode
Say: "My Lord is not concerned on your account if you do not pray to Him. You have surely done with denying; soon will come the inevitable judgement
TA SIN MIM
These are the verses of the perspicuous Book
You may perhaps wear out your heart because they do not come to belief
We could send down from the heavens a sign to them if We pleased, before which their heads would remain bowed
Never does a new reminder come to them from Ar-Rahman but they turn away from it
Surely they have done with denying; soon will come to them the news of what they were laughing at
Do they not see the earth, how We grow all kinds of noble things upon it
Verily there are signs in this; yet many of them do not believe
Your Lord is surely mighty and merciful
When your Lord called upon Moses: "Go to the wicked people
The people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear and take heed
He said: "O Lord, I fear that they will deny me
My heart is constrained, my tongue falters, so delegate Aaron
And they have a charge (of murder) against me. So I fear that they will kill me
(It was) said: "By no means. Go with My signs, both of you. I am verily with you and I hear
Go to the Pharaoh and tell him: 'We bring a message from the Lord of all the worlds
That you should send the children of Israel with us
(The Pharaoh) said: "Did we not bring you up as a child? And you lived a number of years of your life with us
And you commited what you did, and you are ungrateful
(Moses) replied: "I did do that and I was in the wrong
So I ran away from you out of fear. But my Lord has given me wisdom, and made me an apostle
But the favour you oblige me with is that you have enslaved the children of Israel
The Pharaoh asked: "And what is the Lord of all the worlds
(Moses) said: "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, if you can believe
(The Pharaoh) said to those around him: "Do you hear
(Moses continued): "Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers before you
(The Pharaoh) said (to his nobles): "Your apostle who has been sent to you, is certainly mad
(Moses) said: "The Lord of the East and the Lord of the West and all that lies between them, if you have sense
(The Pharaoh) said: "If you took another god apart from me I will have you incarcerated
(Moses) said: "Even though I have brought to you something convincing
(The Pharaoh) said: "Then bring it, if you speak the truth
So (Moses) cast his staff, and lo, it turned into a living serpent
And he drew forth his hand, and lo, it looked white to the beholders
The Pharaoh said to the chiefs around him: "He is certainly a clever magician
He wants to drive you out of your land by his magic. So, what do you bid
They said: "Put him and his brother off awhile, and send summoners to the cities to gather
And bring the ablest magicians to you
So the magicians were assembled at a stated time and place on an appointed day
And the people were also asked to assemble
(They said): "We may haply follow the magicians if they are victorious
When the magicians arrived, they said to the Pharaoh: "Is there a reward for us if we are victorious
Yes," he replied. "You 'will be among the honoured
Moses said to them: "Cast what you have to cast
So they cast their ropes and rods, and said: "By the glory of Pharaoh, we shall be victorious
Then Moses threw down his staff, and lo, it swallowed up their conjurations
Then the magicians fell prostrating in adoration
And said: "We (affirm and) believe in the Lord of all the worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
Said (the Pharaoh): "You have come to believe in him before I gave you leave. He is surely your chief, who taught you magic. You will soon come to know: I will have your hands and feet cut off on alternate sides, and have every one of you crucified
They said: "There will be no harm. We shall return to our Lord
We certainly hope our Lord will forgive our sins as we are the first to believe
We said to Moses: "Travel by night with My creatures. You will surely be pursued
Then the Pharaoh sent announcers to the cities
(Proclaiming): "Surely they are a small band (of fugitives)
They are always harassing us
But we are a fully accounted army
So We made them leave the gardens and springs of water
And treasures and agreeable mansions
Thus it was; and We made the children of Israel possess them
But they pursued them at sunrise
When the two forces drew within seeing distance of each other, the people of Moses said: "We shall certainly be overtaken
Moses replied: "By no means. My Lord is with me. He will show me the way
We commanded Moses: "Smite the sea with your staff." And it parted, and every parting was like a lofty mountain
Then We brought the others to that place
We delivered Moses and every one with him
And We drowned the others
Verily there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe
Indeed your Lord is mighty and merciful
Relate the news of Abraham to them
When he asked his father and his people: "What do you worship
They replied: "We worship idols and are devoted to them
(Abraham) asked: "Do they hear when you call them
Or do they benefit you, or do you harm
They said: "No. But we found our fathers doing so
He said: "Have you considered what you have been worshipping
You and your fathers
Yet they are my enemies except the Lord of all the worlds
Who created me and showed me the way
Who gives me food and drink
And heals me when I am sick
Who will make me die, then give me life again
And who, I hope, will condone my faults on the Day of Judgement
O Lord, give me wisdom and admit me among the righteous
And uphold my name with posterity
And put me among the inheritors of Paradise
Forgive me and my father: He was surely among those who went astray
And do not disgrace me on the day when they are raised from the graves
The day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
But to him who comes to God with a tranquil heart
Paradise will be brought near those who take heed for themselves and follow the straight path
And Hell made visible to those who had gone astray
They will be asked: "Where are those you worshipped
Other than God? Can they save you or even save themselves
They will then be thrown into Hell with those who had gone astray
Together with the hordes of Iblis
Disputing among themselves they will say
By God, we were plainly in error
In equating you with the Lord of all the worlds
No one but the sinners led us astray
Now we have none to intercede for us
Nor any sincere friend
If only we could return and be among the believers
Verily there is a sign in this, but many of them do not believe
Verily your Lord is mighty and merciful
The people of Noah accused the apostles of lies
When their brother Noah said to them: "Will you not take heed
I have been sent as a trusted messenger to you
So be fearful of God and listen to me
I ask no recompense of you for it. My reward is due from none but the Lord of all the worlds
So fear God and follow me
They said: "Should we place our trust in you when only the condemned follow you
He said: "It is not for me to know what they were doing
It is for my Lord to bring them to book, if you can understand
I am certainly not one to drive away the believers
I am only a plain admonisher
They said: "If you do not desist, O Noah, you will be stoned to death
He prayed: "O Lord, verily my people accuse me of lies
So adjudge between me and them conclusively, and save me and the believers who are with me
So We delivered him and those with him in the loaded ark
And drowned the rest of them
Verily there is a sign in this, yet many of them do not believe
But surely your Lord is mighty and merciful
The people of 'Ad accused the messengers of lies
When their brother Hud said to them: "Will you not take heed
I have been sent as a trusted messenger to you
So fear God and listen to me
I ask no recompense of you for it. My reward is due from none but the Lord of all the worlds
You construct monuments on every hill in vain
Erect palaces (thinking) that you will live for ever
And whenever you apply force become tyrannical
So be fearful of God and follow me
Fear Him who has bestowed on you what you know
Gave you increase of cattle and sons
And orchards and springs
I fear the punishment of a terrible day for you
They said: "It is the same to us if you warn us or do not warn
This is just a habit of antiquated people
We are not going to be damned
Then they accused him of lies; so We annihilated them. Verily there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe
Yet surely your Lord is mighty and merciful
The Thamud accused the messengers of lies
When their brother Saleh said to them: "Will you not take heed
I have been sent as a trusted messenger to you
So fear God and follow me
I do not ask any recompense of you for this. My reward is due from none but the Lord of all the worlds
(Do you think) you will be left secure here
In these gardens and these springs
The fields of corn and date-palm trees with soft and tender spathes
And dwellings hewed out of mountains ingeniously
So be mindful of God and listen to me
Do not follow those who are extravagant
Who corrupt the land and do not reform it
They said: "Surely you are deluded
You are nothing but a man like us. Bring us a token if you speak the truth
(Saleh) said: "Here is a she-camel. She has a right of drinking water, and you have a right of drinking it on appointed turns
Do not treat her unkindly or the punishment of a grievous day will fall on you
But they hamstrung her; and on the morrow were repentant
For they were seized by the torment. Verily there was a sign in this, but most of them did not believe
Yet verily your Lord is mighty and merciful
The people of Lot accused the messengers of lies
When their brother Lot said to them: "Will you not take heed
I have been sent as a trusted messenger to you
So fear God and listen to me
I ask no recompense of you for this. My reward is due from none but the Lord of all the worlds
Why do you go for males unlike all other creatures
Leaving the consorts your Lord has made for you? But you are a people who exceed the bounds
They said: "If you do not desist, O Lot, you will be expelled (from the city)
(Lot) said: "I am disgusted with your actions
(And prayed:) "O Lord, save me and my family from what they do
So We saved him and his whole family
Except one old woman who remained behind
Then We destroyed the rest of them
And rained on them a shower (of Stones). How terrible was the rain (that fell) on those who had been warned
Verily in this was a sign, but most of them do not believe
Yet surely your Lord is mighty and powerful
The people of the Wood too called the messengers liars
When Shu'aib said to them: "Will you not take heed
I have been sent as a trusted messenger to you
So fear God and follow me
I ask no recompense of you for this. My reward is due from none but the Lord of all the worlds
Give full measure and do not cheat
Weigh on an even balance
And do not withhold from people what belongs to them, and do not corrupt the land
And fear Him who created you and all the earlier people
They said: "Surely you are deluded
You are nothing but a man like us, and we think you are a liar
But in case you are speaking the truth, then make a segment of the sky to fall upon us
(Shu'aib) said: "My Lord knows well what you are doing
But they denied him, and We seized them with the torment of the Day of Shadowing (when the cloud had rained down fire). It was indeed the torment of a terrible day
Verily in this was a sign, but most of them do not believe
Yet verily your Lord is mighty and merciful
And this (Qur'an) is a revelation from the Lord of all the worlds
Which the trusted spirit descended with
To (communicate) to your heart that you may be a warner
In eloquent Arabic
This is (indicated) in the Books of earlier people
Was it not a proof for them that the learned men of Israel knew about this
Had We revealed it to a man of obscure tongue
And he had recited it to them, and they had not believed (it would have been different)
Thus do We cause (unbelief) to enter the hearts of sinners
They will not believe it until they behold the painful punishment
It will come upon them unawares, and they will not comprehend it
Then will they say: "Can we be given respite
Do they wish Us then to hasten the punishment
Just think: If We let them enjoy (the good things of life) for a few years more
And then what they were promised comes upon them
Of what avail shall their enjoyment be to them
Never have We destroyed a habitation till We had sent admonishers to them
To warn. For We are never unjust
The devils did not bring it down
They are not worthy of it, nor have they power
They have been precluded from hearing it
So call on no other god but God, lest you are condemned to torment
And warn your near relations
And take those believers under your wing who follow you
If they do not obey you, tell them: "I am not responsible for what you do
Have trust in the Mighty, the Merciful
Who watches you when you get up
And your movements among those who bow in homage to God
He is all-hearing and all-knowing
Should I tell you on whom the devils descend
They come down to every mendacious sinner
Who listens to you (for spreading rumours); but most of them are liars
As for the poets, only those who go astray follow them
Have you not seen that they wander distract in every valley
And they say what they do not do
Except those who believe and do the right, and remember God a great deal, who retaliate only when they have been wronged. Yet the oppressors will now come to know through what reversals they will be overthrown
TA SIN. THESE are the verses of the Qur'an, and collection of explicit laws
A guidance and good tidings for the believers
Who fulfil their devotional obligations, pay the zakat, and believe with certainty in the life to come
We make their deeds attractive to those who do not believe in the Hereafter, so that they may wander in perplexity
They are those who will suffer the worst chastisement in this life, and will be the greatest losers in the life to come
You have been conveyed the Qur'an from One all-wise and all-knowing
(Remember) when Moses said to his family: "I see a fire. I shall bring you news from it, or bring an ember that you may warm yourselves
But when he reached it, a voice called out: "Blessed is He who is in the fire and all around it. Praised be God, the Lord of all the worlds
O Moses, I am that God, the mighty and all-wise
Throw down your staff." When he saw it wriggling like a serpent he turned his back and fled without turning (to look). "O Moses," (said the voice), "be not fearful. Surely those sent as messengers do not fear in My presence
Except those who do some wrong but afterwards do good to make up for the wrong. And I am forgiving and merciful
Put your hand in the bosom of your shirt; it will come out white without any blemish. This will be one of nine tokens for the Pharaoh and his people, who are a wicked lot indeed
And when Our signs came as distinct proofs, they said: "This is only magic
And they denied them out of malice and pride, though in their hearts they believed that they were true. So see how was the end of evil-doers
We gave David and Solomon knowledge; and they said: "All praise be to God who has favoured us over many of His creatures who believe
Solomon was heir to David, and he said: "O people, we have been taught the language of Tair, and have been given of everything. This is a clear favour indeed
His armies of jinns and men and Tair assembled, formed into ranks, (and marched)
Till they reached the Valley of Naml. Said the lady of Naml: "O Naml, go into your dwellings lest Solomon and his hordes should crush you unawares
(Solomon) smiled, amused at her speech, and said: "O Lord grant me that I should be grateful for the favours You have bestowed on me and my parents, and do good things of Your pleasing; and admit me among Your righteous devotees by Your grace
When he reviewed the Tair, he said: "How is it I do not see Hud-hud? Is he absent
I will punish him severely, or cut his throat, unless he bring a valid excuse
But he was not long in coming, and reported: "I have been around where you have not been. I come from Saba with positive news
I found a woman reigning over them, and she has been favoured with everything; and she has a throne that is magnificent
I found that she and her people worship the sun in place of God, for Satan has made their deeds look attractive to them and has turned them away from the Path, so they do not find the way
To worship God who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and is cognisant of what you hide and what you disclose
God: There is no god but He, the Lord of the glorious throne
(Solomon) said: 'We shall see if you speak the truth or you are a liar
Take this letter from me, and deliver it to them and withdraw, then see what reply they give in return
(The Queen said): "O nobles, a venerable letter has been delivered to me
It is from Solomon, and (says): 'In the name of Allah, Ar-Rahman, Ar-Rahim
Do not rise against me, but come to me in submission
Advise me, O nobles," she said "in this matter. I do not decide any thing until you concur
They said: "We are men of valour, and brave fighters. It is for you to decide. So consider what you should command
She said: "Surely when kings enter a city they destroy it and despoil the honour of its nobility. So will they do (to us)
But I will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back (in return)
So, when the envoys came to Solomon he said: "Do you wish to increase my wealth? Yet what God has given me is better than what He has given you. No. Be gratified in your present
Go back to them. We shall soon come with our armies which they will not be able to face. We shall drive them out of (the land) with ignominy, and they will be humbled
He (then) said (to his courtiers): "O you nobles, is there any one who can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission
A crafty jinn said: "I will bring it before you rise from your seat, for I am strong and trustworthy
But one who had knowledge of the letter, said: "I will bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye." When Solomon saw it before him, (he said): "This is by the grace of my Lord that He may test me whether I am grateful or I am thankless. Yet if one is grateful, he is grateful for himself, and if one is thankless, then surely my Lord is unconcerned and magnanimous
(Turning to his nobles) he said: "Change the appearance of her throne. Let us see if she is rightly guided, or is not guided at all
When she arrived, they asked her: "Is your throne like this?" She said: "As though this is it. We had come to have knowledge and already submitted
She was (in fact) turned away by what she worshipped other than God, for she came of an unbelieving people
She was invited to enter the court. When she saw it, she took it for a sheet of water, and (pulling up her skirts) uncovered her legs. (Solomon) told her: "This is paved with tiles of glass." "O Lord," she said, "I have wronged myself, and I submit to the Lord of all the worlds with Solomon
We sent to Thamud their brother Saleh (who said): "Worship God." But they were divided into two groups disputing with one another
(Saleh) said: "O people, why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good? Why not ask for God's forgiveness? You may well be forgiven
They said: "You betoken evil, and those with you." (Saleh) replied: "The evil you presage can only come from God. In reality you are a people under trial (for your own inauspiciousness)
There were in that city nine persons who spread disorder in the land, and did not reform
They said: "Let us swear by God that we will attack Saleh and his family at night, and later tell his heirs: 'We did not see his family destroyed, and we speak the truth
They hatched up the plot; We also planned without their knowledge
Now see the end of their machinations: We destroyed them and their entire people
So these their habitations lie deserted now because of their iniquities. Verily there is a sign in this for those who understand
We deliver those who believe and take heed for themselves
(Remember) Lot, when he said to his people: "Why do you indulge in obscenities when you know (it is evil)
You lust after men in place of women. You are indeed a stolid people
His people had no answer except saying: "Expel the family of Lot from your city. They are a people who would (rather) be pure
So We saved him and his family except his wife who was destined to stay behind
And We rained down on them a shower (of stones). How ruinous was the rain that fell on those who had been warned (but warned in vain)
Say: "All praise be to God, and peace on those of His creatures whom He has chosen." Is God better or those they associate with Him
Who created the heavens and the earth, who sends down water from the sky for you, with which He causes graceful gardens to grow? It was not in your power to make trees germinate. Is there any other god along with God. In fact they are a people who turn away (from the truth)
Who then made the earth a habitable place, and made the rivers (flow) in its valleys and dales, and placed upon it firm stabilisers, and kept a barrier between two bodies of water? Is there any other god along with God? In reality most of them do not know
Who hears the cry of the anguished (soul) when it calls to Him, and relieves its suffering? And who made you trustees on the earth? Is there any other god along with God? How little it is that you reflect
Who then really shows you the way in the darkness of the desert and the sea? And who sends breezes bringing news of His benevolence? Is there any other god along with God? He is far too exalted for what they associate with Him
Who creates first then reverts it? And who gives you provision from the heavens and the earth? Is there any other god along with God? Tell them: "Bring your proof, if you are truthful
Say: "No one in the heavens and the earth has knowledge of the unknown except God, nor can they know when they will be raised again
Still less do they comprehend the life to come. In fact they are in doubt about it. Still more, they are blind to it
Those who do not believe, say: "When we and our fathers have turned to dust, how shall we be raised again
Indeed we and our fathers had been promised this before. It is nothing but the earlier people's lore
Say: "Travel in the land and see how (bad) was the end of sinners
Do not grieve over them, and do not be distressed by what they contrive
Yet they say: "When will this promise come to pass? (Tell Us) if you speak the truth
Say: "Perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you
Verily your Lord is gracious to men, though most men are ungrateful
Verily your Lord knows what lies hidden in their breasts and what they disclose
There is nothing of the hidden in the heavens and the earth that is not recorded in the luminous Book
Indeed this Qur'an explains to the children of Israel much of what they are at variance
It is a guidance and grace for those who believe
Surely your Lord in His wisdom will decide between them. He is all-mighty and all-knowing
So you place your trust in God. Certainly you stand on positive truth
You cannot make the dead to listen, or the deaf to hear the call, when they have turned their backs
Nor can you lead the blind when they have gone astray. You can make none hear except those who believe in Our signs and have come to peace and submission
When the sentence will have been passed against them, We shall bring forth beastly brutes from the earth who will torment them, for men certainly do not believe Our signs
The day We shall gather from every community a section of those who denied Our signs, and they will be brought (in separate groups)
So that when they come (before the Lord) He will say: "Did you deny My signs without having understood them? Or what was it that you were doing
When the sentence will have been passed upon them for their wickedness, they will not be able to say a word
Do they not see that We made the night for them to rest, the day to make things clear? Indeed there are signs in this for people who believe
The day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified, save those whom God please, and all will appear before Him in abjectness
You will see the mountains and think they are firmly planted, but they will pass away like flying clouds: Artistry of God who perfected everything. He is indeed fully aware of what you do
Whoever comes with good (deeds) will receive better than (what he had done), and be safe that day from terror
But whosoever comes with evil will be flung face forward into the Fire. Can you expect reward for any thing but what you do
(Say): "I am commanded to worship the Lord of this land He has blessed, to whom all things belong; and I am commanded to be one of those who submit
And to recite the Qur'an." Whoever comes to guidance does so for himself; as for him who stays astray, tell him: "I am only a warner
Say: "All praise be to God. He will show you His signs, and you will recognise them. Your Lord is not heedless of what you do
TA SIN MIM
These are the verses of the illuminating Book
We narrate to you from the history of Moses and Pharaoh in all verity, for those who believe
The Pharaoh had become high and mighty in the land, and divided the people into different classes, and impoverished one class, slaying its males and sparing its women, for he was indeed a tyrant
We wished to favour those who were weak in the land and make them leaders and heirs
And establish them in the country; and to make the Pharaoh, Haman and their hordes beware of what they feared from them
So We conveyed to the mother of Moses: "Suckle him. If you are afraid for him, cast him in the river without any fear or regret, for We shall restore him to you, and make him an apostle
Then he was picked up by the family of Pharaoh (unaware) that he would become their enemy and a cause for regret. Surely the Pharaoh, Haman and their hordes were habitual sinners
The Pharaoh's wife said: "He will be a comfort to me and to you. Do not kill him. He may well be of some advantage to us, or we may adopt him as a son." They were not aware (of what the future held in store)
The mother of Moses was perturbed in the morning. Had We not strengthened her heart to remain a believer she had almost given him away
She told his sister: "Follow him." So she kept an eye on him from a distance, unbeknown to them
We made (Moses) refuse a wet nurse. So his sister said: "Should I tell you of a household that could bring him up for you and take care of him
Thus We restored him to his mother that she may be tranquil and not grieve, and know that the promise of God is true, though most men do not know
When he had grown up to full maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We recompense the doers of good
He came to the city when the people were in a care-free mood, and saw two men quarrelling, one belonging to his community, the other to his enemies. The man who belonged to his community appealed for help against the one who belonged to the enemies. Moses struck him a blow with his fist and finished him off. "This is of Satan's doing," he said. "He is certainly an enemy and a corrupter
O Lord," he prayed, "I have done wrong, forgive me." And God forgave him. Verily He is forgiving and kind
(Moses) said: "O Lord, as You have been gracious to me I will never aid the guilty
In the morning he came to the city, fearful and hesitant. Just then he who had asked him for help the day before called out for help (again). "You are indeed a meddlesome fellow," Moses said to him
Then as he was about to lay hands on the one who was their common enemy, he cried out: "O Moses, do you want to kill me as you killed that person yesterday? You only want to be a tyrant in the land and no peacemaker
There came a man running from the other part of the city. "O Moses," he said, "the chiefs are deliberating to kill you. Go away from the city. I wish you well
So he left the city, fearful and hesitant, (and) prayed: "O Lord, deliver me from these wicked people
Then as he turned his face to Midian, he said: "Maybe my Lord will show me the right way
And when he came to the waters of Midian he found a crowd of people watering (their flocks), and saw two maidens holding back (their cattle). He asked: "What is the trouble with you?" They said: "We cannot water our flock till the shepherds have driven away theirs, and our father is a very old man
So he watered (their flock), and moved into the shade and prayed: "My Lord, I have need of whatever good you send me
Then one of the (maidens) came to him walking bashfully, (and) said: "My father invites you that he may repay you for having watered our flock." So, when (Moses) came to him and told him his story, he said: "Have no fear. You have escaped from the wicked people
Said one of the maidens: "O father, employ him. Surely the best (man) to employ is one who is strong and honest
He said: "I would like to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you if you agree to work for me on hire for eight years. And if you stay on for ten, it is up to you. I do not wish to impose any hardship on you. God willing you will find me a man of honour
(Moses) said: "This is (agreed) between you and me. Whichever term I fulfil, no injustice will be done to me. God is witness to our agreement
When Moses had fulfilled the term and was journeying with his family, he noticed a fire on the side of the mountain. "Wait here," he said to his family; "I have seen a fire. I may haply bring some news from there, or an ember that you may warm yourselves
When he drew near, a voice called out to him from the tree on the blessed spot on the right side of the valley: "O Moses, I am verily God, the Lord of all the worlds
Throw down your staff." When he saw it wriggling like a serpent, he turned about and fled without turning. "O Moses, approach," (said the Voice), "and have no fear. You will be safe
Put your hand inside your shirt. It will come out white without a tarnish of blame; and do not be perturbed or afraid. These are two proofs from your Lord for the Pharaoh and his nobles. They are certainly a rebellious people
He said: "O Lord, I have killed a man of theirs, and fear they would kill me
So send my brother Aaron with me as helper for he is more fluent than I with words, that he should affirm me, for I fear that they would call me a liar
(And) God said: "We shall strengthen your arm with your brother, and give you power with Our signs and give you authority, so that they will not be able to harm you. Both of you and your followers will be victorious
But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs they said: "This is nothing but magic he has contrived, for we have not heard of this from our fathers of old
But Moses said: "My Lord knows well who has come with guidance from Him, and for whom is the guerdon of Paradise. But surely the wicked will not prosper
The Pharaoh said: "O nobles, I am not aware of any other lord of yours but myself. So, O Haman, fire some clay (bricks) to build a tower for me that I may mount up (and see) the God of Moses; for I think he is a liar
He and his soldiers had become arrogant in the land for no reason, and did not think that they have to come back to Us in the end
So We seized him and his hordes and threw them into the sea. Behold then how was the end of the wicked
We made them the leaders of those who call to Hell; and on the Day of Judgement they will not be helped
A curse lies upon them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be despised
After We had destroyed the earlier generations We gave Moses the Book as evidence for mankind, and a guidance and grace, so that they may remember
You were not there on the western side (of Mount Sinai) when We gave the commandments to Moses, nor were you witness (to the event)
We raised (many more) generations and prolonged their lives. You did not live with the people of Midian, nor recited to them Our revelations; but We kept on sending messengers
You were not present on the side of Mount Sinai when We called. And all this (knowledge that you are given) is by the grace of your Lord so that you may warn a people to whom no admonisher had come before you, that they may take heed
And in case disaster comes upon them for what they have done themselves, they should say: "O Lord, why did You not send an apostle to us that we should have followed Your commands, and been with those who are believers
But when the truth came to them from Us, they said: "Why is he not given the like of what was given to Moses?" Did they not disbelieve before in what was given to Moses? They said: "Both are imposters one like the other," and added: "We do not believe in either
Say: "Then bring a Book from God which gives better guidance than these so that I may follow it, if you speak the truth
Then, if they cannot give you an answer, know that they are only following their lusts. And who can be farther astray than he who follows his lust without any guidance from God? And certainly God does not guide an unjust people
We have been sending word to them that they may take a warning
Those to whom We gave the Book before this do believe in it
And when it is read out to them, say: "We believe in it. It's the truth from our Lord. We had committed ourselves before it came
These will be given their recompense twice, for they persevered and repelled evil with good, and spent of what We had given them
When they hear idle talk they turn aside and say: "To us our actions, to you yours. Peace on you; we do not look for the ignorant
You cannot guide any one you like: God guides whosoever He please. He knows best who will come to guidance
They say: "If we followed your guidance we would be driven from the land by force." Have We not set up a sanctuary for them, to which is brought a wealth of everything as provision from Us? But most of them do not understand
How many habitations that had come to boast of their resources have We destroyed? These their dwellings were never inhabited except rarely after them; and they came back to Us
But your Lord does not destroy habitations without having sent an apostle to their metropolis to read out Our commandments to them. We would never have destroyed cities if their inhabitants were not given to wickedness
Whatsoever has been given you is the stuff this life is made of, and only its embellishment. What is with your Lord is better and abiding. Will you not understand
Can one who was given a better promise, which he will find come true, be like him who was given a little enjoyment of this life, but who will afterwards be brought (to judgement) on the Day of Resurrection
That day God will call them and ask: "Where are they you imagined were My compeers
Those against whom the sentence is justified will say: "O Lord, these are those we had led astray as we had ourselves gone astray. We clear ourselves before You: They never worshipped us
(The sinners) will be told: "Invoke your partners." They will call on them, but they will not answer; and they will see the torment (and wish) if only they had come to guidance
(God) will ask them on that day: "What answer did you give the apostles
Then all news will be blacked out for them, and they will not even ask one another
But he who repents and believes and does good things may well be among the successful
Your Lord creates what He wills and chooses. The good is not for them to choose. Too holy and high is God for what they associate with Him
Your Lord well knows what they hide in their breasts and what they disclose
He is God. There is no god but He. His alone is praise first and last, and His the judgement, and to Him will you be brought back in the end
Say: "Just think, if God were to cover you up with night for ever until the Day of Doom, what other god apart from God will give you light? Why do you not pay heed
Say: "Just think. If God were to make the day perpetual till the Day of Resurrection, what other god but God would bring you night for rest? Why do you not reflect
Yet in His benevolence He made you night and day that you may rest and seek His bounty during them, and haply maybe grateful
Upon a day He will call them and ask: "Where are they you imagined were My compeers
And We shall single out one witness from each community and say: "Bring your proof." Then will they know that God's is the judgement, and what they contrived will avail them not in the least
Verily Qarun was of Moses' people, but he began to oppress them. We had given him treasures, so many that a team of wrestlers could hardly lift their keys. His people said to him: "Do not be exultant. God does not like those who exult
So seek the abode of the Hereafter through what God has given you, and do not forget your part in this world. Do good to others as God has done good to you, and do not try to spread corruption in the land. Surely God does not like corrupters
He said: "This has come to me through my own acumen." Did he not know that God had destroyed many generations before him who possessed far more acumen than he, and more wealth? The sinners will not be asked about their sins
Then he came before his people in all pomp; and those enamoured of this world, said: "Ah would that we had what Qarun has been given! He indeed possesses great good fortune
But those who knew better, said: "Alack-a-day! God's guerdon is better for those who believe and do the right. Only those who persevere will receive it
So We opened up the earth and sunk him and his mansion. There was not a body that could help him against (the will) of God, nor was he able to save himself
Those who were envious of his position only yesterday said on the morrow: "Indeed God increases the fortunes of those of His creatures as He will, and decreases. Had God not been gracious to us He could have (opened up) the earth and made it swallow us. Surely the infidels will not succeed
We shall give the mansion of the Hereafter to those who do not want to be haughty in the land and spread corruption. The future belongs to those who take heed for themselves and follow the straight path
Whoever does good will receive better than what he has done; and whoever does ill shall be requited but to the extent of what he does
He who has assigned (the propagation) of the Qur'an to you will bring you back to the destination. Say: "My Lord knows who has come to guidance, and who is clearly in error
You did not expect that the Book would be given to you except by the favour of your Lord. So do not be the helper of unbelievers
Nor should you let them turn you away from the commandments of God once they have been delivered to you; and call them to your Lord, and do not be an idolater
And do not call on any other god apart from God. There is no god but He. All things will perish save His magnificence. His is the judgement, and to Him will you be brought back in the end
ALIF LAM MIM
Do men think they will get away by saying: "We believe," and will not be tried
We had tried those who were before them so that God knew who spoke the truth, and who were liars
Do those who do evil think that they will get the better of Us? How bad is the judgement that they make
He who hopes to meet God (should know) that God's appointed time will surely come. He is all-hearing and all-knowing
He who strives does so for himself. Verily God is independent of the creatures of the world
We shall pardon the sinful deeds of those who believe and do the right, and give them a reward better than their deeds
We have enjoined on man to be good to his parents; but if they try to make you associate with Me that of which you have no knowledge, then do not obey them. You have to come back to Us, when I will tell you what you used to do
We shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous
There are among men those who say: "We believe in God;" yet if they happen to suffer in the cause of God they take oppression by men as punishment from God. And if help comes to them from your Lord, they say: "We were with you." Does not God know what is hidden in the hearts of men
God will surely know the believers and know the hypocrites
Those who deny say to those who affirm: "Follow our way; we shall carry the burden of your sins." But they cannot carry the burden of their sins in the least. They are liars indeed
They will carry their own loads and other loads besides their own; and will surely be questioned on the Day of Resurrection about what they contrived
We sent Noah to his people, and he lived with them a thousand years minus fifty. Then they were caught by the deluge for they were evil
But We saved him and those with him in the ark, and made it a sign for the creatures of the world
And (remember) Abraham who said to his people: "Worship God and be obedient to Him. This is better for you if you understand
You worship idols in place of God and invent lies. Surely those you worship other than God have no power over your means of livelihood. So seek your sustenance from God, and worship Him and give Him thanks. To Him will you be brought back in the end
But if you deny, then many a people have denied before you. The duty of the apostle is to convey the message clearly
Do they not see how God originates creation, then reverts it back? This is indeed how inevitably the law of God works
Say: "Travel on the earth and see how He originated creation. Then (you will know) how God will raise the last raising (of the dead). Surely God has power over everything
Punish whom He will, and have mercy on whom He please. And to Him will you be brought back in the end
Escape Him you cannot either in the earth or in the sky; and you have no friend or helper apart from God
Those who deny the signs of God and the meeting with Him, cannot have hope of My mercy. There is a painful punishment for them
The people (of Abraham) had no answer except: "Kill him or burn him;" but God saved him from the fire. There are lessons in this for those who believe
He said: "You have taken to idols through mutual affection in this life, in place of God, but on the Day of Resurrection you will disown and curse each other, and your abode will be Hell, and you will have none to help you
Then Lot believed in him; and (Abraham) said: "I will separate myself and take refuge in my Lord. Surely He is all-mighty and all-wise
So We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture, and rewarded him in this world, and in the next he will be among the upright
And (remember) Lot when he said to his people: "You indulge in lecherous acts which none of the creatures had done before you
You commit unnatural acts with men and cut off the way (of procreation), and commit obscenities in your gatherings." The only answer his people made was: "Bring the punishment of God, if you are truthful
O Lord, help me against the wicked people,"(Lot) prayed
When Our messengers came to Abraham with good news, they said: "We have to destroy this city as its inhabitants have become sinful
He said: "Surely Lot is there." They answered: "We know who is there. We are to save him and his family except his wife, for she is one of those who will stay behind
So, when Our messengers came to Lot, he was worried on their account as he was unable to protect them. They said: "Have no fear or regret. We will certainly save you and your family except your wife, for she is one of those who will stay behind
We have to bring a scourge from the heavens on the people of this city as they are depraved
Verily We have left a clear sign of this for people of sense to see
To Midian We sent their brother Shu'aib. He said: "O people, worship God and be ready for the Day of Resurrection. Do no evil, and create no mischief in the land
But they denied him and were seized by an earthquake, and lay overturned in their homes in the morning
And (remember) 'Ad and Thamud. It will be clear to you from their habitations (how they were destroyed), for Satan had made their deeds look attractive to them, and turned them away from the path; and yet they were a people of acumen
(Remember) Qarun, Pharaoh and Haman to whom Moses came with clear signs; but they were haughty (and oppressed) the land. Yet they could not run away from Us
And We seized all of them for their crimes. Against some We sent a violent wind hurling stones, and some We seized with a mighty blast, and some We submerged under the earth, and some We drowned. It was not for God to wrong them, they wronged themselves
The semblance of those who take protectors besides God is that of the spider. She arranges a house for herself, but the flimsiest of houses is the spider's. If only they had sense
Verily God knows what they invoke in His place, for He is all-mighty and all-wise
These are precepts of wisdom We offer to men, but only those who are rational understand
God has created the heavens and the earth with reason. Surely in this is a sign for those who believe
Recite what has been revealed to you of this Book, and be constant in devotion. Surely prayer keeps you away from the obscene and detestable, but the remembrance of God is greater far; and God knows what you do
Do not argue with the people of the Book unless in a fair way, apart from those who act wrongly, and say to them: "We believe what has been sent down to us, and we believe what has been sent down to you. Our God and your God is one, and to Him we submit
That is how We have revealed this Book to you and those to whom We have sent down the Book will believe in it. Only those who are infidels will deny it
You did not read any Scripture before this, nor wrote one with your right hand, or else these dissemblers would have found a cause to doubt it
In fact, in the minds of those who have intelligence these are clear signs. No one denies Our revelations except those who are unjust
For they say: "How Is it no signs were sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "The signs are with God. I am only a warner, plain and simple
Is it not sufficient for them that We have revealed the Book to you which is read out to them? It is indeed a grace and reminder for people who believe
Say: "God is sufficient as witness between me and you." He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. It is those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in God who will perish
They want you to hasten the punishment: But for a time already determined the punishment would have come upon them. It will come upon them all too suddenly, and they will be caught unawares
They want you to hasten the punishment: Hell will indeed surround the unbelievers
The day the punishment comes upon them from above and underneath their feet, (God will) say: "And now taste of what you had done
O My creatures who believe, surely My earth has plenty of scope and so worship only Me
Every soul has to know the taste of death. You will then be sent back to Us
We shall admit those who believe and do the right to empyreal gardens with rivers rippling by, where they will abide for ever. How excellent the guerdon of those who toil
Who persevere and place their trust in their Lord
How many living things there are on the earth that do not Store their food; God provides them as well as you. He is all-hearing and all-knowing
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth, and who set the sun and the moon to work?" They will answer: "God." Why then do they vacillate
God increases the means of those of His creatures as He please, or limits them for whomsoever He will. He is certainly cognisant of everything
If you ask them: "Who sends down rain from the sky and quickens the earth when it is dead?" They will answer: "God." Say: "All praise be to God." But most of them do not understand
The life of this world is only a sport and play. It is surely the home of the Hereafter that will indeed be life extended and new, if only they knew
When they board a ship they call on God, placing their faith wholly in Him. But when He brings them safely back to shore, they begin to associate others with Him
And deny what We had given them, in order to go on enjoying themselves. They will come to know soon
Do they not see that We have given them a safe sanctuary, while all around them men are being despoiled? Do they then believe what is false, and deny the bounty of God
Who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie about God, or denies the truth when it has come to him? Is there not an abode for unbelievers in Hell
We shall guide those who strive in Our cause to the paths leading straight to Us. Surely God is with those who do good
ALIF LAM MIM
The Romans have been conquered
In the neighbouring land. But having been conquered they will conquer
In a few years (less than ten). God's is the imperative first and last. On that day the believers will rejoice
In the help of God. He helps whom He will; He is all-mighty, ever-merciful
It is a promise of God; and God does not go back on His promise. Yet most men do not understand
They only know the palpable life of this world, and are oblivious of the Hereafter
Do they not think for themselves that God did not create the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them without reason and a determined purpose? But many men reject the meeting with their Lord
Have they not travelled on the earth and seen how the others before them had met their end? They were far more powerful than them, furrowed the earth and colonised it far more than they; and their apostles came to them with visible signs. It was surely not for God to wrong them, they wronged themselves
Therefore evil was the end of those who did evil, for they denied the signs of God and made fun of them
God originates creation, and then will revert it, then you will go back to Him
The day the Resurrection comes the sinners will be overwhelmed with despair
No intercessor will they have among those they associated (with God), and will reject their partners
The day the Hour comes they will be separated into categories
Those who believed and did the right will be feasted in a rich, well-watered meadow
Those who did not believe and rejected Our signs and the meeting in the Hereafter, will be given over to punishment
So extol God when the evening comes and the day dawns
For His is the praise in the heavens and the earth, -- and at nightfall and the time of noon
He brings the living from the dead, the dead from the living, and quickens the earth after it had died. So will you be brought forth (from the dead)
Among His signs is that He created you from the earth, and you are now human beings dispersed everywhere
Another of His signs is that He created mates of your own kind of yourselves so that you may get peace of mind from them, and has put love and compassion between you. Verily there are signs in this for those who reflect
Among other signs of His is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the variety of your tongues and complexions. Surely there are signs in this for those who understand
Another of His signs is the night, a time for you to sleep, and the day to seek His bounty. Verily there are signs in this for those who pay heed
Another of His signs is the lightning He shows to fill you both with dread and hope, and the water He sends down from the sky which reawakens the earth that was dead. There are indeed signs in this for those who have sense
Another of His signs is that the heavens and the earth stay in position by His command; and then when He will call you once you will come out of the earth
All those who are in the heavens and the earth are His, and they are all obedient to Him
It is He who first creates and then reverts it. This is how His law works inevitably. His semblance is of the most sublime in the heavens and the earth. He is all-mighty and all-wise
He gives you an example from your own life: Do you possess among your dependants any partners in what We have bestowed on you, so that you and they have equal (share) in it, and that you fear them as you fear each other? That is how We explain Our signs clearly for those who comprehend
And yet the wicked follow their own lusts without understanding. Who can show the way to those whom God allows to go astray? None will they have to help them
So keep yourself exclusively on the true way, the creational law of God according to which He created man with the quality of choosing right or wrong. There is no altering of God's creation. This is the supreme law. But most men do not understand
Turn towards Him and be dutiful to Him; be firm in devotion, and do not become an idolater
(Or) one of those who created rifts in their order and are divided into sects, with each group exulting in what it has (carved out for itself)
When misfortune befalls men they pray to their Lord and turn to Him; but afterwards when He has given them a taste of His benevolence a section of them begins to ascribe compeers to their Lord
So as to deny what We have given them. Please yourselves for a time; you will come to know soon
Have We sent down a charter to them which mentions what they associate with Him
When We give men a taste of Our benevolence they start rejoicing in it. When misfortune befalls them as a result of what they have done themselves, they begin to despair
Do they not see God increases or decreases the means of whosoever He please? Verily there are signs in this for those who believe
So, give their share to the relatives, the needy, and the wayfarers. This is best for those who seek the way that leads to God, and they will be successful
What you give on interest to increase (your capital) through others' wealth, does not find increase with God; yet what you give (in alms and charity) with a pure heart, seeking the way of God, will be doubled
It is God who created you, then gave you sustenance, then He will make you die, and bring you back to life. Is there one among those you associate with Him who can do the least of these things? Too high and exalted is He for what they associate with Him
Corruption has spread over land and sea from what men have done themselves that they may taste a little of what they have done: They may haply come back (to the right path)
Say: "Travel on the earth and see how came the end of those before you." Most of them were idolaters
So set your face towards the straight path before the day arrives from God which is irreversible. Men will be segregated on that day
So that he who disbelieves will bear the consequence of his unbelief; and he who does the right will straighten out the way for himself
So that God may reward those who believed and did what was good, by His grace. Surely He does not love unbelievers
Among His signs are the breezes He sends as harbingers of happy news, so that He may allow you to taste of His mercy, and that ships may sail by His command, and you may seek of His bounty, and may haply be grateful
Verily We sent many apostles before you to their people, who brought clear signs with them. Then We retributed those who were sinful. It is a duty incumbent on Us to help the believers
It is God who sends the breezes that raise clouds, then spreads them over the sky as He please, fold on fold, then you see the drops of rain issue from between them. When He sends it down to those of His creatures as He will, they are filled with joy
Although before it came down they were despondent
So consider the signs of His benevolence: How He quickens the earth after it had become waste. He is verily the one who will raise the dead. He has power over everything
If We send a (blighting) wind and they see (the earth) seared autumnal, they would surely become ungrateful
You cannot make the dead to listen nor the deaf hear the call when they have turned back and retreated
Nor can you make the blind see the way when they have gone astray. You can make none hear except those who believe Our signs and have come to submission
It is God who created you of weakness, then after weakness gave you strength, then after strength will give you weakness and grey hair. Surely He makes whatever He wills. He is all-knowing and all-powerful
The day Resurrection is set the sinners will swear: "We did not tarry more than an hour (and cannot be guilty)." That is how they have always been deceived
But those who were given the knowledge and belief will say: "You have tarried, according to the Book of God, as long as the Day of Resurrection, and this is the Day of Resurrection, but 'you do not know
Their excuses will be of no avail to the sinners on that day, and they will not be allowed to beg for favour
We have offered every kind of example here in this Qur'an to men. Even then if you bring a verse to them, those who disbelieve say: "You are nothing but a liar
That is how God seals the hearts of those who do not know
So have patience. The promise of God is surely true; and let not those who do not believe make you relax (your endeavours)
ALIF LAM MIM
These are the verses of the sagacious Book
And a guidance and grace for those who do good
Who are constant in devotion, pay the zakat, and are certain of the Hereafter
They are on guidance from their Lord, and will prosper
But among men are also those who spread frivolous stories to mislead (others) from the way of God, without any knowledge, and take it lightly. For such as these the nemesis will be shameful
When Our verses are recited before them they turn away haughtily as though they did not hear them, as if a deafness had come into their ears. So give them tidings of a shameful punishment
Surely for those who believe and do the right are pleasure gardens
They will abide in them for ever. The promise of God is true; and He is all-mighty and all-wise
He created the skies without a support, as you can see, and placed stabilisers in the earth that you may dwell at ease as it revolves; and dispersed on it all varieties of creatures, and He sent down water from the skies and grew all kinds of splendid things upon it
Such is God's creation. Show me now what those (they worship) beside Him have created. Surely the evil-doers are in clear error
We bestowed wisdom on Luqman that he may be grateful to God. Whosoever is grateful is so for his own good, and whoever is ungrateful (should remember) that God is above all concern, worthy of praise
(Remember) when Luqman counselled his son: "O son, do not associate any one with God. To associate others with God is a grievous wrong
We have committed man about his parents. His mother carries him in her womb in weakness and debility, weaning him in two years. So he should be grateful to Me and his parents. To Me is the journeying back
If they try to force you to associate with Me that of which you have no knowledge, do not obey them. Live with them honourably in the world, but follow the way of him who turns to Me. Your returning is to Me in the end, when I will tell you what you did
O my son, whatsoever it may be, even though equal to a mustard seed in weight, or within a rock or in the sky or in the earth, God will bring it forth. Verily God is perceptive, all-aware
O my son, fulfil your moral obligations, bid what is known to be right and forbid what is wrong, and bear with patience what befalls you. These are indeed acts of courage and resolve
Do not hold men in contempt, and do not walk with hauteur on the earth. Verily God does not like the proud and boastful
Be moderate in your bearing, and keep your voice low. Surely the most repulsive voice is the donkey's
Have you not seen that God has subjugated what is in the heavens and the earth to you, and bestowed His favours, external and esoteric, in abundance on you? And yet there are men who contend about God without any knowledge or guidance or the Book enlightening
When you ask them to follow what God has revealed, they say: "No. We shall follow what we found our ancestors following," even though the devil were calling them to the torment of Hell
He who turns his face to God in submission and does good, holds fast to a handle that is strong; for the resultance of things rests with God
So do not let the unbelief of disbelievers grieve you. They will be brought back to Us, when We shall tell them what they used to do. Whatever is in their hearts is known to God
We let them enjoy themselves only for a while, then We shall drag them to a severe punishment
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth?" They will surely answer: "God." Say: "All praise be to God." But most of them do not understand
To God belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. Verily He is all-sufficient, worthy of praise
If all the trees of the earth were pens and the oceans ink, with many more oceans for replenishing them, the colloquy of God would never come to end. He is indeed all-mighty and all-wise
Your creation and resurrection is but like that of a single cell. Verily He is all-hearing and all-seeing
Do you not see that God makes the night succeed the day, the day succeed the night? And He has harnessed the sun and the moon so that each runs its appointed course. Surely God is aware of all you do
That is so for God is the Reality, and what they invoke other than Him is illusion. Indeed God is all-high and supreme
Do you not see that the ships sail in the ocean by the grace of God, that He may show you some of His glories. Verily there are signs in this for those who are constant and give thanks
When the waves overshadow them like a canopy, they pray to God with all-exclusive faith in Him. But after He has safely brought them to the shore, there are some who vacillate between doubt and belief, but no one rejects Our signs except those who are perverse and disbelieve
O people, fear your Lord and dread the day when no father will avail a son, nor son his father. Truly the promise of God is true. Do not be deluded by the life of this world, and do not let the deceiver draw you away from God
Only God has the knowledge of the Hour. He sends rain from the heavens, and knows what is in the mothers' wombs. No one knows what he will do on the morrow; no one knows in what land he will die. Surely God knows and is cognisant
ALIF LAM MIM
The revelation of this Book free of doubt and involution is from the Lord of all the worlds
Or do they say he has fabricated it? In fact, it is the truth from your Lord so that you may warn the people to whom no admonisher was sent before you. They may haply come to guidance
It is God who created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, in six spans, then assumed all authority. You have no protector other than Him, nor any intercessor. Will you not be warned even then
He regulates all affairs from high to low, then they rise to perfection step by step in a (heavenly) day whose measure is a thousand years of your reckoning
Such is (He) the knower of the unknown and the known, the mighty and the merciful
Who made all things He created excellent; and first fashioned man from clay
Then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid
Then proportioned and breathed into him of His spirit, and gave you the senses of hearing, sight and feeling. And yet how little are the thanks you offer
But they say: "When we have mingled with the earth, shall we be created anew?" In fact they deny the meeting with their Lord
Say: "The angel of death appointed over you will take away your soul, then you will be sent back to your Lord
If only you could see when the sinners will stand before their Lord, heads hung low, (and say:) "O Lord, we have seen and heard. So send us back. We shall do the right, for we have come to believe with certainty
Had We intended We could have given every soul its guidance; but inevitable is My word that I will fill up Hell with men and jinns together
So now suffer. As you forgot the meeting of this your Day of Doom, so have We forgotten you. Now taste the everlasting punishment for your deeds
Only they believe in Our revelations who, when they are reminded, bow in adoration, and give praise to their Lord, and do not become arrogant
Their backs do not rest on their beds, and they pray to their Lord in fear and hope, and spend of what We have given them (in charity)
No soul knows what peace and joy lie hidden from them as reward for what they have done
Is one who is a believer like one who is a transgressor? No, they are not alike
As for those who believe and do the right, there are gardens for abode as welcome for what they had done
As for those who disobey, their abode is Hell. Whensoever they wish to escape from it they would be dragged back into it, and told: "Taste the torment of the Fire which you used to call a lie
But We shall make them taste the affliction of this world before the greater torment, so that they may retract
Who is more wicked than he who is reminded of his Lord's revelations yet turns away from them; We will surely requite the sinners
Verily We gave Moses the Book; so be not in doubt about his having received it; and We made it a guidance for the children of Israel
When they persevered and firmly believed Our revelations We appointed learned men among them who guided them by Our command
Surely your Lord will decide between them about what they were at variance, on the Day of Resurrection
Did they not find guidance in the many generations We had destroyed before them, over whose dwellings they (now) walk? There were indeed signs in this. Will they even then not listen
Do they not see that We drive the rain towards a land that is dry, then grow grain from it which their cattle and they themselves eat? Will they not see even then
Yet they say: "When will this decree come, if you speak the truth
Say: "Of no use will be the acceptance of belief to unbelievers on the Day of Decision, nor will they be granted respite
Therefore turn away from them and wait as they are waiting
O PROPHET FEAR God and do not follow the unbelievers and the hypocrites
Follow what is revealed to you by your Lord. Verily God is all-knowing and all-wise
Trust in God. God is sufficient as guardian
God has not provided two hearts in the breast of a man, nor made your wives, whom you pronounce "mothers" (in order to divorce them), your real mothers, nor has He made your adopted sons your real sons. This is only what your lips pronounce. God says what is just, and shows the right way
Call them by the names of their fathers. This is the right course in the sight of God. If you do not know their fathers, they are then your brothers in religion and your friends. It will not be a sin if you make a mistake, unless you do so intentionally; for God is forgiving and kind
The Prophet is closer to the faithful than they are themselves; and his wives are as their mothers. Yet blood relations are closer to one another according to God's decree, more than (other) believers and the emigrants (who left their homes in the cause of God), but you should be kind to your friends. This is inscribed in the Book (of decrees)
When We made the covenant with the prophets, and with you, as with Noah and Abraham, Moses and Jesus son of Mary, a binding covenant
(It was) so that God may ask the truthful of their sincerity. As for the infidels, He has prepared a painful punishment for them
O you who believe, remember the favours of God to you when an army came against you and We sent a wind against them and forces that you did not see. But God sees all that you do
When they came upon you from above and below you, when the eyes were stupefied with horror, and hearts jumped to the throats, and you made wild suppositions about God
The faithful were sorely tried there and were shaken completely
When the hypocrites and those who were filled with doubt, said: "The promise of God and His Apostle was nothing but deceit
When a section of them said: "O people of Yathrib, there is no place for you here, turn back;" and a section of them asked leave of the Prophet, saying: "Our homes lie exposed," -- while they were not exposed. Their only intention was to run away
If the (enemy) had entered the city from every side and asked them to rise in revolt, they would have done so, and not hesitated but a little
Whereas earlier they had made a promise to God that they would never turn their backs; and a promise made to God is answerable
Say: "Of no gain will be your running away if you run from death or being killed, even then you will enjoy the good things of life but only for a while
Say: "Who will save you from God if He decide to afflict you or show you His mercy?" They will never find a friend or helper apart from God
Surely God knows who among you obstruct, and those who say to their brethren: "Come to us," and go to battle but seldom
Being chary of helping you. But when danger appears you will find them looking at you with eyes turning like a man's in the swoon of death. Yet when the danger is past they lash you with sharp tongues, covetous of the best (of booty). Such as these have not come to belief. So God nullifies whatever they have done. This is how (the innate law of) God works inevitably
They think the allied tribes have not withdrawn; and if the allied tribes had advanced they would have wished that they were rather with the Arabs of the desert asking news of you; and had they been among you they would have fought but just a little
You have indeed a noble paradigm in the Apostle of God for him who fears God and the Day of Resurrection, and remembers God frequently
When the faithful saw (the armies of) the allied tribes, they said: "This is what God and His Apostle had promised us; and God and His Apostle say the truth;" and this enhanced their faith and obedience
There are men among the faithful who have been true to the covenant they had made with God; and some of them fulfilled their vows (by dying in His cause), and some still wait (prepared for death), and stand firm
That God may recompense the truthful for their truthfulness, and punish the hypocrites or relent towards them, as He will. God is surely forgiving and kind
God drove the unbelievers back in their fury, and they gained no advantage. God was sufficient (to help) the believers in the battle. God is all-powerful and all-mighty
He made those of the people of the Book who had helped (the tribes) descend from their forts, and filled their hearts with dread, so that you killed some and made many captive
And He made you inherit their lands and mansions and wealth, and a country you had not traversed before, for God has power over everything
O Prophet, say to your wives: "In case you desire the life and pomp of this world, come, I will provide you handsomely, and let you go with a grace
But if you desire God, His Apostle, and the joys of life to come, then God has verily set apart for those of you who are good, a great reward
O wives of the Prophet, whosoever of you commits an act of clear shamelessness, her punishment will be doubled. This is how (the innate law of) God works inevitably
But whoever of you is obedient to God and His Apostle, and does the right, will be given a two-fold reward by Us; and We have a rich provision in readiness for her
O wives of the Prophet, you are not like other women. If you are mindful of God, do not be too obliging in your speech, lest some one sick of heart should covet your person; so say only customary things
Stay at home, and do not deck yourselves with ostentation as in the days of paganism; fulfil your devotional obligations, pay the zakat, and obey God and His Apostle. God desires to remove impurities from you, O inmates of this house, and to cleanse and bring out the best in you
Remember God's revelations and the wisdom that are recited in your homes. God is indeed all perceiving, well-informed
Verily men and women who have come to submission, men and women who are believers, men and women who are devout, truthful men and truthful women, men and women with endurance, men and women who are modest, men and women who give alms, men and women who observe fasting, men and women who guard their private parts, and those men and women who remember God a great deal, for them God has forgiveness and a great reward
No believing men and women have any choice in a matter after God and His Apostle have decided it. Whoever disobeys God and His Apostle has clearly lost the way and gone astray
When you said to him who had been favoured by God and was favoured by you: "Keep your wife to yourself and fear God," you were hiding something God was about to bring to light, for you had fear of men, though you should fear God more. And when Zaid was through with her, We gave her to you in marriage, so that it may not remain a sin for the faithful (to marry) the wives of their adopted sons when they are through with them. God's command is to be fulfilled
There is no constraint on the Prophet in what God has decreed for him. This has been the way of God with (apostles) who have gone before you, and God's command is a determined act
(For) those who convey the messages of God, and fear Him and no one else, God is sufficient to keep account
Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but a messenger of God, and the seal of the prophets. God has knowledge of everything
O you who believe, remember God a great deal
And sing His praises morning and evening
It is He who sends His blessings on you, as (do) His angels, that He may lead you out of darkness into light, for He is benevolent to the believers
Their greeting on the day they meet Him will be: "Peace;" and He has a generous reward ready for them
O Prophet, We have sent you as a witness and a bearer of happy tidings and an admonisher
And to call (men) to God by His leave, and as a lamp resplendent
Give glad tidings to the believers that there is great bounty for them from God
Do not listen to the unbelievers and the hypocrites. Ignore what they do to hurt you, and put your trust in God. God is sufficient as protector
O you who believe, when you marry believing women then divorce them before having (sexual) contact with them, you have no right to demand observance of the 'waiting period' of them. But provide suitably for them, and let them go with honour
We have made lawful for you, O Prophet, wives to whom you have given their dower, and God-given maids and captives you have married, and the daughters of your father's brothers and daughters of your father's sisters, and daughters of your mother's brothers and sisters, who migrated with you; and a believing woman who offers herself to the Prophet if the Prophet desires to marry her. This is a privilege only for you and not the other believers. We know what We have ordained for them about their wives and maids they possess, so that you may be free of blame, for God is forgiving and kind
You may defer the turn of any of your wives you like, and may take any other you desire. There is no harm if you take any of those (whose turn) you had deferred. This would be better as it would gladden their hearts and they will not grieve, and each will be happy with what you have given her. God knows what is in your heart, for He is all-wise and benign
No other women are lawful for you after this except those you have married, nor to change your present wives for other women even though their beauty should appeal to you. God is watchful of everything
O you who believe, do not enter the houses of the Prophet for a meal without awaiting the proper time, unless asked, and enter when you are invited, and depart when you have eaten, and do not stay on talking. This puts the Prophet to inconvenience, and he feels embarrassed before you; but God is not embarrassed in (saying) the truth. And when you ask his wife for some thing of utility, ask for it from behind the screen. This is for the purity of your hearts and theirs. It does not behove you to annoy the prophet of God, or to ever marry his wives after him. This would indeed be serious in the sight of God
Whether you discuss a thing or conceal it, surely God has knowledge of everything
There is no harm if they come before their fathers or their sons, or their brothers and their brothers' and sisters' sons, or their women folk or captive maids they possess. Follow the commands of God. Verily God is witness to everything
God and His angels shower their blessings on the Prophet. O believers, you should also send your blessings on him, and salute him with a worthy greeting
Those who offend God and His Prophet will be damned in this world and the next. There is a shameful punishment ready for them
Those who slander believing men and women for what they have not done, will bear the burden of calumny and clear iniquity
O Prophet, tell your wives and daughters, and the women of the faithful, to draw their wraps a little over them. They will thus be recognised and no harm will come to them. God is forgiving and kind
If the hypocrites and perverts, and the rumour-mongers of Madinah, do not desist even now, We shall rouse you against them, so they would not be able to live but a short time in the city with you
Accursed, they would be seized wherever found, and slain mercilessly
Such was the law of God among those before you; and you will not find any change in the law of God
People ask you about the Hour (of the great change). Say: "Only God has knowledge of it. Who knows? The Hour may be close at hand
Verily God has cursed the infidels, and prepared a blazing fire for them
They will live in it for ever, and will find no saviour or helper
The day their faces would be turned on the fire (as on a spit), they will say: "Alas! If only we had obeyed God, and obeyed the Prophet
They will say: "O our Lord, we obeyed our leaders and the elders, but they only led us astray
O Lord, give them a double punishment, and put a grievous curse upon them
O you who believe, do not be like those who maligned Moses, whilst God cleared him of what they alleged; and he was held in high esteem with God
O you who believe, obey the commands of God, and say straightforward things
That He may straighten your affairs for you and forgive your sins; and he who obeys God and His Prophet will be successful
We had offered the Trust (of divine responsibilities) to the heavens, the earth, the mountains, but they refrained from bearing the burden and were frightened of it; but man took it on himself. He is a faithless ignoramus
So that God punishes men and women hypocrites, the idolaters and idolatrous women, but He turns to faithful men and women in forgiveness, for God is forgiving and kind
ALL PRAISE BE to God to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and His the praise in the world to come. He is all-wise and all-knowing
He knows whatever goes into the earth and whatsoever issues from it, whatsoever comes down from the sky, and whatsoever goes up to it. He is all-merciful, all-forgiving
The unbelievers say: "There is no coming of the Hour for us." Say: "Why not? By my Lord, the knower of the unknown, it will certainly come for you. Not even an atom's weight in the heavens and the earth, or something smaller or greater than it, is hidden from Him, and which is not recorded in the all-too-manifest Book
In order that He may recompense those who have believed and done the right. For them will be forgiveness and worthy sustenance
As for those who try to subvert Our signs, there is a punishment of painful torment
Those who have been given knowledge realise what has been revealed by the Lord is the truth, and leads to the path of the mighty and praiseworthy (God)
The disbelievers say: "Shall we tell you of a man who prophesies that when you are reduced to particles and vanished in the dust, you will become a new creation
Has he fabricated a lie about God, or is he possessed?" Not so; but those who believe not in the Hereafter are themselves afflicted and far astray
Do they not see what is before them and what is behind them of the heavens and the earth? We could cleave the earth and sink them, if We pleased, or drop a fragment of the sky upon them. There is surely a sign in this for every penitent creature
We favoured David with excellence, (and commanded): "O Jibal and Tair, glorify the greatness of God with him." And We made iron pliable for him
Make long coats of mail," (We said), "and fix their links, and do the right. I surely see whatsoever you do
We (subjugated) the wind to Solomon. Its morning's journey took one month, and the evening's one month. We made a spring of molten brass to flow for him; and many jinns laboured for him by the will of his Lord. Anyone of them who turned from Our command was made to taste the torment of blazing fire
They made for him whatever he wished, synagogues and statues, dishes large as water-troughs, and cauldrons firmly fixed (on ovens; and We said): "O House of David, act, and give thanks." But few among My creatures are thankful
When We ordained (Solomon's) death, none but the weevil, that was eating away his staff (on which he rested), pointed out to them that he was dead. When he fell down (dead) the jinns realised that if they had knowledge of the Unknown they would never have suffered demeaning labour
There was a sign for the people of Saba in their habitations: Two gardens, on the right and left. (And they were told:) "Eat of what your Lord has given you and be thankful. Fair is your land, and forgiving your Lord
But they turned away. So We let loose on them the inundation of (the dyke of) al-'Arim, replacing their gardens with two other gardens which bore only bitter gourd, and tamarisks and a few sparse lote-trees
That is how We requited them for their ingratitude. We only punish those who are ungrateful
Between them and the cities We had blessed We placed towns along the highway, and made them stages on their journey, (saying): "Travel between them in safety by day or by night
But they said: "O Lord, make the distance between the stages of our journeys longer;" but (by doing so) they wronged themselves. So We turned them into bygone tales, and dispersed them, scattered in all directions. Surely there are signs in this for those who endeavour and are grateful
Thus Iblis found his supposition about them to be true; and except for a section of believers they follow him
He had no authority over them save for the purpose of Our knowing who believed in the world to come, and who doubted it. For your Lord keeps a watch over everything
Say: "Call on those you imagine are gods apart from God. They are not masters even of an atom's weight in the heavens and the earth, nor do they have a share in them, nor is any one of them a helper (of God)
No intercession avails with Him except his He allows, so that when their hearts are freed of fear, they ask (one another): "What did your Lord say?" They will answer: "What is expedient. He is the all-mighty and supreme
Say: "Who gives you food from the heavens and the earth?" Say: "God. Surely either you or we are on guidance, or are lost in clear error
Say: "You will not be questioned about the sins that we have committed, nor shall we be questioned about your deeds
Say: "Our Lord will gather us together and judge between us equitably, for He is the Judge all-knowing
Say: "Just show me those you associate with Him as compeers." No, (you cannot), for He is God, the all-mighty and all-wise
We have sent you only as a bearer of good tidings and admonisher for all mankind; yet most people do not understand
Instead they say: "When is this promise going to be, if you speak the truth
Say: "Determined is the day of the promise, which you can neither put back nor advance an hour
The unbelievers say: "We do not believe in this Qur'an, nor in what was (sent) before it." If only you could see the sinners when they are made to stand before their Lord, blaming one another! Those who were weak will say to those who were arrogant: "But for you we would have certainly been believers
The arrogant will say to the weak: "Did we hold you back from guidance after it had come to you? Certainly not. In fact you were yourselves guilty
But the weak will say to the arrogant: "Not in the least. It was your plotting night and day when you ordered us to disbelieve in God and associate compeers with Him." When they see the punishment they will express repentance. But We shall put iron collars round the necks of infidels. Will they be requited for anything but what they did
We never sent an admonisher to a habitation but its well-to-do people said: "We do not believe in what you have brought
And (further): "We have far more wealth and children (than you), and we are not the ones to be punished
Say: "Verily my Lord increases or restricts the provision of whosoever He will;" but most men do not understand
It is not your wealth and children that will bring you closer to Us, except those who believe and do the right. These will be given a two-fold reward for their deeds, and will dwell in peace in the high empyrean
But those who try to subvert Our signs will be given over to punishment
Say: "Verily my Lord increases or restricts the provision of any of His creatures as He will, and repays whatsoever you spend. He is the best of all providers
The day He will gather all of them together, He will ask the angels: "Did they worship you
God forbid!" (they will answer). "You are our protector not they. In fact, they worshipped the devils. Most of them believed in them
That day you will have no power to profit or harm each other; and We shall say to the sinners: "Taste the punishment of Fire which you had denied
When Our clear revelations are read out to them, they say: "This is only a man who wants to turn you away from what your fathers used to worship." And they say: "This is nothing but a fabricated lie." And those who do not believe say of the truth when it has reached them: "This is nothing but pure sorcery
We did not give them any scripture to study, nor sent any warner before you
Those before them had also denied, and they could not reach a tenth of (the possibilities) We had given them, and still they called My apostles liars. How great was the change that I wrought in their condition then
Say: "I urge upon you only one thing: Stand up for God two by two or one by one, and think and reflect!" There is no madness about your companion. He is a warner against the dreadful affliction (that awaits)
Say: "The reward I ask is for yourself. My reward is due from none but God; and He is witness over everything
Say: "My Lord casts the truth: He is the knower of things unknown
Say: "The truth has come, and falsehood had neither precedence nor will reappear
Say: "If I am in error it is to my own loss; if I am on guidance that is so because of what my Lord reveals to me. He is all-hearing and all-too-near
If you could see when they are gripped by terror without any escape, and are seized from close at hand
They will say: "We believe in it." How could they reach it from a place of no return
They had surely denied it before and aimed without seeing from so far away
A barrier shall be raised between them and what they desired, as was done with their partisans before. They too were filled with disquieting doubt
ALL PRAISE BE to God, the originator of the heavens and the earth, who appointed angels as His messengers, with wings, two, three and four. He adds what He pleases to His creation. He has certainly power over everything
There is none who can take away the favours He bestows on man; and there is none apart from Him to restore what He has withheld. He is all-mighty and all-wise
O you people, remember the favours of God to you. Is there any creator other than God who gives you food from the heavens and the earth? There is no god but He: How then can you turn aside
If they call you a liar, so have other messengers been denied before you. But all things will be brought back to God
O you people, the promise of God is true. So do not let the life of this world delude you, nor let that (arch) deceiver deceive you about God
Satan is certainly your enemy, so hold him as a foe. He only calls his faction to be the residents of Hell
For those who are unbelievers, there is severe punishment; but for those who believe and do the right is forgiveness and a great reward
Can he, the evil of whose deed is made to look attractive to him so that he considers it good, (be like him who is guided)? God leads whosoever He please astray and guides whosoever He will. So do not waste away your self with grief for them. God is indeed cognisant of things they do
It is God who sends the winds that raise the clouds. Then We drive the clouds towards the land that was dead, and restore the earth to life after it had died. So will be the Resurrection
Whosoever desires honour (should remember) that all honour is with God. All good words ascend to Him, and all good deeds He exalts. As for those who are plotting evil, there is severe punishment for them, and their plots will be fruitless
It is God who created you from dust, then from a sperm, then formed you into pairs. Neither does a female conceive nor gives birth without His knowledge; nor do the old grow older or become younger in years but in accordance with the law (of nature). Indeed the law of God works inevitably
Alike are not two bodies of water: This one is sweet and fresh and pleasant to drink, and this one brine and bitter; yet you get fresh meat to eat from both, and take out ornaments to wear. You see how the ships churn through them so that you may seek of His bounty and, perhaps, give thanks
He makes night run into day, the day run into night, and has harnessed the sun and the moon so that each runs to its determined course. This is God your Lord; His is the kingdom; and those you invoke apart from Him are not masters even of the film on a date-palm stone
You pray to them, but they do not hear your call; and even if they heard you, they could not answer your prayer; and on the Day of Resurrection they will deny your having worshipped them. None can acquaint you (with the reality) as He who is informed of everything
O men, it is you who stand in need of God. As for God, He is above all need, worthy of praise
He could take you away if He pleased and bring a new creation (in your place)
This is well within the power of God
No one who carries a burden bears another's load; and even if the burdened soul cry out for help none will carry the least of its burden, however close a relative it may be. You can only warn those who fear their Lord in secret and fulfil their devotional obligations. Whoever grows in goodness does so for himself. To God is the journeying back
Equal are not the blind and those who can see
Nor darkness and light
Nor shade and heat of sunshine
Equal are not the living and the dead. Verily God makes those He will to listen; but you cannot make those hear who are in their graves
You are only a bearer of warnings
We have sent you with the truth, to give glad tidings and to warn. Never has there been a community to which an admonisher was not sent
If they call you a liar, so had those before them called their apostles liars, who had come to them with clear proofs, scriptures and the splendent Book
So We seized the unbelievers. How great was the change I wrought in their condition then
Do you not see how God sends water from the sky, then We produce fruits from it variegated in colour; and on mountains are tracts of red and white, in different shades and raven black
And so are among men, beasts and cattle, different shades. Only those of His creatures fear God who have knowledge. Verily He is all-mighty and forgiving
Surely those who read the Book of God, are firm in devotion, and spend of what We have given them in secret or openly, can hope for a commerce that will not decline
So that He may reward them in full, and give them a greater increase by His grace. He is verily forgiving and rewarding
What We have revealed to you of the Book is the truth, and proves (what has been sent) before it to be true. Verily God is informed of His creatures and sees everything
So We made those of Our creatures whom We had chosen, heirs to the Book; but some of these exceed themselves, and some follow the middle course, and some surpass others in goodness by God's will, which is the greatest blessing
They will enter the gardens of Eden, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and of silk will be their garments
They will say: "All praise be to God who has removed all care from us. Indeed our Lord is forgiving and rewarding
Who has settled us by His grace in the mansions of eternal rest, where there is no labour for us, nor does weariness come upon us
As for the unbelievers, there is the fire of Hell. It will neither consume them wholly that they should die, nor will its torment be lessened for them. That is how We requite the ungrateful
There they will cry for help: "O Lord, get us out that we may do the right, and not what we used to do." Did We not give you a long enough span of life so that he who remembered may reflect? And did not the warner come to you? So now taste (the punishment). The iniquitous will have none to help them
Verily God knows the unknown of the heavens and the earth. Indeed He knows what lies in the hearts of men
He is the one who made you trustees on the earth. So he who disbelieves, will bear the consequence of his unbelief. but their unbelief will only increase disgust for unbelievers in the sight of their Lord; and their unbelief will only lead the unbelievers to greater loss
Say: "Look at the compeers you invoke apart from God. Show me, what of the earth have they created, or what share have they in the heavens?" Or have We given them a Book whose testimony they possess? Not in the least. What the unbelievers have been promising one another is nothing but deceit
Verily God holds the heavens and the earth in position lest they deviate; and if they deviated there will be none to hold them in place, apart from Him He is sagacious and forgiving
The unbelievers swore on oath emphatically that if an admonisher came to them they would be guided better than the other communities. But when the admonisher came to them their aversion for the truth increased
As did their arrogance in the land, and their plotting of evil. But their evil plots will turn back on the plotters themselves. So can they expect any thing but what befell the earlier people? You will not find any change in the law of God, nor will you find divine law mutable
Have they not journeyed in the land and seen how the end of those before them, who were far more powerful, came about? There is nothing in the heavens and the earth that can defeat (the law of) God. He is all-knowing and all-powerful
If God were to seize men for their doings, not a living being would be left upon the earth. But He gives them respite for a time ordained. When their time is come, surely God will keep (the interest of) His creatures in view
YA SIN
I call to witness the Qur'an, custodian of all laws
That you are indeed one of those sent
On a path that is straight
A revelation from the mighty, ever-merciful (God)
That you may warn a people whose ancestors had never been warned, who are therefore heedless
The sentence is surely justified against most of them, for they do not believe
We will certainly put iron collars on their heel's which will come up to their chins, so that they will not be able to raise their heads
And We shall raise a barrier in front of them and a barrier behind them, and cover them over so that they will not be able to see
Whether you warn them or do not warn, it is all the same; they will not believe
You can only warn him who listens to the warning and fears Ar-Rahman secretly. So give him good news of forgiveness and a generous reward
It is We indeed who bring back the dead to life, and write down what they send ahead (of their deeds), and traces that they leave behind. We keep an account of all things in a lucid register
Narrate to them the example of the people of the city when the messengers came to it
When We sent two of them they called them liars; so We sent a third to strengthen them. "We have been sent to you," they said
You are only men like us," they replied; "Ar-Rahman has not sent down any thing. You are speaking only lies
(The messengers) said: "Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you
Our duty is to convey the message clearly
They rejoined: "We feel you augur ill. If you do not desist, we shall stone you to death, and inflict a grievous punishment on you
(The messengers) said: "The augury is within your own selves. Do you (consider it a bad omen) that you should be warned? You are a people guilty of excess
Then a man came running from the other side of the city. "O my people," he said, "follow the messengers
Follow those who do not ask for any recompense of you, and are rightly guided
Why should I not worship Him who brought me into being, to whom you will be brought back in the end
Should I take other gods apart from Him, who would neither be able to intercede for me nor save me if Ar-Rahman brings me harm
In that case I would surely be in clear error
I believe in your Lord, so listen to me
(But they stoned him to death.) It was said to him: "Enter Paradise;" and he said: "If only my people knew
How my Lord has forgiven me and made me one of those who are honoured
We did not send down any army against his people from heaven, nor did We have to send one
There was just one blast, and they were extinguished
Alas for men! No apostle ever came to them but they made fun of him
Have they not seen how many generations have We destroyed before them who will not return again
They will all be brought together before Us
There is a sign in the dead earth for them which We quicken, and produce from it grain which they eat
We have laid out gardens of dates and grapes upon it, and made springs of water flow
So that they may eat of its fruit; yet it was not done by their hands. Then why do they not acknowledge thanks
All glory to Him who created pairs of everything that grows from the earth, and out of themselves, and other things they do not know
And there is a sign in the night for them. We strip off the day from it and they are left in darkness
While the sun keeps revolving in its orbit. This is the dispensation of the mighty, all-knowing (God)
We have determined the stations of the moon, so that (after its wanderings) it returns as a dried up inflorescent spike of dates
Neither can the sun overtake the moon, nor the night outpace the day: Each of them keeps coursing in its orbit
That We bore their progeny in the laden ark is a sign for them
And We made similar vessels for them to ride
We could have drowned them if We pleased, and none would have answered their cry for help, nor would they have been saved
Unless by Our benevolence, to reap advantage for a time
When it is said to them: "Beware of what is before you and what is past, that you may be treated with kindness
None of the signs of their Lord ever comes to them but they turn away from it
When they are told: "Spend of what God has given you," the unbelievers say to those who believe: "Why should we feed those whom God should have fed if He pleased?" You are only in palpable error
And they say: "When will this promise come to pass, if what you say is true
They are only waiting for a single blast that will seize them, but they will go on contending
Then they would not be able to make a will, or go back to their people
When the trumpet blast is sounded they will come out of their graves and hasten to their Lord
Saying: "Ah woe, who has roused us from our sleep?" This is what Ar-Rahman had promised, and whose truth the apostles had affirmed
It would be but a single blast of the trumpet, and they would all be arraigned before Us
No soul will be wronged the least that Day, nor would be recompensed but only for what it had done
Surely the inmates of Paradise will be engaged in pastimes
They and their companions will recline on couches in the shade
For them will be fruits and whatever they ask
Peace" shall be the greeting from the merciful Lord
(And the guilty will be told:) "O sinners, separate yourselves this day
Did I not commit you, O children of Adam, not to worship Satan who is your acknowledged foe
But to serve Me; (that) this is the straight path
But he beguiled a great many of you. Why did you not then understand
This is the Hell that you were promised
Roast in it now for having disbelieved
We shall seal their lips that day; and their hands will speak, their feet testify to what they had done
We could take away their sight if We pleased; then they would run around to find the way: But how then would they see
And if We pleased We could paralyse them in their tracks, and they would not be able to move forward or turn back
Whoever reaches old age, We reverse in natural disposition. Do they not have sense (to see)
We have not taught (Muhammad) to versify, nor is it worthy of him. This is nothing but a reminder and illuminating discourse
So that he may warn him who is alive and feels, and justify the word against those who do not believe
Do they not see the cattle among things We have fashioned by Our power, which they own
Whom We made subservient to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat
And they derive other advantages and drinks from them. Even then they do not offer thanks
And take other gods apart from God that they may perhaps give them help
They will not be able to help them and will be brought (to Us) as their levied troops
So be not grieved by what they say. We certainly know what they hide and disclose
Does not man see We created him from a drop of semen? Even then he becomes an open contender
And applies comparisons to Us, having forgotten his origin, and says: "Who can put life into decayed bones
Say: "He who created you the first time. He has knowledge of every creation
Who gave you fire from a green tree, with which you ignite the flame
How can He who created the heavens and the earth not be able to create others like them? Why not? He is the real creator all-knowing
When He wills a thing He has only to say: "Be," and it is
So all glory to Him who holds all power over everything, to whom you will go back in the end
I CALL TO witness those who stand arrayed in rows
And those who restrain by reprimanding
And those who recite the Reminder
Verily your God is One
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, and the Lord of the Easts
He decked the nearest heavens with ornaments of stars
Protecting them against every wayward devil
So that they are not able to listen to the angels of higher (echelons), and are pelted from all sides
And kept far away. There is perpetual punishment for them
Except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame
So ask them if they are more difficult to create, or the rest We have created? Indeed (man) We created from fermented clay
Yet while you are filled with wonder, they just scoff
And when they are warned they pay no heed
When they see a sign, they laugh at it
And say: "This is only magic
When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, how can we be raised again
And our fathers too
You say: "Yes; and you will be lowly made
There will only be a single jerk, and they will gape
And say: "Ah woe! This is the Day of Reckoning
(Yes,) this is the Day of Judgement you had called a lie
Gather all the wicked together and their comrades, and those they had worshipped
Other than God," (the angels will be told), "then show them the way to Hell
And detain them, for they will be questioned
What is the matter with you that you do not help each other
They will submit to questioning then
And some of them will confront the others
Saying: "It were you who imposed yourselves upon us
They will say: "No, you were the ones who would not believe
We had no power over you. In fact, you were a people rebellious
The sentence of our Lord has come true for us. We have certainly to taste (the punishment)
For we had led you astray. In fact we ourselves were astray
So, they will become partners in punishment
That is how We deal with sinners
They were those who, when it was said to them, "There is no god but God," behaved with insolence
And said: "Should we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet
Not in the least. He has brought the truth and confirmed the other messengers
You will indeed taste a painful punishment
And be rewarded but only for what you had done
Except the chosen creatures of God
Whose provision is predetermined
Fruits of every kind, and they will be honoured
In gardens of delight
(Sitting) on couches, face to face
With cups from a flowing stream being passed around
Clear, delicious to drink
Neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating
And with them maidens of modest look and large lustrous eyes
Like sheltered eggs in a nest
Then one turned to the other in an enquiry
Said one of the speakers: "I had a friend
Who used to say: 'Are you one of those who can testify to the truth
(Do you think) we would be paid back our due when we are dead and reduced to dust and bones
He said: 'Will you look down
He looked down and saw (his friend) in the midst of Hell
By God', he said, 'you had almost ruined me
Had it not been for the grace of my Lord I too would have been there (in Hell)
(Another will say:)"Is it true, we are not going to die
Other than our first death, and we shall not be punished
This will indeed be great happiness
For this the toilers should strive
Is this better or the tree of Zaqqum
Which We have reserved as punishment for evil-doers
It is a tree that grows at the bottom of Hell
Its spathes are like the prickly pear
They will eat and fill their bellies with it
Washing it down with boiling water
Then to Hell they will surely be returned
They had found their fathers astray
Yet they hasten to follow in their footsteps
So had many an earlier people gone astray
And We had sent admonishers to them
Look, then how was the end of those who had been warned
Other than the chosen creatures of God
Noah had verily called to Us. And how gracious was He who answered (him)
We saved him and his family from the great affliction
And made his progeny survive
And left (his name) for posterity
Peace on Noah among all men
That is how We reward those who do good
Surely he was among Our faithful creatures
Afterwards We drowned the others
And Abraham indeed was of his inducement
When he came to his Lord with a heart compliant
When he said to his father and his people: "What is this you worship
Why do you solicit false gods instead of God
What do you imagine the Lord of the worlds to be
Then he looked up at the stars (they worshipped)
And said: "I am sick (of what you worship)
But they turned their backs on him and went away
Then he turned towards their gods and said: "Why do you not eat (of these offerings)
What is wrong with you that you do not speak
Then he started striking them down with his right hand
So the people descended upon him
Why do you worship these you carve yourselves," he asked
When God has created you and what you make
Build a pyre for him and throw him into the raging fire
So they contrived a plot against him, but We made them abject
And he said: "I am going away to my Lord who will show me the way
(And he prayed:) "O Lord, grant me a righteous son
So We gave him the good news of a clement son
When he was old enough to go about with him, he said: "O my son, I dreamt that I was sacrificing you. Consider, what you think?" He replied: "Father, do as you are commanded. If God pleases you will find me firm
When they submitted to the will of God, and (Abraham) laid (his son) down prostrate on his temple
We called out: "O Abraham
You have fulfilled your dream." Thus do We reward the good
That was indeed a trying test
So We ransomed him for a great sacrifice
And left (his hallowed memory) for posterity
Peace be on Abraham
That is how We reward those who do good
He is truly among Our faithful creatures
So We gave him the good news of Isaac, apostle, who is among the righteous
And We blessed him and Isaac. Among their descendants are some who do good, but some who wrong themselves
We were indeed gracious to Moses and Aaron
And saved them and their people from great distress
And helped them, so they were victorious
We gave them the explicit Book
And showed them the straight path
And left (their remembrance) for posterity
Peace be on Moses and Aaron
That is how We reward those who do good
They are among Our faithful devotees
Verily Elias is one of the apostles
When he said to his people: "Will you not be mindful of God
Would you call on Baal and leave the best of creators
God, your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers
They denied him, and will surely be brought to punishment
Except the chosen creatures of God
And We left his (memory) for posterity
Peace be on Elias
That is how We reward those who do good
He is truly among Our faithful devotees
Verily Lot was one of the apostles
Wherefore We saved him and his entire family
Except an old woman who was one of those who stayed behind
Then We destroyed the others
You pass by (their habitations) in the morning
Or at night. Then how is it you do not understand
Verily Jonah is one of the apostles
When he fled on the laden ship
And lots were cast (when a storm overtook them), he was rejected, (and thrown overboard)
Then he was swallowed by a large fish as he was worthy of blame
Had he not been one of those who struggled hard
He would have stayed in its belly till the day the dead are raised
So We cast him, sick, on a barren shore
And We made a gourd tree grow over him
We sent him to a hundred thousand men or more
And they came to believe; so We allowed them to enjoy the good things of life for an age
Now ask them if their Lord has daughters, and they sons
Or did We make the angels females, and they witnessed it
Is it not a lie invented by them when they say
God has begotten (children)?" They are liars indeed
Does He prefer sons to daughters
What ails you that you judge in such a wise
Why do you not reflect
Or have you received some clear authority
Then bring your scripture, if what you say is true
They link Him with jinns by lineage, yet the jinns know they will be brought before Him
God is too glorious for what they ascribe to Him
Except His chosen creatures who do not
So neither you nor those you worship
Can mislead anyone away from Him
Except one who is (destined) to burn in Hell
There is not one of us who does not have his appointed place," (declare the angels)
And we are truly those who stand in rows
And we are those who sing hallelujas to Him
They used to say
If we had the account of earlier people with us
We would have been the chosen creatures of God
Yet now (that it has come) they refuse to believe in it; but they will come to know soon
Our word had already been given before to Our votaries, the apostles
That they would be helped
And that certainly Our armies will be victorious
So you ignore them for a time
And wait; they will come to know soon
Do they want to hasten Our punishment
When it comes down on their plains, it will be an evil dawn for those who had been warned
So turn away from them for a time
And watch; they will come to know soon
Too glorious is your Lord, the Lord of power, for what they ascribe to Him
So peace be on the messengers
And all praise to God, the Lord of all the worlds
SAD. I CALL to witness the admonishing Qur'an
But the unbelievers are still full of pride and hostility
How many generations have We destroyed before them who cried (for mercy) when it was too late for escape
They were surprised that one of them had come to them as warner; and the unbelievers said: "He is a deceiving sorcerer
Has he turned so many gods into one deity? This is indeed a strange thing
And their leading chiefs said: "Remain attached to your gods. There is surely some motive behind it
We never heard of it in the former faith. It is surely a fabrication
To him of all of us has the Reminder been sent down?" They are still in doubt about My admonition; but they have not tasted My punishment yet
Do they have the stores of the mercy of your Lord, the mighty and munificent
Or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, theirs? Then let them climb up the ladders (to the heavens)
They will be one more army vanquished among the many routed hordes
Even before them the people of Noah, 'Ad, the mighty Pharoah
And the Thamud, the people of Lot, as well as the dwellers of the Wood, had denied. These were the hordes
Of all these there was not one who did not deny the messengers. So My retribution was justified
They await but a single blast which will not be repeated
Still they say: "O Lord, give us our share before the Day of Reckoning
Bear with patience what they say, and remember Our votary David, man of strength. He surely turned to Us in penitence
We subjugated the chiefs (of tribes) to struggle day and night with him
And the levied Tair. They were all obedient to him
So We further strengthened his kingdom, and bestowed wisdom on him, and judgement in legal matters
Have you heard of the litigants who jumped over the wall into his chamber
When they came before David, he was frightened of them. "Do not be afraid," they said. "The two of us are disputing the wrong one has done the other. So judge between us with equity, and do not be unjust, and guide us to the right path
This man here is my brother. He has ninety and nine ewes while I have only one. He demands that I should give him my ewe, and wants to get the better of me in argument
(David) said: "He is unjust in demanding your ewe to add to his (many) ewes. Many partners are surely -- unjust to one another, except those who believe and do the right; but there are only a few of them." It occurred to David that he was being tried by Us, and he begged his Lord to forgive him, and fell down in homage and repented
So We forgave him. He has surely a high rank with Us and an excellent place of return
O David, We have made you trustee on the earth. So judge between men equitably, and do not follow your lust lest it should lead you astray from the way of God. Surely for those who go astray from the way of God, is severe punishment, for having forgotten the Day of Reckoning
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, all for nothing. Only those who deny imagine so. So for the unbelievers there is woe from the fire
Should We equate those who do the right with those who spread corruption in the land? Should We make those who are morally integrated equal to those who seek disintegration
We have sent down a Book to you which is blessed, so that people may apply their minds to its revelations, and the men of wisdom may reflect
We bestowed Solomon on David who was an excellent devotee, for he turned to God in penitence
When they brought fleet-footed chargers in the evening to show him
He said: "The love of horses is worthy of desire to me for the remembrance of my Lord;" and when they were out of sight, (he said)
Bring them back to me," and he began to rub and stroke their shanks and necks
We surely tried Solomon, and placed another body on his throne. So he turned to God
Saying: "O Lord, forgive me, and give me such a dominion as none will merit after me. You are the great bestower
So we subjugated the wind to his service which carried his merchandise wheresoever he wished
And the devils -- the builders and divers of all kinds
And many others bound in bond
This is Our gift," (We said to him), "so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning
He has a high position with Us and an excellent abode
Remember Our votary Job because he called to his Lord: "Satan has afflicted me with disease and distress
Go swiftly to the spring," (We said). "This cold water is for bathing and for drinking
We restored his family to him with others similar to them, as a blessing from Us and a reminder for men of wisdom
Take a handful of herbs," (We said to him), and apply and rub them, and do not make a mistake." We found him patient in adversity, an excellent devotee, always turning in repentance
Remember Our votaries Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of power and insight
We distinguished them for the distinct remembrance of the abode (of the Hereafter)
They are the chosen ones, the excellent in Our sight
And remember Ishmael, Elisha and Dhu'l-Kifl. Every one of them is among the best
This is a commemoration. Surely for those who take heed for themselves is an excellent place of return
Gardens of Eden with gates open wide to them
Where they will take their ease, calling for fruits in plenty, and for wine
With companions of modest look, the same in age, by their side
This is what is promised you for the Day of Reckoning
This is surely Our provision never-ending
This (for the virtuous); but for the transgressors the evil destination
Hell, in which they will burn. How vile a resting place
There will be boiling water for them and cold, clammy, fetid drink to taste
And other similar torments
Here is a multitude rushing headlong with you. There is no welcome for them. They will roast in the fire
They will say: "In fact, it is you who will have no welcome. It is you who brought this upon us. What an evil place of rest
They will say: "O Lord, give him who has brought this upon us two times more the torment of Hell
And will add: "O what has happened to us that we do not see the men we counted among the wicked
Did we laugh at them (for nothing), or our eyes fail to pick them out
This contending of the inmates of Hell will surely be real
Say: "I am only a warner, and there is no other god but God, the one, the omnipotent
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, all-mighty, all-forgiving
Say: "This is a momentous message
To which you pay no heed
I had no knowledge of the higher Assembly when they discussed it among themselves
Only this has been revealed to me that I am a distinct warner
When your Lord said to the angels: "I am going to create a man from clay
And when I have made him and have breathed into him of My spirit. Fall down in homage before him
Then the angels bowed before him in a body
Except Iblis. He was filled with pride and turned an unbeliever
Said (God): "O Iblis, what hindered you from adoring what I created by My own authority? Are you too proud, or too high and mighty
He said: "I am better than he. You created me from fire, and him from clay
(God) said: "Then go hence, ostracised
Upon you will be My damnation till the Day of Doom
He said: "O Lord, give me respite till the day the dead rise from their graves
(God) said: "You have the respite
Till the appointed day
He said: "By Your authority, I will lead them astray
Other than the chosen ones among Your creatures
(God) said: "This is right by Me, and what I say is right
I will fill up Hell with you together with those who follow you
Say: "I do not ask any compensation of you for it, nor am I a specious pretender
This is only a warning for mankind
You will come to know its truth in time
THE REVELATION OF this Book is from God, the mighty and all-wise
We have revealed to you the Scripture with exactitude; so worship God with devotion all exclusive for Him
Remember that devotion is exclusively for God. Those who have taken protectors other than Him, say: "We worship them that they may bring us nearer to God." Surely God will judge between them in what they are differing about. Verily God does not show the way to an ungrateful liar
Had God pleased to take a son, He could have chosen whom He liked from among those He has created. Glory be to Him. He is God, the one, the omnipotent
He has created the heavens and the earth with precision. He folds the day up over the night, and folds the night up over the day. He has subjugated the sun and moon, (so that) each runs its appointed course. Is He not all-mighty and forgiving
He created you from a single cell, then from it created its mate; arid provided eight varieties of cattle for you. He formed you in the mother's womb, formation after formation in three (veils of) darkness. He is God your Lord. His is the kingdom. There is no god other than He. How then can you turn away
If you are ungrateful, then remember! God is independent of you, and He does not favour ingratitude on the part of His creatures. If you are grateful He will be pleased with you. For no one who carries a burden bears another's load; and your returning is to your Lord, when He will tell you what you used to do. Surely He knows what is in the hearts
When man is afflicted with adversity he turns to his Lord, and prays to Him. But when He bestows His favour on him, he forgets what he prayed for before, and sets up others as compeers of God to mislead (people) from His way. Say: "Take advantage of your denying for a while: You will be among the inmates of Hell
Can one who prays in the watches of the night, bowing in homage or standing attentive, fearful of the life to come, and hoping for the mercy of his Lord, (be like one who does not)? Say: "Can those who know, and those who do not know, be equal? Only they think who are wise
Tell them: "O my creatures who have come to belief, have fear of displeasing your Lord. There is good for those who do good in this world, and productive is God's earth. Only those who persevere will get their reward measureless
Say: "I am commanded to worship God with obedience all-exclusive for Him
And I am commanded to be the first of those who submit
Say: "If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of an evil Day
Say: "I worship God with devotion all-exclusive for Him
You may worship what you will apart from Him." Say: "Surely the greatest losers will be those who will lose their own selves and their people on the Day of Resurrection." Remember, this will be an all-too-evident loss
Above them will be a covering of fire, below them a cloud (of flames). With this does God warn His creatures: "O My creatures, fear Me
There are happy tidings for those who keep away from the worship of false gods and turn to God in repentance. Give glad tidings to My creatures
Those who listen to the Word and then follow the best it contains, are the ones who have been guided by God, and are men of wisdom
Can he against whom the sentence of punishment has been justified (be rescued)? Can you save him who is in the Fire
But for those who fear displeasing their Lord there are lofty mansions built above mansions, with rivers rippling past below them: A promise of God; (and) God does not go back on His promise
Do you not see that God sends down water from the sky, then makes it flow in rills on the earth, and brings forth corn from it which, having passed through changes of shade and colour, comes to ripen, and you see it autumnal yellow; then He reduces it to chaff. There are indeed lessons in this for those who are wise
Will he whose breast has been opened up to peace (not be) in luminescence from his Lord? Alas for those whose hearts have been hardened to God's remembrance! They wander (astray) in clear error
God has sent down the very best discourse, the Book conformable in its juxtapositions, which makes all of those who fear their Lord, shudder. So their hearts and bodies become receptive to the remembrance of God. This is the guidance of God with which He guides whosoever He will; but whosoever God allows to go astray has none to show him the way
Can he who will have to shield himself against the torment of the Day of Resurrection (be the same as one at peace)? The evil-doers will be told: "So taste what you earned
Those before them had denied, then punishment had overtaken them is from a quarter they did not suspect
Then God made them taste of disgrace in this life; and the torment of the life to come is greater, if they understand
We have given examples of every kind for men in this Qur'an so that they may contemplate
A clear discourse which expounds all things without any obliquity, so that they may take heed for themselves
God advances the example of a man who is owned (as slave in common) by a number of men at loggerheads, and another man who is owned by only one. Are these two alike in attribute? God be praised; yet many of them do not know
Verily you will die, and so will they
Then on the Day of Resurrection you will dispute before your Lord
Who does greater wrong than he who tells a lie against God, and denies the truth when it has come to him? Is there no place for unbelievers in Hell
He who brings the truth and verifies it, -- such are the people who are God-fearing
They shall have what they wish from their Lord. This is the recompense for the good
That God may absolve them of their sins and reward them for the best that they had done
Is not God sufficient for His devotee? Still they frighten you with others apart from Him. Whoever God allows to go astray has none to show him the way
And none can lead him astray who has been guided by God. Is not God all-mighty, the lord of retribution
If you ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth?" they will answer: "God." Say: "Then just think. Can those whom you worship apart from God remove the distress God is pleased to visit upon me, or withhold a blessing God is pleased to favour me with?' Say: "God is all-sufficient for me. The trusting place their trust in Him
Say: "O people, act as best you can on your part, I am acting too. You will come to know in time
Who suffers the shameful punishment, and on whom falls the everlasting torment
We have Sent down this Book to you with the truth for all mankind. So, he who comes to guidance does so for himself, and he who goes astray does so for his own loss; on you does not lie their guardianship
God gathers up the souls of those who die, and of those who do not die, in their sleep; then He keeps back those ordained for death, and sends the others back for an appointed term. Surely there are signs in this for those who reflect
Have they appointed intercessors other than God? Say: "Even though they have no power in the least, nor do they understand
Say: "God's is the intercession entirely; His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; then to Him you will return
When God alone is mentioned the hearts of those who do not believe in the life to come, are filled with resentment. But when others are mentioned apart from God, they begin to rejoice
Say: "O God, the originator of the heavens and the earth, the knower of the unknown and the known, You alone will judge between Your creatures for things they differed about
Even if the sinners possessed whatever is in the heavens and the earth, and as much more, they would offer it to ransom themselves from the torment of the Day of Resurrection; yet what they did not even imagine would appear to them from God
And the evil of what they had earned would become visible to them; and what they used to mock would surround them from all sides
When a man is in trouble, he prays to God; but when We bestow a favour on him he says: "It has come to me through my acumen." In fact, this is an illusion, but most men do not know
Those before them had also said so, and yet nothing of what they did availed them in the least
Then the worst of what they had done overtook them. So will the evil deeds of those who are sinners among them recoil back on them. They cannot get the better (of Us)
Do they not know that God enhances or restricts the provision of any one He will. Surely there are signs in this for people who believe
Say: "O creatures of God, those of you who have acted against your own interests should not be disheartened of the mercy of God. Surely God forgives all sins. He is all-forgiving and all-merciful
Turn towards your Lord and obey Him before the punishment comes upon you when you will not be helped
Follow the best of what has been revealed to you by your Lord before the punishment overtakes you suddenly and you are caught unawares
Lest a soul should say: "Alas, I was heedless of God and only laughed
Or say: "If only God had guided me I would have been a man of fear and piety
Or say on seeing the punishment: "If I could only return I would be among the good
Why, My revelations had come to you, but you denied them and were filled with pride, and were among the disbelievers
If you see those who had imputed lies to God on the Day of Resurrection, black would be their faces (with disgrace). Is there not a place in Hell for the arrogant
God would rescue those who fear Him (and guide them) to places of safety. Neither will evil touch them nor regret
God is the creator of all things, and He is the guarantor of all things
He has the keys of the heavens and the earth; and those who deny the revelations of God will be losers
Say: "O you ignorant people, do you bid me to worship someone other than God
Surely you have been commanded, as those before you were: "If you associate (any one with God), wasted will be all your deeds, arid you will perish
So, you should worship only God, arid be among the grateful
They do not esteem God as is rightly due to Him. The whole earth would be a fistful of His on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens would be rolled up in His right hand. Too immaculate is He and too high for what they associate with Him
When the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will swoon away, except those God please. When the blast is sounded the second time, they will stand up all expectant
The earth will light up with the effulgence of her Lord; and the ledger (of account) will be placed (in each man's hand), and the apostles and the witnesses will be called, and judgement passed between them equitably, and no wrong will be done to them
Each soul will be paid in full for what it had done. He is cognisant of what you do
The unbelievers will be driven into Hell in groups till, when they reach it and its doors are opened up, its keepers will say to them: "Did not apostles of your own come to you reciting your Lord's revelations, warning you of this your day of Doom?" They will answer: "Yes;" but the sentence of punishment was justified against the unbelievers
Enter the gates of Hell," they will be told, "and there abide for ever." How grievous a destination for the haughty
Those who were mindful of their duty to their Lord will be driven in groups to Paradise, till they reach it and its gates are opened, and its keepers say to them: "Peace be on you; you are the joyous. So enter here to live for ever
They will say: "All praise be to God Who has fulfilled the promise He had made to us, and bequeathed to us this land for dwelling in the garden wheresoever we like." How excellent the recompense for those who act
You will see the angels hover round the Throne, singing the praises of their Lord; and justice will be done between them equitably, and it would be said: "All praise to God the Lord of all the worlds
HA MIM
The revelation of this Book is from God the all-mighty and all-knowing
Forgiver of trespasses, acceptor of repentance, severe of retribution, lord of power. There is no god but He. Towards Him is your destination
Only the unbelievers dispute the revelations of God. So do not let their activities in the land deceive you
The people of Noah had denied before them, and many factions after them. Every nation has intrigued against its apostle and afflicted him, and argued with false arguments to condemn the truth. Then I seized them. How was then My retribution
In this way the sentence of your Lord against the infidels that they would be the inmates of Hell, was justified
The bearers of the Throne, and those around it, sing the praises of their Lord and believe in Him, and seek forgiveness for those who believe: "O our Lord, Your mercy and knowledge embrace everything; so forgive those who turn to You in repentance and follow Your path; and preserve them from the torment of Hell
Admit them, O Lord, to the garden of Eden which You promised them, and those of their fathers, spouses and progeny who are upright. You are truly all-mighty and all-wise
Protect them from evil; and whosoever You preserve from evil on that Day shall have surely received Your mercy. This will be the great triumph
Those who disbelieve will certainly be told: "God's displeasure was greater than your disgust of your selves when you were called to belief and refused to believe
They say: "O Lord, twice You made us die, and twice You made us live. We admit our sins. Is there still a way out for us
This has come upon you because when God alone was invoked you disbelieved; but when partners were associated with Him, you believed. But judgement belongs to God, the all-high and supreme
It is He who shows you His signs, and sends you food from the heavens. Yet none takes a warning except him who turns to Him
So call on God with exclusive obedience, howsoever the unbelievers may dislike it
Most exalted of position, Lord of power, He directs inspiration by His command to any of His creatures as He will, to warn (men) of the Day of Meeting
The day when they will come out (of their graves), with nothing of them hidden from God. Whose then will be the kingdom? -- God's, the one, the omnipotent
Each soul will be recompensed that Day for what it had earned. There will be no depriving on that Day. Surely God is swift at reckoning
Warn them of the coming day inevitable, when hearts would jump to the throats, filling them with anguish. The sinners will have neither friend nor intercessor whose (word) will be heeded
Known to Him is the treachery of the eye, and what the breasts conceal
God decides with justice. But those they call apart from Him can not adjudge in the least. Verily God is all-hearing, all-perceiving
Have they not travelled on the earth that they could see what happened to those before them? They were greater in strength than they, and have left behind them traces on the earth. Yet they were seized by God for their sins, and had none to protect them against God
This was so because their apostles came with clear proofs to them, but they refused to believe. So they were seized by God. Surely God is powerful, unrelenting in retribution
We sent Moses with Our signs and clear authority
To Pharaoh, Haman and Qarun. But they said: "He is only a deceiving sorcerer
And when he brought the truth to them from Us, they said: "Slay the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women." But the unbelievers' stratagem is bound to fail
Let me kill Moses," the Pharaoh said, "and let him call to his Lord. I fear that he will change your faith and spread corruption in the land
Moses said: "I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every insolent imposter who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning
A believer from the House of Pharaoh who had kept his faith to himself, said: "Will you kill a man because he says: 'My Lord is God,' when he has brought clear signs from his Lord to you? If he is a liar his lie will recoil back on him; but in case he speaks the truth, then what he predicts will befall you. Surely God does not show the way to the shameful liar
O my people, authority is yours today being the most powerful in the land; but who will save us from the scourge of God if it fall upon us?" "I show you," said the Pharaoh, "only what I see (is right), and guide you but to the right path
But the man of belief said: "O my people, what I fear for you is the like of what befell the communities (of old)
Like the people of Noah, 'Ad and Thamud, and those that came after them. God does not want to be unjust to His creatures
O my people, what I fear for you is the day of gathering, crying and calling
The day you will turn your backs and flee, with none to defend you against God. Whoever God allows to go astray has none to show him the way
Joseph had indeed come to you before with clear proofs, but you did not cease to doubt what he had brought until he died, when you said: 'God will not send a prophet after him.' That is how God leads the waster, the sceptic astray
Those who dispute God's revelations, with no authority having come to them, (are) greatly odious in the sight of God, and the sight of those who believe. That is how God seals every proud and perverse heart
The Pharaoh said: "O Haman, build me a lofty tower that I may perhaps find the means
Of reaching the tracts of heaven and look at the god of Moses, though I think that he is a liar." Thus were the evil deeds of Pharaoh made to look attractive to him, and he was hindered from the path. So the stratagem of Pharaoh was bound to perish
The man who believed said: "O my people, follow me; I will guide you to the right path
O people, the life of this world is ephemeral; but enduring is the abode of the Hereafter
Whoever does evil will be requited in accordance with it; but whoever does right, whether man or woman, and is a believer, will enter Paradise, where they will have provision in abundance
O my people, what is wrong with me that I am calling you to preservation, while you invite me to the Fire
You are asking me to disbelieve in God, and to associate with Him that of which I have no knowledge, yet I invite you to the all-mighty, all-forgiving
What you are calling me to is surely not worth the calling in this world or in the next, because our returning is to God; and because the transgressors will be inmates of Hell
You will remember what I say in time to come; I submit my case to the judgement of God. Surely God keeps an eye on His creatures
So God preserved him from the evil they were planning; and a dreadful doom encompassed the people of Pharaoh
Fire, to which they are exposed morning and evening. The day the Hour is proclaimed (it will be said:) "Admit the people of Pharaoh to the severest punishment
As they will noisily argue in the Fire, the weaker ones will say to the arrogant: "We were your followers, so will you take over some of our share of the fire
The arrogant will answer: "All of us are in it. Surely God has judged between His creatures
Those in the Fire will say to the warders of Hell: "Ask your Lord to reduce the punishment by a day for us
They will say: "Did not your apostles come to you with clear proofs?" They will answer: "Indeed, they did." "Then pray," will (the warders) say. But the praying of unbelievers will be all in vain
We will certainly help Our messengers and those who believe, in this world, and on the day the witnesses take their stand
The day upon which their excuses will not benefit the evil-doers, and the condemnation and evil abode will be theirs
Verily We showed Moses the way, and bequeathed the Book to the children of Israel
A guidance and reminder for men of wisdom
So persevere; the promise of God is true; and seek forgiveness for your sins, and chant the praises of your Lord evening and morning
Verily those who argue in the matter of God's revelations, without authority having reached them, have nothing but pride in their hearts, and they will not achieve their end. So take refuge in God: Surely He is all-hearing and all-seeing
The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed of greater magnitude than the creation of mankind; but most men do not understand
The blind and the seeing are surely not alike, nor those who believe and act rightly and those who do evil. Little do you reflect
The Hour will certainly come; there is no mystery about it; but most men do not believe
Your Lord has said: "Call to Me that I may answer your call. Surely those who disdain worshipping Me will enter Hell, disgraced
It is God who made the night for you to rest, the day to make things visible. Indeed God is gracious to men, but most men are not grateful
He is God your Lord, creator of everything. There is no god but He. How then do you turn away (from Him)
Only they are turned away thus who deny the signs of God
It is God who made the earth a dwelling for you, and the sky a vaulted roof, who fashioned you and gave you excellent form and provided you with clean and wholesome things. He is God, your Lord. So blessed be God, the Lord of all the worlds
He is the living. There is no god but He. Therefore pray to Him with obedience all-exclusive. Praise be to God, the Lord of all the worlds
Say: "I am forbidden to worship those you call apart from God, since clear signs have come to me from my Lord, and I am commanded to submit to the Lord of all the worlds
It is He who created you from dust, then a drop of semen, then the embryo; afterwards He brings you forth as a child; then you attain the age of manhood, and then reach old age. But some of you die before you reach the appointed term that you may haply understand
It is He who gives you life and death. When He creates a thing, He has only to say: "Be," and it is
Have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of God are turned away
Those who deny the Book and what We have sent down with Our apostles, will soon come to know
When, with (iron) collars and chains around their necks, they will be dragged
Through boiling water, and then burnt in the Fire
They will then be asked: "Where are they you took as partners
Apart from God?" They will answer: "They have left us in the lurch and fled. In fact it was nothing that we prayed to before." That is how God sends the unbelievers astray
This is so because you went about exulting wrongfully in the land," (will they be told), "and you were insolent
So enter the gates of Hell to abide in it for ever." How evil the abode of the arrogant
So you persevere with patience (in your mission). The promise of God is true. Whether We show you some of the punishment We have promised them, or gather you up in death, they have to come back to Us
Surely We have sent apostles before you, some of whose account We have related to you, and that of some We have not told you. But no apostle was given a miracle unless God dispensed. But when the decree of God comes the sentence is passed with justice; and the lovers of vice and vanity will then come to grief
It is God who made the cattle for you so that some you ride and some you eat
There are advantages for you in them, so that you may satisfy your needs through them, and may be borne upon them and on ships
He shows His signs. How many of God's signs will you then deny
Have they not travelled in the land and seen how was the end of those before them who were far more numerous than they and more strong, and have left behind them traces on the earth. And yet nothing of what they did profited them
For when Our apostles came to them with clear proofs, they boasted and exulted at the knowledge they possessed; but what they used to mock recoiled back on them
So that when they saw Our might, they said: "We believe in God the one and single, and reject those we associated (with Him)
But then their affirming served them nothing after they had seen Our torment. This is the law of God that has prevailed among His creatures, Then the unbelievers went to rack and ruin
HA MIM
A revelation from the most benevolent, ever-merciful
A Book whose verses have been distinguished and explained, a lucid discourse for people who understand
Announcing happy news and warnings. And yet most of them are averse and do not listen
And say: "Our hearts are immured against what you call us to. There is a deafness in our ears, and a veil lies between us and you. So act (your way), we are acting (ours)
Say: "I am a man like you, (but) it is revealed to me that your God is one God, so take the straight path to Him, and ask Him to forgive your sins. Woe to the idolaters
Who do not give a due share of their wealth for the welfare of others, and do not believe in the Hereafter
But those who believe and do the right, will have a continuing reward
Say: "Do you refuse to believe in Him who created the earth in two spans of time, and set up compeers to Him, the Lord of all the worlds
He placed firm stabilisers rising above its surface, blessed it with plenty and growth, and ingrained the means of growing its food within it, sufficient for all seekers, in four spans
Then He turned to the heavens, and it was smoke. So He said to it and the earth: "Come with willing obedience or perforce." They said: "We come willingly
Then He created several skies in two spans, and ingrained in each sky its function, decking the nearest heaven with lamps, and guarded it. This has been determined by the mighty and all-knowing
If even then they turn away, tell them: "I forewarn you of a terrible punishment like the thunderbolt that fell upon the 'Ad and Thamud
Their apostles came to them one after the other (saying): "Do not worship any one but God." They said: "If our Lord had pleased He would have sent the angels down. We reject what is sent with you
So those who were 'Ad turned insolent unjustly in the land, and said: "Who is stronger than us?" Did they not see that God who created them was greater far in power than they? Yet they refused to believe Our signs
So We let loose on them a violent wind for several days of distress to make them taste a most disgraceful punishment here in this world, and far more shameful will be the punishment in the Hereafter, and there will be no succour for them
As for the (tribe of) Thamud, We tried to guide them, but they preferred blindness to guidance; then they were seized by the torment of a humiliating punishment as requital for their misdeeds
But We saved those who believed and took heed for themselves
The day the enemies of God will be gathered at the Fire and the records of their deeds will be distributed
So that when they reach it their ears and eyes and persons will testify to what they did
And they will say to their bodies: "Why did you testify against us?" They will answer: "God, who gave all things power of articulation, made us speak. It is He who created you the first time, and to Him you will return
You did not hide your (doings) so that your ears or eyes or persons should not testify against you. In fact you thought that God did not know the things you used to do
It is this notion you had of your Lord that caused your ruin, and you are lost
Even if they are patient, their abode is Hell; and if they beg for favour, none will favour them
We had assigned to them close companions who made their past and present look attractive to them; and the fate that had once befallen the communities of jinns and men before them was justified upon them. They were indeed bound to perish
The disbelievers say: "Do not listen to this Qur'an, and shout away (its reading); you may haply prevail
We shall make the disbelievers taste the severest punishment, and retribute them for the worst that they had done
This is the requital for God's enemies: Hell, where they will have their lasting home, as punishment for denying Our revelations
Those who disbelieve will say: "O Lord, show us those among the jinns and men who had led us astray that we may trample them underfoot and make them wholly abject
Surely the angels will come down to those who say, 'Our Lord is God' and then remain steadfast, saying: "You should have neither fear nor regret, but rejoice in the happy news of Paradise that has been promised you
We are your friends in this life and in the Hereafter where you will get whatever your hearts desire, and have whatsoever you ask for
As a gift from the forgiving, ever-merciful (God)
Whose word is better than his who calls to God and does the right, and says: "I am of the obedient
Good and evil are not alike. Repel evil with what is good. Then you will find your erstwhile enemy like a close. affectionate friend
Only they attain it who forbear, and only a man of great good fortune can achieve it
If the Devil incite you to evil, seek refuge in God. He is all-hearing and all-knowing
The night and day and the sun and moon are (only) some of His signs. So do not bow before the sun and the moon, but bow in homage to God who created them, if you truly worship Him
But if they become haughty (then remember) that those who are close to your Lord sing His praises night and day and do not grow weary of (doing so)
It is among His signs that the earth you see all barren and desolate begins to stir and sprout when We send down rain upon it. Surely He who gives it life will also give life to the dead. Indeed He has power over everything
Surely those who slander Our signs are not hidden from Us. Then, is he better who will be cast into Hell, or he who will come out safe on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you will, He sees whatsoever you do
Those who reject the Reminder when it has come to them (should know) that it is a Book inviolate
Falsehood cannot enter it from any side: It's a revelation from the all-wise and praiseworthy (God)
Nothing is said to you which had not been said to other apostles before you. Surely your Lord is the lord of forgiveness, but also the lord of severe retribution
If We had made it a discourse in an obscure tongue, they would have said: "Why were its revelations not expounded distinctly? A foreign tongue and an Arab (audience)?" Say: "For those who believe it is a guidance and a healing; but for those who do not believe it is a deafness in the ears, and a blindness. They are those one calls to from far away
Verily We gave Moses the Book; but they began to differ about it. If the Word of your Lord had not preceded it the matter would have been settled between them. They are still in doubt about it and uneasy
Whoever does good does so for himself, and whoever does wrong bears the guilt thereof. Your Lord does no wrong to His creatures
He alone has knowledge of the Hour (of change): No fruit comes Out of its spathe, no female conceives or gives birth, but He has knowledge of it. The day He will call them (and ask): "Where are the compeers (you ascribed to Me)?" They will answer: "We profess to You not one of us can vouch for them
And those they used to worship will leave them in the lurch, and they will realise there is no escape for them
Man never tires of praying for good; but if evil assails him he begins to despair
If We give him a taste of Our favour after some distress he has known, he says: "It was my due. I cannot imagine the Hour will come. And even if I go back to my Lord, there will surely still be the best for me with Him." We shall tell those who do not believe what they used to do, and inflict on them a heavy punishment
When We show Our favours to man he moves away and turns aside; but when in trouble he prays a great deal
Say: "Just think. If this is from God and you deny it, who will be in greater error than he who is in open dissent
We will show Our signs to them in the horizons of the external world and within themselves, until it becomes clear to them that it's the truth. Is your Lord not sufficient? He is a witness over all things
In truth they are in doubt that they will ever face their Lord. Do they not know that He surrounds all things
HA MIM
Am Sin Qaf
So has God, all-mighty and all-wise, been revealing to you and to others before you
Whatever is in the heavens and the earth, belongs to Him. He is all-high and supreme
The skies are near to bursting asunder above them (for awe of Him), and the angels sing the praises of their Lord, imploring forgiveness for the dwellers of the earth. Is it not that God is forgiving and merciful
Those who have taken protectors other than Him, are watched over by God. It is not for you to be their guardian
We have, therefore, revealed to you the eloquent Qur'an that you may warn the people of the Metropolis, and those who live around it, of the Day of Gathering, of which there is no doubt, (when mankind would be assembled) some in Heaven, some in Hell
If God had pleased He would have made them one community of belief; but He admits whom He please to His grace; yet the sinners have neither friend nor helper
Have they taken others beside Him as protectors? It is God who protects; it is He who gives life to the dead, for He has power over everything
In whatever matter you disagree the ultimate judgement rests with God. This is God, my Lord; in Him have I placed my trust, if to Him I turn
Originator of the heavens and the earth, He has made your consorts from among you, and made pairs of cattle. He multiplies you in this way. There is no other like Him. He is all-hearing and all-seeing
He holds the keys of the heavens and the earth. He increases or decreases the provision of any one He will. He has knowledge of everything
He has laid down for you the (same) way of life and belief which He had commended to Noah, and which We have enjoined on you, and which We had bequeathed to Abraham, Moses and Jesus, so that they should maintain the order and not be divided among themselves. Heavy is to idolaters what you invite them to. God chooses whom He please for Himself, and guides to Himself whoever turns to Him
Yet they did not differ about it until knowledge came to them, through rivalries among themselves. If the Word of your Lord, (staying) it for a time ordained, had not preceded it, the matter would have been settled among them. But those who came to inherit the Book after them are also in doubt and disturbed about it
Yet to that (law) you should call them, and be constant as commanded. Do not follow their passing whims, but say: "I believe in whatever Scripture God has revealed, and I am commanded to act with equivalence among you. God is our Lord and your Lord. To us our actions, to you your deeds. There is no dispute between you and us. God will gather us all together, and to Him is our returning
As for those who argue in the matter of God after He has been fully acknowledged, their disputing has no force with their Lord. Upon them is (God's) anger, and the punishment for them will be severe
It is God who has sent down the Book with the truth, and the Balance. How do you know the Hour is not near
Only they who do not believe in it wish to hasten it; but those who believe are in fear of it, for they know it to be true. Surely those who are in doubt about the Hour are wandering far astray
God is gracious to His creatures, and bestows favours on whosoever He will. He is all-powerful and all-mighty
Whoever desires the fruits of the Hereafter, We shall add to his fruit. As for him who desires the fruits of this world, We shall give to him of these, but he will have no share in the Hereafter
Have they other associates who have prescribed another law for them which has not been dispensed by God? But for the decisive Word (of God) a sentence would have been passed amongst them. Surely there is a grievous punishment for the ungodly
You will see the evil-doers full of fear of what they deserve, yet it will come to pass. But those who believe and do the right will be in gardens of Paradise. They will receive what they wish from their Lord; and this will be the greatest favour
This is the good news that God gives to His creatures who believe and do good. Say: "I ask no recompense of you for it other than obligations of relationship." We shall give more excellence to him who acquires excellence. Surely God forgives and accepts (gratitude)
Do they say he has fabricated a lie about God? He could have sealed your hearts if He pleased; but God blots out the false and vindicates the truth by His dispensations, for He knows the secrets of the hearts
It is He who accepts repentance from His creatures and forgives their trespasses, for He knows what you do
He answers (the prayers) of those who believe and do good, and gives them more of His bounty. But for the unbelievers there is severe punishment
If God were to give in abundance to His creatures they would fill the earth with oppression. So He gives according to measure as He will. He knows (what is good for) His creatures. He is all-aware and all-seeing
It is He who sends down rain when they had despaired of it, and showers His benevolence. He is the protector worthy of praise
The creation of the heavens and the earth and all the living things dispersed in them, are a sign of His. He has the power to gather them together when He will
Whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your deeds; yet He forgives much
You cannot thwart Him on the earth, and have no friend or helper apart from Him
Ships sailing in the ocean like ensigns are a sign of His
He could stop the wind if He pleased, then they would be stranded on its surface. Surely there are signs in this for every one who perseveres and is grateful
Or He could wreck them for what they have done; yet there is much that He pardons
Let those who dispute Our signs know that there is no way of escape for them
Whatsoever you have been given is only this life's merchandise; but what is with God is better and more lasting for those who believe and place their trust in their Lord
Who avoid the deadly sins, immoral acts, and forgive when they are angered
Who obey the commands of their Lord and fulfil their devotional obligations, whose affairs are settled by mutual consultation, who spend of what We have given them
And those who defend themselves when they are wronged
The retribution of evil is the equal of evil (done); yet those who forgive and rehabilitate will be rewarded by God. Verily He does not like those who do wrong
If one avenges himself after he has been wronged, there is no way of blaming him
Blame lies on those who oppress, and terrorise the land unjustly. For them there is painful punishment
But he who bears with patience and forgives, surely complies with divine resolve
He whom God leads astray has no one except God to protect him. You should see the sinners when they face the punishment. They will say: "Isn't there a way of going back
You should see them brought before the Fire, abject in disgrace, looking stealthily. And those who believe will say: "They who forfeit their souls and families on the Day of Resurrection will really be losers." Is it not that sinners will suffer a lasting torment
They will have no protector to help them other than God. He whom God allows to go astray has no way
Hearken to your Lord before the Day arrives from God that will not be averted. You will have no place of refuge then nor time for denying
If they turn away (you are not responsible); We have not appointed you a warden over them. Your duty is to deliver the message. When We let man taste of Our favours he begins to exult; but if misfortune befalls him, as a consequence of his own deeds, man is surely then ungrateful
To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatsoever He wills, bestows daughters on whosoever He will, and gives sons to whom He choose
On some He bestows both sons and daughters, and some He leaves issueless. He is all-knowing and all-powerful
It is not given to man that God should speak to him except by suggestion or indirectly, or send a messenger to convey by His command whatsoever He please. He is all-high and all-wise
So have We revealed to you the Qur'an by Our command. You did not know what the Scripture was before, nor (the laws of) faith. And We made it a light by which We show the way to those of Our creatures as We please; and you certainly guide them to the right path
The path of God to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And will not all things go back to God
HA MIM
I call to witness the lucent Book
That We made it a distinctly lucid Qur'an that you may understand
It is inscribed in the original Book (of Books) with Us, sublime, dispenser of (all) laws
Should We have withdrawn the Reminder from you as you are a people who exceed the bounds
Many a prophet had We sent to the earlier communities
But never did a prophet come at whom they did not scoff
So We destroyed far more powerful (nations) than they. The example of earlier people is there
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth?" they will answer: "The Mighty and All-knowing created them
He who made the earth a bed for you, and laid out tracks upon it so that you may find the way
Who sent down water in due measure from the sky, then quickened a region that was dead -- So shall We bring you forth
He who created pairs of everything, and fashioned for you boats and beasts on which you ride
So that when you sit astride of them and think of the bounties of your Lord, you may say: "All glory to Him who subjugated these for us. We were incapable of doing so
Surely we have to go back to our Lord
Yet they make some of His creatures His offspring! Man is surely most ungrateful
Or has He taken from those He has created daughters for Himself, and assigned sons to you
Yet when news of (a daughter) they had reserved for Ar-Rahman comes to one of them, his face is blackened (with shame), and he grieves in silence inwardly
Can one who has been raised on ornaments and cannot present her case coolly in a dispute (be associated with God)
Yet they have made the angels, who are creatures of Ar-Rahman, females. Did they witness their creation? We shall record their testimony, and they will be interrogated
Yet they say: "If Ar-Rahman had so pleased we would not have worshipped them." They have no knowledge of it in the least. They only make up lies
Did We give them a Scripture before this to which they are holding fast
In fact they say: "We found our fathers following a certain way, and are guided by their footprints
Thus, We never sent an admonisher to a settlement before you but the decadent among them said. "We found our fathers following this way, and we are walking in their footsteps
Even if I bring you a better guidance," he rejoined, "than the one you found your fathers on?" Still they said: "We do not believe in what you have brought
Then We punished them. So look at the fate of those who denied
When Abraham said to his father and his people: "I am rid of what you worship
Other than Him who created me. He will show me the right way
This is the legacy he left to his descendants so that they may turn (to God)
In fact, I allowed them and their fathers to enjoy this life till the truth, and the apostle preaching it lucidly, came to them
Yet when the truth had come to them, they said: "This is sorcery. We shall never believe in it
They also said: "Why was this Qur'an not sent down to some great man of the two cities
Are they the ones who dispense the favour of your Lord? It is He who apportions the means of livelihood among them in this world, and raises some in position over the others to make some others submissive. The favours of your Lord are better than what they amass
Had it not been that all people would become one community (of unbelievers), We might have given those who disbelieve in Ar-Rahman roofs of silver for their dwellings and (silver) stairs for mounting
And doors (of silver) for their houses, (silver) couches for reclining
And ornaments of gold. But all this would have been nothing but the vanity of this world. The Hereafter with your Lord is for those who take heed for themselves and follow the straight path
We shall attach to him who goes blind to the remembrance of Ar-Rahman a devil as companion
Surely the (devils) obstruct them from the path, though they think they are rightly guided
Until when he comes before Us he will say (to the devil): "Would to God there was a distance of the East and West between you and me, for you were an evil companion
But nothing will avail you on that day, for you were unjust, and you will be partners in the punishment
Can you make the deaf to hear, or show the blind, and those lost in clear error, the way
We shall punish them whether We take you away
Or show you some of what We have promised them. They are certainly well within Our power
So hold fast to what has been revealed to you. You are truly on the right path
It is a (source) of greatness for you and your people. You will surely be questioned about it
Inquire of apostles We had sent before you if We appointed gods to be worshipped other than Ar-Rahman
We sent Moses with Our signs to the Pharaoh and his nobles. He said: "I have been sent by the Lord of all the worlds
But when he brought to them Our signs they laughed at them
(Even though) each miracle that We showed them was greater than the other. So We seized them with chastisement so that they may turn back
But they said: "O sorcerer, call on your Lord for us in accordance with the compact He has made with you. We shall certainly come to guidance
Yet no sooner did We take away the affliction from them than they broke their pledge
And the Pharaoh said to his people: "O people, is not mine the kingdom of Egypt and these rivers that flow at my feet? Can you still not comprehend
Am I (not) better than him who is contemptible, and cannot even express himself clearly
Why were then no bracelets of gold shed upon him from above, or angels sent down as a retinue with him
Thus he made light (of the matter) to his people, and they obeyed him. They were certainly wicked
But when they roused Our anger We inflicted retributive punishment and drowned them all
And made them a precedent and example for posterity
When the example of Mary's son is quoted before them, your people cry out at it
And say: "Are our deities better or he?" They say this only for disputing. Surely they are a contentious people
(Jesus) was only a creature whom We favoured and made an example for the children of Israel
If We pleased We could have put angels in place of you as trustees on the earth
He is certainly the sign of the Hour (of change). So have no doubt about it, and listen to me. This is the straight path
Let not Satan misdirect you. He is your open enemy
When Jesus came with the signs, he said: "I have come to you with authority, and to explain some thing about which you are at variance. So fear God, and follow me
Verily God is my Lord and your Lord; so worship Him. This is the straight path
But the factions differed among themselves. Woe alas to the sinners for the torment of the grievous Day
Are they waiting (for any thing) but the Hour (of Doom) which would descend upon them suddenly, and catch them unawares
Friends will turn into enemies on that day, except those who fear and follow the straight path
O My creatures, there will be no fear or regret
For (those of) you on that day who believed in My revelations and submitted
(You will) enter the garden, you and your spouses, and be glad
Golden platters and goblets will be passed around, and everything the heart desires and pleases the eye will be there, where you will abide for ever
This is the Paradise you will inherit (as meed) for your deeds
You will have fruits in abundance there to eat
The sinners will certainly dwell for ever in the torment of Hell
It will not decrease for them; dumb with despair they will stay in it
We did not wrong them, they wronged themselves
They will call (to the keeper of Hell-gate): "O Malik, let your Lord decide our fate." He will answer: "You are to stay
We have brought to you the truth, but most of you despise the truth
Have they settled upon a plan? We shall also settle on one
Or do they think We do not hear their secrecies and stealthy consultations? In fact, Our messengers who attend them record everything
Say: "If Ar-Rahman had a son I would have been the first of worshippers
All too glorious is He, Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of all power, for what they ascribe to Him
Leave them to their vain discoursing and horse-play till they come to meet their promised day (of reckoning)
He is God in heaven and God on earth, and He is all-wise and all-knowing
Blessed be He, who holds the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them. He alone has knowledge of the Hour, and to Him will you return
Those they invoke apart from Him have no power of intercession, except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge
If you ask them who created them, they will answer: "God." How then can they turn away
And (the Prophet) will say: "O Lord, these are certainly a people who do not believe
Turn away from them and say: "Peace." They will come to know soon
HA MIM
The perspicuous Book is witness
(That) We sent it down one night of blessing -- so that We could warn
On which all affairs are sorted out and decided
As commands from Us. It is indeed We who send (messengers)
A mercy from your Lord. Verily He is all-hearing and all-knowing
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, if you really do believe
There is no god other than He, who gives you life and death, your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of old
Yet they are lost in doubt and play
So watch for the day when the sky begins to emit clear smoke
Which would envelope mankind. That would be a grievous affliction
O Lord, take away this torment from us," (they will pray); "we have come to believe
How can a warning benefit them? The Apostle who explained all things clearly had come to them
But they turned away from him, and said: "He is well-instructed, (but) possessed
If We remove the torment a little, you revert back (to misdeeds)
The day that We shall seize them with a grievous hold, We will indeed castigate them
We had tried the people of Pharaoh before them. A respected prophet had come to them (saying)
Deliver the creatures of God to me. I am the trusted messenger sent to you
Do not think yourselves to be above God: I have come to you with clear authority
I have taken refuge in my Lord and your Lord against your stoning me to death
If you do not believe in me, leave me alone
Then he called to his Lord: "These are a sinful people
Journey by night with My devotees," (it was said); "you will certainly be pursued
(Cross and) leave the sea undisturbed. The (pursuing) hosts will surely be drowned
How many gardens and fountains did they leave behind
And fields and stately mansions
And the comfort they enjoyed
Thus it was; and We passed them on to another people
Neither did the heavens weep for them, nor the earth, nor were they granted respite
So We saved the children of Israel from degrading suffering
They (had experienced) under the Pharaoh. He was certainly a tyrant, guilty of excess
And We exalted them over the other people knowingly
And sent them tokens to bring out the best in them
Even then they say
There is no dying for us but once; and we shall not be raised again
So bring our ancestors back, if you are truthful
Are they better than the people of Tubba, and those who had lived before them, whom We destroyed as they were sinners
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, out of play
We created them with definite purpose; but most of them do not understand
The Day of Judgement is your promised day of meeting
The day when friend will help no friend in the least, nor will they be helped
Apart from those to whom God is kind. He is all-mighty and all-merciful
The tree of Zaqqum will indeed be
The food of sinners
It is like pitch. It will fume in the belly
As does boiling water
Seize him and drag him into the depths of Hell," (it will be said)
Then pour over his head the torment of scalding water
Taste it," (they will be told). "You were indeed the mighty and noble
This is certainly what you had denied
Surely those who fear and follow the straight path will be in a place of peace and security
In the midst of gardens and of springs
Dressed in brocade and shot silk, facing one another
Just like that. We shall pair them with companions with large black eyes
They will call for every kind of fruit with satisfaction
There they will not know any death apart from the first death they had died, and will be kept safe from the torment of Hell
By the beneficence of your Lord. This will be the great success
Therefore We have made this (Qur'an) easy in your tongue. They may haply take a warning
So you wait. They are also waiting
HA MIM
The revelation of this Book is from God, the mighty and all-wise
Indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth
In creating you and spreading all the moving things (on earth) are signs for people firm of faith
As there are signs in the alternation of night and day, and in rain that God sends with which He revives the earth once dead, as there are in the changing of the winds, for people who can understand
These are revelations of God which we recite to you correctly: In what other lore but God and His manifestations would they then believe
Alas the woe for every dissembling sinner
Who hears the revelations of God being recited to him, yet persists in denying with arrogance as though he had never heard them! So warn him of a painful punishment
When he comes to know something of Our messages he makes fun of them: For them is shameful punishment
There is Hell before them; and whatever they have earned will not avail them in the least, nor those whom they take as friends apart from God. There is great chastisement for them
This is guidance. Those who deny the revelations of their Lord will suffer a dreadful doom
It is God who subjugated the ocean for you so that ships may ply through it by His command, and you may seek His bounty, and may haply be grateful
He subjugated for you whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, each and everything. Verily there are signs in this for those who reflect
Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the visitations of God, so that He may requite the people for their deeds
He who does good does so for himself; and he who does evil suffers the consequence thereof. You have then to go back to your Lord
We gave the children of Israel the Book, and the judgement and the prophethood, provided them with good things, favoured them over other people
And gave them a clear exposition of Our laws. And they did not differ until after knowledge came to them, through mutual jealousies. Verily your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgement in what they differed about
We have put you on the right way in the matter (of divine law). So follow it, and do not follow the wishes of those who are ignorant
They will not avail you in the least against God. Surely the wicked are each other's friends, but God befriends those who fear and follow the right path
These are precepts of wisdom for men, and guidance and grace for people who believe with certainty
Do those who seek evil think that We shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good? How bad is the judgement that they make
God has created the heavens and the earth with reason, so that He may reward each soul in accordance with what it has done; and no wrong will be done to them
Just think: Who apart from God can show the way to him who deifies his ego into his god, whom God allows to go astray knowingly, and seals his ears and heart, and covers over his eyes with a veil? Why then do you not contemplate
Yet they say: "There is nothing but the life of this world. We die and we live, and only time annihilates us." Yet they have no knowledge of this: They only speculate
When Our clear revelations are recited to them, their only argument is to say: "Bring our ancestors back, if what you say is true
Say: "God, who gives you life and makes you die, will (raise the dead) then gather you (and your ancestors) together on the Day of Resurrection of which there is no doubt." And yet most men do not understand
God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. The day the Hour is proclaimed the liars will be losers
You will see each community kneeling down; and each community will be summoned to its ledger (of good and evil deeds). You will receive upon that day your recompense for what you had done
This, Our record, will speak about you truthfully. We had everything you did recorded in it
So, those who believed and did good things will be admitted to His favour by their Lord. This will be a clear triumph
As for the infidels, (it will be said): "Were not My messages read out to you? But you behaved with self-conceit, and became a sinful people
Whenever it was said: 'God's promise is certainly true, and there is no doubt about the Hour,' you replied: 'We know not what the Hour is. We have only a vague idea, but are not certain
The evil of what they had done will become clear to them, and they will be seized by what they had scorned
We shall ignore you today," they will be told, "as you had forgotten the meeting of this Day. Your dwelling place is Hell, and there is none to save you
This because you laughed at God's revelations and were taken in by the life of the world." So they will neither be taken out of it, nor will be asked to seek God's favour on that day
All praise be to God, Lord of the heavens, Lord of the earth, Lord of all the worlds
His is the supremacy in the heavens and the earth; and He is the all-mighty and all-wise
HA MIM
The revelation of this Book is from God, the mighty and all-wise
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them but with a purpose for an appointed time. Yet the unbelievers turn away from the warning
Say: "Have you thought of those you invoke apart from God? Show me what they have created of the earth, or, do they have a share in the heavens? Bring me an earlier Book than this, or inherited knowledge, if you are truthful
Who is more astray than he who calls on those, apart from God, who cannot answer their prayers till the Day of Resurrection, and are even unaware of being called
When all men are gathered together (on that Day) they will become their enemies and deny their worship
When Our clear revelations are read out to them, the infidels say of the truth, when it has come to them: "This is pure magic
Do they say: "He has fabricated it?" Tell them: "If I have fabricated it, you have no power to save me from God. He knows what you are busy with concerning this. He is sufficient as witness between you and me; yet He is forgiving, ever-merciful
Say: "I am not a new Messenger to come, nor do I know what is to be done to me or you. I only follow what is revealed to me. My duty is only to warn you clearly
Tell them: "Think (of the consequence) if this is from God and you deny it when a witness from the people of Israel had testified to the like of it and come to believe, while you spurn it?" Assuredly God does not guide a wicked people
Those who deny say of those who believe: "Had there been any good in it they would not have preceded us in coming to it." Since they have not taken guidance from it, they will say: "This is the same old lie
There was the Book of Moses before this, a guide and a mercy; and here is this Book confirming it in lucid language, warning those who are wicked, and giving happy tidings to the righteous
Surely for those who say, "God is our Lord," and then remain firm, there is no fear or regret
They are men of Paradise where they will abide for ever as a recompense for what they had done
We have enjoined on man to be good to his parents: His mother carries him in her womb with hardship, and gives birth to him in pain. Thirty months is the period of her carrying and weaning him. When he attains to manhood and the age of forty, he says: "O Lord, guide me to thank You for the favours You have bestowed on me and my parents, and to do things good as may please You, and give me a righteous off-spring. I turn to You in penitence and submit
They are those from whom We accept the very best of what they have done, and overlook their faults. They will be among the inmates of Paradise: A true promise they have been made
But he who says to his parents: "Shame on you: You intimidate me that I will be resurrected when many generations will have passed before me?" And (the parents) would implore God's help: "Woe to you. You better believe. The promise of God is certainly true." Yet he answers: "These are only fables of long ago
They are those on whom the sentence of God would be justified as on communities of jinns and men before them. They will surely perish
Each will have a position in accordance with his deeds; and no wrong will be done to them
The day the unbelievers are brought to the Fire, (it will be said): "You wasted all your good deeds in the life of the world, and enjoyed them to the full. You will now be requited with a shameful punishment, for you behaved with arrogance for no reason on the earth, and acted wickedly
Remember (Hud) the brother of 'Ad. When he warned his people in Ahqaf -- though many a warner had come and gone before and after him: "Do not worship any one but God, for I fear the punishment of an awful day for you
They said: "Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Then bring upon us what you predict for us, if you are a man of truth
He said: "Only God has the knowledge. I only convey to you what I have been sent with. But I see you are a foolish people
So when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys, they said: "This is just a passing cloud that will bring us rain." "No. It is what you were trying to hasten: The wind which carries the grievous punishment
It will destroy everything at the bidding of its Lord." So in the morning there was nothing but their empty dwellings to be seen. That is how We requite the sinners
We had strengthened them as We have not strengthened you, had given them ears and eyes and hearts; but nothing stood them in good stead, neither their ears nor eyes nor hearts, for they rejected the signs of God, and were seized by what they had mocked
We have destroyed habitations all around you, having explained Our signs in different ways to them that they may turn back
Why then did the gods they had taken apart from God as propitiators, not come to their aid? In fact they strayed away from them. It was all a lie what they had contrived
And (remember), when We turned a company of jinns towards you to listen to the Qur'an, they arrived when it was being recited, and they said: "Keep silent." When it was over they came back to their people, warning them
O our people:" they said: "we have listened to a Book which has come down after Moses, confirming what was (sent down) before it, showing the way to the truth and a path that is straight
O our people, hearken to the summoner of God, and believe in him, so that He may forgive you your sins and save you from a painful doom
He who does not listen to the summoner of God cannot weaken (the power of) God on earth, nor will he have protectors other than Him. They are clearly in the wrong
Do they not realise that God who created the heavens and the earth, and did not tire creating them, is able to bring the dead to life? And why not? He has the power over everything
The day the unbelievers will be stood before the Fire, (they will be asked:) "Is this not the reality?" They will answer: "In truth, by our Lord!" It will be said: "Then taste the torment of what you had denied
So bear with patience, as the apostles who were constant, bore; and do not be hasty (in demanding punishment) for them. On the day they see what they had been foretold, (they will realise) that they did not stay in the world but only an hour of the day. This is the message to be conveyed: Shall any perish but the ungodly
THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE and obstruct (others) from the way of God will have wasted their deeds
But those who believe and do the right, and believe what has been revealed to Muhammad, which is the truth from their Lord, will have their faults condoned by Him and their state improved
That is because those who refuse to believe only follow what is false; but those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. That is how God gives men precepts of wisdom
So, when you clash with the unbelievers, smite their necks until you overpower them, then hold them in bondage. Then either free them graciously or after taking a ransom, until war shall have come to end. If God had pleased He could have punished them (Himself), but He wills to test some of you through some others. He will not allow the deeds of those who are killed in the cause of God to go waste
He will show them the way, and better their state
And will admit them into gardens with which he has acquainted them
O you who believe, if you help (in the cause of) God He will surely come to your aid, and firmly plant your feet
As for the unbelievers, they will suffer misfortunes, and their deeds will be rendered ineffective
That is so as they were averse to what has been revealed by God, and their actions will be nullified
Have they not journeyed in the land and seen the fate of those before them? Destroyed they were utterly by God; and a similar (fate) awaits the unbelievers
This is so for God is the friend of those who believe while the unbelievers have no friend
Verily God will admit those who believe and do the right into gardens with streams of water running by. But the unbelievers revel and carouse and subsist like beasts, and Hell will be their residence
How many were the habitations, mightier than your city which has turned you out, which We destroyed; and they did not have a helper
Can one who stands on a clear proof from his Lord, be like one enamoured of his evil deeds and follows his inane desires
The semblance of Paradise promised the pious and devout (is that of a garden) with streams of water that will not go rank, and rivers of milk whose taste will not undergo a change, and rivers of wine delectable to drinkers, and streams of purified honey, and fruits of every kind in them, and forgiveness of their Lord. Are these like those who will live for ever in the Fire and be given boiling water to drink which will cut their intestines to shreds
There are some who listen to you; but as soon as they go from you they say to those who were given knowledge: "What is this he is saying now?" They are those whose hearts have been sealed by God, and they follow their own lusts
But those who are rightly guided will be given greater guidance by Him, and they will have their intrinsic piety
Do they wait for any thing but the Hour (of change), that it may come upon them suddenly? Its signs have already appeared. How then will they be warned when it has come upon them
Know then, therefore, there is no god but He, and ask forgiveness for your sins and those of believing men and women. God knows your wanderings and your destination
Those who believe say: "How is it no Surah was revealed?" But when a categorical Surah is revealed that mentions war, you should see those who are sceptical staring at you like a man in the swoon of death. Alas the woe for them
Obedience and modest speech (would have been more becoming). And when the matter has been determined it is best for them to be true to God
Is it possible that if placed in authority you will create disorder in the land and sever your bonds of relationship
They are those who were condemned by God, whose ears were blocked by Him and their eyes blinded
Do they not ponder on what the Qur'an says? Or have their hearts been sealed with locks
Those who turn their backs after the way of guidance has been opened to them, have been surely tempted by Satan and beguiled by illusory hopes
This was so because they said to those who disdain what God has revealed: "We shall obey you in some things." But God knows their secret intentions well
How will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs
Because they followed what displeases God, and they were averse to pleasing Him. So We nullified their deeds
Do they whose minds are filled with doubt, think that God will not expose their malice
Had We pleased We could have shown them to you that you could know them by their marks, and recognise them from the way they twist their words. Yet God knows all your deeds
We shall try you in order to know who are the fighters among you, and who are men of fortitude, and verify your histories
Surely those who do not believe, and obstruct others from the path of God, and oppose the Prophet after the way of guidance has been opened to them, will not hurt God in the least, and He will nullify all that they have done
O you who believe, obey God and the Prophet, and do not waste your deeds
Those who do not believe and obstruct others from the way of God, and die disbelieving, will not be pardoned by God
So do not become weak-kneed and sue for peace, for you will have the upper hand as God is with you and will not overlook your deeds
Verily the life of this world is no more than a sport and frivolity. If you believe and fear God, he will give you your reward, and will not ask for your possessions
If He asks for all you possess and insist upon it, you will become niggardly, and it will bring out your malevolence
Beware! You are called to spend in the way of God, yet some among you close their fists. But he who is niggardly is so for his own self: God is above need, and it is you who are needy. If you turn away then God will bring other people in your place who, moreover, will not be like you
WE HAVE GIVEN you a splendent victory
That God may save you from earlier and subsequent blames, and complete His favours on you, and guide you on the straight path
And help you with surpassing help
It is He who sent down the sense of security into the hearts of believers so that their faith may increase with belief, -- God's are the armies of the heavens and the earth; and God is all-knowing and all-wise
And that He may admit men and women who believe into gardens with rivers running by, to live for ever there, and absolve their evil, -- This, in the sight of God, will be the great fulfilment
And that He may punish men and women (who are) hypocrites, and idolaters and idolatresses who entertain evil notions of God: It is against them that the wheel of misfortune will turn, and God will be wroth with them, and condemn them. For them He has prepared Hell, an evil destination
For God's are the armies of the heavens and the earth; and God is all-knowing and all-wise
We have sent you as witness (of the truth) and harbinger of good news and a warner
So that (men) may believe in God and His Apostle, and honour Him and revere Him, and sing His praises morning and evening
Those who swear allegiance to you indeed swear allegiance to God; and God's protection is over them. Then whosoever breaks the promise breaks it to his own loss; but whosoever fulfills the promise made to God will receive a great reward from Him
The Arabs of the desert who had stayed behind will now say to you: "We were occupied with our flocks and herds and families, so ask forgiveness for us. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Tell them: "Who can prevail with God for you if He wish you harm or benefit? Surely God is well aware of what you do
In fact you imagined that the Prophet and the faithful would never come back home; and this seemed pleasing to your hearts, and you entertained evil thoughts. You are a people lost
He who does not believe in God and His Apostle (should know) We have prepared for unbelievers a blazing fire
To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He may forgive whosoever He please, and afflict whosoever He will. Yet God is forgiving and kind
Those who had stayed behind will say: "When you depart for taking the spoils, allow us to follow you." They wish to change the word of God. Tell them: "You will not follow us. That is what God has already said before." They will say: "You are envious of our gain." The fact is they understand but little
Say to the desert Arabs who had stayed behind: "You will be called against a formidable people. You will fight them till they surrender. If you obey, then He will give you a good reward; but if you turn back, as you had done before, He will punish you with a grievous affliction
It is not binding on the blind, the lame or the sick (to follow this command); but those who obey God and His Apostle will be admitted by God to gardens with running streams; but those who turn back will suffer a painful doom
God was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree, for He knew well what was in their hearts, and sent down tranquility on them, and rewarded them with an expeditious victory
And the many spoils that they were to take. God is all-mighty and all-wise
God had promised you many spoils that you would capture; so He gave this soon enough to you, and stayed the hands of men from you that it may serve as a sign for believers, and guide you on the straight path
And other (benefits) which you have not yet obtained, are within the compass of God, for God has power over everything
Had the unbelievers fought you they would have turned their backs and not found a protector or helper
This is the law of God, effective as before: You will not find any change in the law of God
It was He who restrained their hands from you in the heart of Makkah, and your hands from them, after He had given you victory over them, as God sees all that you do
It were those who disbelieved who hindered you from (going to) the Holy Mosque, preventing your offerings from arriving at the place of sacrifice. Had it not been for (the presence of) believers, men and women, (among the unbelievers) of whom you were unaware, and whom you might have trampled and thus incurred guilt unknowingly on account of them, (the matter would have been settled). (But this was not done) so that God may admit into His favour whom He willed. If these (believers) had been separated from them, He would have inflicted a grievous punishment on the unbelievers
When the unbelievers fostered a sense of honour in their hearts, a sense of pagan honour, God sent down a sense of tranquility on His Apostle and the believers, and obliged them to an act of self-restraint, for they were deserving and worthy of it. God is cognisant of everything
God has truly made the vision of His Apostle come true: You will surely enter the Holy Mosque in security if God please, without any fear, having shaved your heads and cut your hair. He knew what you did not know, and has vouchsafed you, apart from this, a victory near at hand
It is He who has sent His Apostle with the guidance and the true faith, so that He may exalt it over every other creed. God is sufficient as a witness
Muhammad is the Prophet of God; and those who are with him are severe with infidels but compassionate among themselves. You may see them kneeling and bowing in reverence, seeking His favour and acceptance. Their mark is on their foreheads from the effect of prostrations. Their likeness in the Torah, and their likeness in the Gospel, is like a seed that sends out a stalk, then makes it firm, and it becomes strong and rises straight upon its stem, gladdening the cultivator's heart, in order to fill the unbelievers with dismay. God has promised those who believe and do the right forgiveness and a great reward
O YOU WHO believe, do not forestall the judgements of God and His Apostle, and have fear of God. Verily God hears all and knows everything
O you who believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, and do not speak loudly to him as you do with one another lest your deeds are nullified unconsciously
They who speak in a low voice in the presence of God's Apostle, have had their hearts tried by God for reverence. There is forgiveness for them and a great reward
Many of those who call you from outside the apartments are not considerate
If they had waited for you to come out it would have been better for them. But God is forgiving and kind
O you who believe, if a dissolute person brings some news, verify it first lest you attack a people ignorantly and later regret what you had done
Know that the Apostle of God is among you: If he agreed with you in most matters you would surely come to grief. But God has made faith more desirable to you, and attractive to your hearts, and rendered disbelief and sin and disobedience repugnant. They are those who are well directed
By God's benevolence and His grace. God is all-knowing and all-wise
If two groups of believers come to fight one another, promote peace between them. Then if one of them turns aggressive against the other, fight against the aggressive party till it returns to God's authority. If it does so, make peace among them equitably and be impartial. Verily God loves those who are just
The faithful are surely brothers; so restore friendship among your brothers, and fear God that you may be favoured
O you who believe, men should not laugh at other men, for it may be they are better than them; and women should not laugh at other women, for they may perhaps be better than them. Do not slander one another, nor give one another nick-names. After believing, it is bad to give (another) a bad name. Those who do not repent behave wickedly
O you who believe, avoid most suspicions: Some suspicions are indeed sins. So do not pry into others' secrets and do not backbite. Would any of you like to eat a dead brother's flesh? You would surely be revolted by it Then fear God. He is certainly forgiving and kind
O men, We created you from a male and female, and formed you into nations and tribes that you may recognise each other. He who has more integrity has indeed greater honour with God. Surely God is all-knowing and well-informed
The Arabs of the desert say: "We believe." Tell them: "You do not believe. Better say: 'We submit'; for belief has not yet penetrated your hearts." If you begin to obey God and His Apostle, He will not withhold the least (of the recompense) of your labour. Verily God is forgiving and kind
They alone are believers who come to believe in God and His Apostle, then never doubt again, and struggle wealth and soul in the way of God. They are the truthful and sincere
Say: "Are you trying to convince God of your faithfulness? But God knows all there is in the heavens and the earth, for God has knowledge of everything
They impress upon you that they have submitted. Tell them: "Do not favour me with your submission. In fact God has favoured you by showing you the way to belief, if you are men of truth
Verily God knows the unknown of the heavens and the earth; and God perceives all you do
QAF. I CALL to witness the glorious Qur'an
They are rather surprised that a warner from among themselves has come to them. So the unbelievers say: "This is astonishing
When we are dead and turned to dust, this returning (to life) is most far-fetched
We know what the earth consumes of them, for We have the Book that preserves everything
But no! They called the truth a lie when it came to them; so they are in a confused state
Have they not looked at the sky above them, how We have fashioned and adorned it, and it has no flaw
We stretched the earth and placed upon it firm stabilisers and We made every kind of splendid thing to grow upon it
As instruction and reminder to every penitent creature
And We send down water as a blessing from the sky, and grow gardens with it and the grain for harvest
And tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
As a provision for men, and enlivened a region that was dead. Even thus will be the life after death
The people of Noah, Ar-Rass and Thamud denied before you
As did the people of 'Ad and Pharaoh and the brethren of Lot
And the dwellers of the Wood and people of Tubba'. Each of them denied the apostles. So My threat became a reality
Were We exhausted by the act of the first creation? And yet they are confused about a new creation
He created man and surely know what misdoubts arise in their hearts; for We are closer to him than his jugular vein
When the two (angels) who keep the account, one sitting on the right, one on the left, take it down
There is not a word he utters but an observer is ready (to make note of it)
The palsy of death will surely come. This is what you wished to avert
And the trumpet blast will sound: It would be the Day of Doom
Each soul will come with a driver and a witness
(And the driver will say:) "You were oblivious of this, so we have removed the veil, and how keen is your sight today
His companion will say: "Here is (the record) I have ready with me
Cast each stubborn unbeliever into Hell," (they will be told)
Every obstructor of good, transgressor, and the sceptic
Who had set up another god with God. Cast him into severe torment
His companion will say: "O Lord, I did not lead him to wickedness, but he was himself far astray
Do not argue in My presence. I had announced the promise of doom in advance
There is no changing of My word, nor am I unjust to My creatures
We shall ask Hell that day: "Are you full?" It will answer: "Are there still more
And Paradise will be brought near, not far from those who took heed for themselves and feared God
This is what you had been promised," (will be said) to every penitent who remembered (his duty)
Who feared Ar-Rahman in secret, and came with a penitent heart
Enter it in peace. This is the day of life abiding
Theirs will be whatsoever they wish: And with Us there is more
How many generations have We destroyed before them who were mightier in power than they. Then they searched throughout the land to see if there was a way of escape
Surely there is a reminder in this for whosoever has a heart (to feel), or takes heed
We created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, in six spans, and no weariness came upon Us
So you bear with patience what they say, and sing the praises of your Lord before the rising of the sun and its setting
And glorify Him for some portion of the night, and additional adorations
Take heed that the day the crier calls from a place close (to every one)
The day they actually hear the blast, will be the Day of rising of the dead
We are the one who give life and death, and to Us will be the destination
The day the earth will split asunder they will come out hurriedly. This gathering together is easy for Us
We are cognisant of what they say; but it is not for you to compel them. So keep on reminding through the Qur'an whoever fears My warning
I CALL TO witness those who scatter (dust) by dispersing
And those who bear the load (of rain)
And those who move (on the water) gently
And those who distribute (it) by command
Verily the promise made to you is true
The Judgement will indeed take place
The heavens webbed-with-tracks is witness
You are surely caught in contradictions
From which only he turns who is turned away
Perish will those who just guess and speculate
Who are lost in deception
They ask: "When is the Day of Judgement
The day they will be burnt in the Fire
(And told:) "Taste your punishment. This is what you were trying to hasten
Surely those who fear God and follow the straight path will be amidst gardens and fresh springs of water
Receiving what is given them by their Lord. They were surely the virtuous before this
They slept little in the night
And every morning asked forgiveness
In whose wealth the suppliant and the deprived had a share
There are signs in the earth for those who are firm in their faith
And within yourselves. Can you not perceive
There is in the heavens your sustenance, and whatever has been promised you
By the Lord of the heavens and the earth, this is certainly true even as you speak
Has the story of Abraham's honoured guests come to you
When they came to him, they said: "Peace." He answered: "Peace." They were a people he did not recognise
So he hurried to the house and brought a fatted calf
And placing it before them said: "Won't you eat
He felt afraid of them; but they said: "Have no fear," and gave him the good news of a wise son
His wife came out lamenting, striking her forehead, and said: "I, am old and barren woman
They said: "Thus said your Lord. He is indeed all-wise and all-knowing
He said: "What is then your business, O messengers
They said: "We have been sent to a wicked people
So as to let loose clods of clay on them
Marked by your Lord for those who waste their substance
So We evacuated everyone who was a believer there
But did not find more than a single family of believers
We left a sign in this for those who fear the grievous punishment
As (there was) in Moses when We sent him to the Pharaoh with clear authority
But he turned to his counsellors, and said: "He is a magician or lunatic
So We seized him and his armies, and threw them into the sea, for he was worthy of blame
In 'Ad (also is a sign), when We sent a blasting wind against them
Which turned everything it touched to ashes
And in Thamud, when We said to them: "Enjoy yourselves for a while
But they disobeyed the command of their Lord; so they were destroyed by a thunderbolt, and they could only gape
And neither stand up nor defend themselves
(So had We destroyed) the people of Noah before them: They were surely a sinful people
We built the heavens by Our authority; and We are the Lord of power and expanse
We spread the earth a carpet; what comfort We provide
And We created pairs of everything that you may contemplate
So turn to God. I give you a clear warning from Him
Do not set up another god with God. I give you a clear warning from Him
Even thus no apostle came to those before them but they said: "He is a sorcerer or a mad man
Is this the legacy they have passed down from one to the other? In fact, they are a rebellious people
Turn away from them. You will not be blamed
But go on reminding them, as reminding benefits the believers
I have not created the jinns and men but to worship Me
I want no sustenance from them nor do I want them to feed Me
God is certainly the great provider, Lord of strength and power
Those who do wrong will indeed come to the same end as their fellows (of old). So let them not ask Me to hasten (the punishment)
Alas the woe for those who refuse to believe in the Day which has been promised them
I CALL TO witness the Mount Sinai
And the Scripture inscribed
On a parchment scroll unrolled
The house ever-peopled
The roof raised high
And the swollen sea
The punishment of your Lord is certain to come
There is none who could avert it
The day the sky will tremble
The mountains move and fly away
Will be the day of woe for those
Who, ignoring the Reality, engage in pleasantries
The day they are dragged and pushed into Hell
(And told:) "This is the fire which you denied
Is it magic, or you cannot see
Roast in it. Bear it with patience or impatience, it will be the same for you. You will be requited for what you had done
Those who fear God and follow the straight path will surely be in gardens and in bliss
Rejoicing at what their Lord has given them; and their Lord will preserve them from the torment of Hell
Eat and drink with relish," (they will be told), (as recompense) for what you had done
They would recline on couches set in rows, paired with fair companions (clean of thought and) bright of eye
And those who believed, and whose progeny also followed them in their faith, will be united with their offspring. We will not deprive them of their labour in the least. Every man is bound to what he does
We shall give them fruits and meats, and what they desire
They will exchange cups of wine free of (incitement to) pleasantry or sin
And young attendants like pearls within their shells, will go round
They will ask each other questions
Saying: "We were also once full of fear at home
But God has been gracious to us, and has saved us from the torment of scorching wind
We used to pray to Him erstwhile; He is the just and merciful
Remind them, therefore, that by the grace of your Lord you are neither a soothsayer nor possessed
Do they say: "He is a poet for whom we expect an adverse turn of fortune
Tell them: "Keep on expecting, I am expecting with you
Does their reasoning prompt them to this, or they are a people rebellious
Or do they say: "He has fabricated it?" In fact, they will never believe
So let them bring a discourse like it, if they are truthful
Or were they created of themselves? Or are they the creators
Or have they created the heavens and the earth? In fact they are certain of nothing
Do they possess the treasures of your Lord? Or are they the treasurers
Or do they have a ladder (climbing which) they can hear (the secrets of heaven)? Let one who has heard then bring a clear proof
Has (God) daughters and they sons
Or do you demand any wages from them so that they are burdened with expense
Or do they have knowledge of the Unknown which they write down
Or do they want to stage a deception? -- Then only those who do not believe will be the ones who will be tricked
Or do they have a god apart from God? He is too exalted for what they associate with Him
If they should see a segment falling from the sky, they would say: "It is only a massive cloud
So, leave them until they face their day (of doom) when they will be stunned
Their deception will not avail them in the least on that day, nor will they be helped
Surely there are other torments besides this for those who are wicked, though most of them do not know
Await the judgement of your Lord, for you are always before Our eyes, and glorify your Lord with praises when you rise
And glorify Him in the night and when the stars begin to wane
I CALL TO witness the star of the pleiades when it has dipped
That your companion is not confused, nor has he gone astray
Neither does he speak of his own will
This is only revelation communicated
Bestowed on him by the Supreme Intellect
Lord of power and wisdom. So he acquired poise and balance
And reached the highest pinnacle
Then he drew near and drew closer
Until a space of two bow (arcs) or even less remained
When He revealed to His votary what He revealed
His heart did not falsify what he perceived
Will you dispute with him what he saw
He saw Him indeed another time
By the Lote-tree beyond which none can pass
Close to which is the Garden of Tranquility
When the Lote-tree was covered over with what it was covered over
Neither did sight falter nor exceed the bounds
Indeed he saw some of the greatest signs of His Lord
Have you considered Lat and 'Uzza
And Manat, the other third (of the pagan deities)
Are there sons for you, and daughters for Him
This is certainly an unjust apportioning
These are only names which you and your fathers have invented. No authority was sent down by God for them. They only follow conjecture and wish-fulfilment, even though guidance had come to them already from their Lord
Can ever man get what he desires
To God belong the End and the Beginning
Many as the angels be in heaven their intercession will not avail in the least without God's permission for whomsoever He please and approve
Those who do not believe in the Hereafter give the angels names of females
Yet they have no knowledge of this, and follow nothing but conjecture, but conjecture cannot replace the truth
So you turn away from him who turns away from Our rememberance and wants nothing but the life of this world
This is the farthest limit of their knowledge. Surely your Lord alone knows best who has strayed away from the path and who has come to guidance
To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth, that He may requite those who do evil, in accordance with their deeds, and those who do good with good
As for those who avoid the greater sins and shameful acts, except minor trespasses, your Lord's forgiveness surely has great amplitude. He is fully knowledgeable of you as He produced you from the earth, and since you were a foetus in your mother's womb. So do not assert your goodness; he is better who takes heed and preserves himself
Have you seen him who turns his back
Who gives but little, and is niggardly
Has he knowledge of the Unknown that he perceives everything
Has he not heard what is contained in the Book of Moses
And of Abraham who fulfilled his trust
That no one who carries a burden bears another's load
That a man receives but only that for which he strives
That his endeavours will be judged
And only then will he receive his recompense in full
And that to your Lord is your returning
That it is He who makes you happy and morose
And He who ordains death and life
That He created pairs, male and female
From a drop of semen when emitted
That the second creation is incumbent on Him
That it is He who makes you rich and contented
That He is the Lord of Sirius
That it was He who destroyed the 'Ad of old
And Thamud, and did not leave them
Like the people of Noah before them, who were surely oppressors and rebellious
And He overthrew the Cities of the Plain
So that they were covered over by what they were covered over
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
He who warns you is one of the warners of old
What is to come is imminent
There is no one to unveil it apart from God
Are you astonished at this news
And keep laughing and do not weep
Indulging in pleasantries
Bow instead in adoration before God and worship Him
THE HOUR HAS come and split is the moon
But if they see a sign they turn away, and say: "This is the same old lie continuing
And deny, and follow their own vain desires; but every matter is determined at its time
Messages deterring them from evil had come to them
Containing consummate wisdom; yet warnings were of no avail
So turn away from them. When on the Day the crier calls to the painful business
They will come out of the graves with downcast eyes like an expanding swarm of locusts
They will hasten forward to the caller, gazes fixed. And the unbelievers will say: "This is the day of untold woe
The people of Noah had denied before them, and had called Our votary a liar, and said: "He is possessed," and repulsed him
So he prayed to his Lord: "I am helpless, deliver me
And We opened up the flood gates of the sky with water pouring down in torrents
And We opened up the springs of the earth; and the waters met for a decreed end
But We bore him on a (vessel made) of planks and oakum
Which sailed right under Our eyes: A recompense for him who had been denied
And We left it as a sign. Is there anyone who will be warned
How was then My punishment and My commination
Easy have We made the Qur'an to understand: So is there any one who will be warned
The 'Ad had also disavowed. How was then My punishment and My commination
We let loose against them a violent roaring wind on a day of ill omen, continuous
Which snatched away men as though they were palm trees pulled out by the roots
How was then My punishment and My commination
Easy have We made the Qur'an to understand: So is there any one who will pay heed
The Thamud rejected the warnings
And said: "Should we follow only one man among us? In that case we shall he in error and insane
Was he the one of all of us to have been given the exposition? He is surely an impudent liar
Tomorrow they will know who is the impudent liar
We shall send the she-camel to try them. So watch them, and be constant
Tell them that the water is to be apportioned between them (and her); and every turn of drinking will be fixed (for each)
But they called their commander, who seized and hamstrung her
How was then My punishment of which they had been warned
We sent a single blast against them, and they were reduced to husks of a decayed fence
Easy have We made the Qur'an to understand: So is there any one who will be warned
The people of Lot rejected the warnings
We sent a stone-hurtling storm against them, except the family of Lot whom We saved in the early hours of the morning
As a favour from Us. That is how We reward the grateful
He had warned them of Our might, but they passed over the warnings
They lusted after his guests, so We put out their eyes (and said): "Taste My punishment and My commination
And early in the morning the decreed punishment came upon them
So now taste My punishment and My commination
Easy have We made the Qur'an to understand: So is there any one who will be warned
The warnings came to the people of Pharaoh
They rejected each one of Our signs. So We seized them with the grip of one mighty and powerful
Are the unbelievers among you any better than they? Or is there immunity for you in the Scriptures
Or do they say: "We are a well-accoutred army
The army will be routed and put to flight
Surely the Hour will be the moment of their promise, and that moment will be calamitous and distressing
Surely the sinners are misguided and insane
On that Day they will be dragged into the fire faces foremost, (and told:) "Taste the feel of Hell
We have indeed created all things by measure
And Our command is but one (word) swift as the winking of an eye
We have destroyed the likes of you in the past: So is there any one who will be warned
All things they do are (recorded) in the books
All things small or great have been written down
Surely those who fear God and follow the straight path will be amidst gardens and light
At the still centre in the proximity of the King all-powerful
AR-RAHMAN
Bestowed the Qur'an
Created man
And taught him to express clearly
The sun and moon revolve to a computation
And the grasses and the trees bow (to Him) in adoration
He raised the sky and set the Balance
So that none may err against the scales
And observe correct measure, weigh with justice, and not cheat the balance
He positioned the earth for all the creatures
There are fruits of all kinds on it, and date-palms with their clusters sheathed
Grain with husk, and fragrant grasses
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
He created man of fermented clay dried tinkling hard like earthen ware
And created jinns from the white-hot flame of fire
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
Lord of the two Easts, Lord of the two Wests
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
He has set two seas in motion that flow side by side together
With an interstice between them which they cannot cross
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
Out of them come pearls and coral
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
His are the high-sailed vessels in deep ocean like the mountains
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
All that is on the earth is passing
But abiding is the glory of your Lord, full of majesty and beneficence
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
All those there are in the heavens and the earth turn to Him with solicitation, intent on His purpose all the time
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
We shall soon be free to turn to you, O weary caravans
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
O society of jinns and men, cross the bounds of the heavens and the earth if you have the ability, then pass beyond them; but you cannot unless you acquire the law
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
Let loose at you will be smokeless flames of fire so that you will not be able to defend yourselves
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
When the sky will split asunder, and turn rosy like the dregs of annointing oil
Which of the favours of your Lord will you then deny
Neither man nor jinn will be questioned on that day about his sin
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
The sinners will be recognised by their marks, and seized by the forelock and their feet
Which of the favours of your Lord will you then deny
This is Hell the sinners called a lie
They will go round and around between it and boiling water
Which of the favours of your Lord will you then deny
But for him who lived in awe of the sublimity of his Lord, there will be two gardens
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
Full of overhanging branches
Which of the favours of your Lord will you then deny
With two springs of water flowing through them both
Which of the favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
In both of them there will be every kind of fruits in pairs
Which of the favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
Reclining there on carpets lined with brocade, fruits of the garden hanging low within reach
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
In them maidens with averted glances, undeflowered by man or by jinn before them
Which of the favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
As though rubies and pearls
Which of the favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
Should the reward of goodness be aught else but goodness
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
And besides these two other gardens
Which of the favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
Of darkest verdant green
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
With two fountains gushing constantly
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
With fruits in them, and dates and pomegranates
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
In them good and comely maidens
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
Houris cloistered in pavilions
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
Undeflowered by man or by jinn before them
How many favours of your Lord will then both of you deny
Reclining on green cushions and rich carpets excellent
How many favours of your Lord will you then deny
Blessed be the name of your Lord, full of majesty and beneficience
WHEN WHAT IS to happen comes to pass
Which is bound to happen undoubtedly
Degrading (some) and exalting (others)
When the earth is shaken up convulsively
The mountains bruised and crushed
Turned to dust, floating in the air
You will become three categories
Those of the right hand -- how (happy) will be those of the right hand
Then those of the left hand -- how (unhappy) will be those of the left hand
Then the foremost, how pre-excellent
Who will be honoured
In gardens of tranquility
A number of the earlier peoples
And a few of later ages
On couches wrought of gold
Reclining face to face
Youths of never-ending bloom will pass round to them
Cups and decanters, beakers full of sparkling wine
Unheady, uninebriating
And such fruits as they fancy
Bird meats that they relish
And companions with big beautiful eyes
Like pearls within their shells
As recompense for all they had done
They will hear no nonsense there or talk of sin
Other than "Peace, peace" the salutation
As for those of the right hand -- how (happy) those of the right hand
They will be in (the shade) of thornless lote
And acacia covered with heaps of bloom
Lengthened shadows
Gushing water
And fruits numberless
Unending, unforbidden
And maidens incomparable
We have formed them in a distinctive fashion
And made them virginal
Loving companions matched in age
For those of the right hand
A crowd of earlier generations
And a crowd of the later
But those of the left hand -- how (unhappy) those of the left hand
Will be in the scorching wind and boiling water
Under the shadow of thick black smoke
Neither cool nor agreeable
They were endowed with good things
But persisted in that greater sin
And said: "What! When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, shall we then be raised again
And so will our fathers
Say: "Indeed, the earlier and the later generations
Will be gathered together on a certain day which is predetermined
Then you, the erring and the deniers
Will eat of the tree of Zaqqum
Fill your bellies with it
And drink over it scalding water
Lapping it up like female camels raging of thirst with disease
Such will be their welcome on the Day of Judgement
It is He who created you, then why do you not affirm the truth
Just consider (the semen) that you emit
Do you create it, or We are its creator
We have incorporated death in your constitution, and We shall not be hindered
From replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know
You have known the first creation, then why do you not reflect
Just ponder over what you sow
Do you give it its increase, or are We the giver
We could turn it, if We pleased, into straw; then you would rue the day
(And say:) "We have fallen into debt
Indeed, we have been deprived of the fruits of our labour
Consider the water that you drink
Do you send it down from the clouds, or We send it down
We could make it brackish, if We pleased; so why do you not acknowledge thanks
Consider the fire that you strike (and get by friction)
Have you raised its tree, or We have raised it
We have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy
So glorify your Lord, the most supreme
So I call the placement of the stars to witness
And this surely is great evidence if you can understand
That this is indeed the glorious Qur'an
(Inscribed) in the well-kept Book
Only they can reach it who are clean (of mind)
It has been revealed by the Lord of all the worlds
Then why do you dissimulate this Revelation
You live by calling it a lie
Then how is it that when the (dying) breath is withdrawn into the throat (and rattles)
And you wait for the moment (of death)
We are closer to him than you, even though you cannot see
Then why, if you are not indebted (to Us for life)
Can you not bring him back? (Answer) if you are truthful
Then, if he is one of the honoured
There will be peace and plenty, and gardens of tranquility for him
If he is of those of the right hand
There will be the salutation by those of the right hand: "Peace on you
But if he is of the deniers and the errants
The welcome will be boiling water
And the roasting in Hell
This is indeed the ultimate truth
Then praise your Lord, the most supreme
WHATSOEVER IS IN the heavens and the earth sings the praises of God. He is all-mighty and all-wise
His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, He is the giver of life and death, and He has power over everything
He is the first and He the last, the transcendent and the immanent; and He has knowledge of everything
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six stages, then assumed the throne. He knows whatsoever enters the earth, and whatsoever comes out of it, and what comes down from the sky and what goes up to it; and He is with you wheresoever you may be, and He perceives whatsoever you do
His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all things will go back to Him
He turns night into day, and turns day into night; and He knows whatsoever is in your hearts
Believe in God and His Apostle, and spend of what He has given you as His trustee. And those of you who believe and spend in charity will have a great reward
What has come upon you that you believe not in God, though the Prophet is calling you to believe in your Lord? And He has already taken your pledge, if you are believers
It is He who sends down splendent revelations to His votary that he may take you out of darkness into light; for surely God is gracious and kind to you
What has come upon you that you do not spend in the way of God, when the heritage of the heavens and the earth belongs to God? Those of you who spent before the victory and fought, are not equal (to those who did not). They are higher in position than those who spent after (the victory) and fought. To each one God has made the promise of excellence, for God is aware of all you do
Who will give a goodly loan to God which He will double for him, and be for him a splendid reward
The day you see the believers, men and women, with their light advancing ahead and to the right of them, (they will be told:) "There is good news for you this day, of gardens with rivers flowing by where you will live for ever." This will be the great attainment
The day the hypocrites, men and women, will say to the believers: "Wait for us that we may borrow a little light from your light," they will be told: "Go back, and look for your light." A wall shall be raised between them in which there will be a door. Within it will be benevolence and retribution without
They will call to them: "Were we not with you?" They will answer: "Certainly; but then you let yourselves be tempted, and waited in expectation but were suspicious and were deceived by vain desires, till the decree of God came to pass, and the deceiver duped you in respect of God
So no ransom will be accepted of you on this day, or of those who refused to believe. Hell will be your refuge and the only friend -- and how evil a destination
Has the moment not yet come when the hearts of believers should be moved by the thought of God and the truth that has been sent down, so that they should not be like those who received the Book before them but whose hearts were hardened after a lapse of time, and many of them turned disobedient
Know that God enlivens the earth even after it has died. We have explained to you clearly Our signs that you may understand
Surely the men and women who spend in charity and give a goodly loan to God, will have it doubled for them and will receive a generous reward
Those who believe in God and His apostles are true of word and deed; and by their Lord are considered testifiers of the truth. They have their guerdon and their light. As for those who do not believe and reject Our revelations, are the people of Hell
Know that the life of this world is only a frolic and mummery, an ornamentation, boasting and bragging among yourselves, and lust for multiplying wealth and children. It is like rain so pleasing to the cultivator for his vegetation which sprouts and swells, and then begins to wither, and you see it turn to yellow and reduced to chaff. There is severe punishment in the Hereafter, but also forgiveness from God, and acceptance. As for the life of this world, it is no more than merchandise of vanity
Hasten for the forgiveness of your Lord and Paradise whose expanse is as wide as that of the heavens and the earth, which has been prepared for those who believe in God and His apostles. This is the bounty of God which He bestows on whosoever He please; and the bounty of God is infinite
There is no calamity that befalls the earth or your own selves but in accordance with the law (of causation) before We make it evident. This is indeed how the law of God works inevitably
Lest you grieve for what you missed, or rejoice at what you received. God does not love the egoist and the braggart
Who hold back what they possess and enjoin stinginess on others. Whoever turns away (from God, should remember) that God is self-sufficient, worthy of praise
We have surely sent apostles with clear signs, and sent with them the Book and the Balance, so that men may stand by justice; and We sent down iron which causes much distress but also has advantages for men, so that God may know who helps Him and His apostles in secret. Verily God is all-powerful and all-mighty
We sent Noah and Abraham, and gave prophethood to their progeny and the Book, and some of them are well-directed, but many of them are disobedient
Then in their train We sent Our apostles, and succeeding them Jesus, son of Mary, and gave him the Gospel, and put into the hearts of his followers compassion and kindness. But they created monasticism which had not been prescribed for them by Us except for seeking the pleasure of God; yet they did not observe it as it should have been rightly observed. So We gave those among them who were believers their reward; but most of them are disobedient
O you who believe, have fear of displeasing God, and believe in His Prophet. He will give you twice as much of His bounty and place a light for you to walk in, and forgive you, for God is forgiving and kind
So that the people of the Book may know that they have not the least power over the bounty of God, and that the bounty is wholly in the hands of God to give whosoever He please, for God is the master of infinite bounty
GOD CERTAINLY HEARD what the woman who argued with you about her husband, said, and complained to God; and God heard your interrogation. Verily God hears all, and sees everything
Those of you who divorce your wives by calling them 'mothers,' cannot (make them) their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave birth to them. They surely utter what is unseemly and a lie. But God is forbearing and forgiving
Those who call their wives their mothers then revoke what they had said, should free a slave before having physical contact (with them). This is to warn you, as God is aware of what you do
If one does not have the means (of doing so) then he should fast for two months continuously before he has physical contact; but any one who is unable to do so, should feed sixty needy persons. This (is enjoined) so that you may be faithful to God and His Apostle. These are the limits set by God. As for the unbelievers, there is painful punishment for them
Those who oppose God will be disgraced, as those before them were. We have sent down very clear signs. For unbelievers there is a shameful punishment
On the day when God will raise them up together, He will tell them what they did. God takes account of it although they forget, for all things are evident to God
Have you not considered that God knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth? No three persons confer secretly but He is the fourth among them, and no five but He is the sixth; and neither fewer nor more but He is with them wheresoever they be. And on the Day of Judgement He will announce their deeds to them. Verily God has knowledge of everything
Have you not considered those who were forbidden to conspire, but reverted after a time to what was forbidden them, and conspired evil, rebellion and disobedience to the Prophet? Yet when they come to you they greet you with a greeting even God does not greet you with; and say to themselves, "Why doesn't God punish us for what we say?" Hell is sufficient for them, in which they will be burnt: And what an evil consequence
O you who believe, when you converse privately, do not talk of iniquity, rebellion, and disobedience to the Prophet, but talk of goodness and piety, and fear God before whom you will be gathered
Surely scheming is the work of Satan that he may cause the faithful grief; but he cannot harm them unless God dispense. So in God should the believers place their trust
O you who believe, when you are told to make room in the assemblies, then make room; God will give you more room to spread. When you are told to rise, then rise; God will raise those of you who believe, and those who have knowledge, in position. God is aware of what you do
O you who believe, if you confer with the Prophet in private, give alms in the name of God before you go to confer. This is better for you and becoming. If you do not have the means, then surely God is forgiving and kind
Are you afraid of giving alms before confering? Then, if you cannot do this, and God forgives you, be constant in your devotional obligations and pay the due share of your wealth for the welfare of others, and obey God and His Prophet. God is aware of all you do
Have you not seen those who have taken a people who have roused the wrath of God, as friends? They are neither of you nor of them, and swear to a lie, and knowingly
God has reserved a severe punishment for them. Evil indeed are the things they do
They have made their oaths a shield, and obstruct people from the way of God. There is shameful punishment for them
Neither their wealth nor children will avail them against God. They are the people of Hell, and there will abide for ever
On the day that God will raise them together, they will swear before Him as they swear before you, and imagine they are on the right path. Is it not they who are liars
Satan has got the better of them. and made them forget to remember God. Indeed they belong to Satan's faction. Will not Satan's faction perish
Surely those who oppose God and His Prophet will be among the vilest
God has decreed: "I will prevail, I and My apostles." Verily God is powerful and all-mighty
You will not find those who believe in God and the Day of Resurrection, loving those who oppose God and His Prophet, even though they be their fathers, sons, or brothers or their kin. God has inscribed on their hearts belief, and has succoured them with His own grace, and will admit them to gardens with rivers flowing by, where they will abide for ever, God accepting them, and they, happy in the pleasure of God. They are verily the army of God. Will not the army of God be victorious
WHATEVER IS IN the heavens and the earth sings the praises of God. He is all-mighty and all-wise
It is He who drove those among the people of the Book who refused to believe, from their homes for the first confrontation. You did not think that they would go away, and they imagined that their forts would protect them against God. But God came upon them from where they did not suspect, and filled their hearts with terror, so that they destroyed their homes with their own hands (or were destroyed) by the hands of believers. So take heed, O men of sight
Had God not decreed the expulsion for them He would have punished them in this world, and in the next the punishment of Hell would have been theirs
For they had opposed God and His Apostle; and whosoever opposes God, then God is severe in retribution
The palm trees that you cut down or left standing intact was by God's dispensation, so that He might disgrace the transgressors
You did not charge with horse or camel for whatever (spoils) God gave His Apostle from them. In any case, God gives authority to His Apostle over whomsoever He please. God has power over everything
Whatever booty God gives to His Apostle from the people of the cities, is for God and His Apostle, the near relations, the orphans, the needy and wayfarers, so that it does not concentrate in the hands of those who are rich among you. Accept what the Apostle gives you, and refrain from what he forbids, and take heed for yourself and fear God. Surely God is severe of retribution
The spoils are also for the poor emigrants who were deprived of their homes and possessions and are seeking the bounty and protection of God, and are helping God and His Apostle. They are the ones who are true of word and deed
Those who came to the city and to faith before them, love those who take refuge with them, and do not feel for themselves any need for what is given them, and give them preference over themselves even if they are indigent. Whoever preserves himself from his own greed will be prosperous
(And the spoils are for) those who came after them, who say: "O Lord, forgive us and our brothers who came to faith before us, and do not put a grudge in our hearts against those who believe O Lord, You are compassionate and kind
Have you never considered the hypocrites? They say to their brethren among the people of the Book who do not believe: "If you are driven out we shall go with you, and will not listen to any one in what concerns you; and if there is war against you, we shall aid you." But God is witness they are liars
If they are driven out, they will not go with them; and if they are attacked, they will not aid them. And even if they aided them, they will turn their backs, then they will not be helped
Surely they have greater fear of you in their hearts than of God, because they do not understand
They will not fight you in a body except in fortified cities, or from behind the walls. Their enmity among themselves is great. You think they are united, but divided are their hearts. That is because these people are devoid of sense
Like those who had tasted the gravity of their actions a little before them. There is a grievous punishment for them
(They are) like Satan who says to man: "Do not believe;" and when he becomes a disbeliever, he says: "I have nothing to do with you. I fear God, the Lord of all the worlds
Both of them will end up in Hell, where they will abide for ever. This is the punishment for the wicked
O you who believe, be fearful of God. Let each soul consider what it has sent (of good deeds) in advance for the morrow, and fear God. Surely God is aware of what you do
And be not like those who have forgotten God, so that God has made them forget themselves. Such are the reprobates
Alike are not the inmates of Hell and the residents of Paradise. The men of Paradise will be felicitous
If We had sent down this Qur'an to a mountain you would have seen it turn desolate and split into two for fear of God. We offer these examples to men that they may think and reflect
He is God; there is no god but He, the knower of the unknown and the known. He is the benevolent, ever-merciful
He is God; there is no god but He, the King, the Holy, the Preserver, Protector, Guardian, the Strong, the Powerful, Omnipotent. Far too exalted is God for what they associate with Him
He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner. His are all the names beautiful. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings His praises. He is all-mighty and all-wise
O YOU WHO BELIEVE, do not take My enemies and your enemies as friends. You show kindness to them, but they reject the true way that has come to you. They expelled the Prophet and you, for you believe in God your Lord. If you have come out to struggle in My cause having sought My acceptance, (do not be) friendly with them in secret. I know what you hide and what you disclose. Whoever of you does this will have gone astray from the right path
If they gain ascendancy over you, they will become your enemies, and employ their hands and tongues with evil designs, and wish that you also became disbelievers
Neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the Day of Resurrection. He will judge between you, for God sees what you do
You have an excellent model in Abraham and those who were with him, when he said to his people: "We are through with you, and those you worship other than God. We reject you. Enmity and hate have come between you and us for ever, unless you believe in God the One," -- except for what he said to his father: "I shall ask forgiveness for you, but I have no power to prevail with God for you." "O Lord, we place our trust in You, and turn to You in penitence, and to You is our returning
O Lord, make us not an example of punishment for infidels, and forgive us, O Lord. You are all-mighty and all-wise
Those of you who have hope in God and the Last Day have certainly a good example in them. But whosoever turns away, then surely God is above concern, worthy of praise
It maybe that God will create love between you and your enemies. God is all-powerful, and God is forgiving, ever-merciful
God does not forbid you from being kind and acting justly towards those who did not fight over faith with you, nor expelled you from your homes. God indeed loves those who are just
He only forbids you from making friends with those who fought over faith with you and banished you from your homes, and aided in your exile. Whoever makes friends with them is a transgressor
O believers, when believing women come over to you as refugees, then examine them. God alone is cognisant of their faith. If you find that they are believers, do not send them back to unbelievers. They are not lawful for them, nor are infidels lawful for believing women. Give the unbelievers what they have spent on them. There is no sin if you marry them provided you give their dowers to them. Do not retain your (marriage) ties with unbelieving women. Ask for the return of what you have spent (on them); and the unbelievers should ask for the return of what they have spent. This is the judgement of God. He judges between you. God is all-knowing and all-wise
If any of your women go away to the unbelievers, and you succeed in your turn (and have a chance of getting spoils), then give to those whose wives have so gone away as much as they had spent on them; but take heed and fear God in whom you believe
O Prophet, when believing women come to you and swear on oath that they will not associate anything with God, nor steal, nor fornicate, nor kill their children, nor accuse others for what they have fabricated themselves, nor disobey you in any rightful thing, then you should accept their allegiance, and ask forgiveness of God for them. Certainly God is forgiving and kind
O you who believe, do not make friends with those who have suffered the anger of God by having become despondent of the life to come like those unbelievers who are despondent of those who are in the graves
ALL THAT IS in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of God. He is all-mighty and all-wise
O you who believe, why do you profess what you do not practise
Saying what you do not practice is odious to God
Surely God loves those who fight in His cause in full formations as though they were a compact wall
When Moses said to his people: "O my people, why do you afflict me though you know that I have been sent to you by God?" But when they turned aside God made their hearts turn farther away; for God does not show the transgressors the way
And when Jesus, son of Mary, said: "O children of Israel, I am sent to you by God to confirm the Torah (sent) before me, and to give you good tidings of an apostle who will come after me, whose name is Ahmad (the praised one)." Yet when he has come to them with clear proofs, they say: "This is only magic
Who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against God when he is called to submit? God does not show the evil-doers the way
They want to extinguish the light of God by uttering blasphemies. But God wills to perfect His light, however the unbelievers may dislike it
It is He who sent His Apostle with the guidance and the true way to raise it above all faiths, however the idolaters may dislike it
O you who believe, may I offer you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment
Come to believe in God and His Apostle, and struggle in the cause of God, wealth and soul. This will be good for you, if you can understand
He will forgive you your sins and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing by, and excellent mansions in the garden of Eden. This will be a great fulfilment
And (He will give you) what is dearest to you -- help from God and early victory. So give good tidings to those who believe
O you who believe, be helpers of God, as Jesus, son of Mary, had said to the disciples: "Who will help me in the way of God?" and they had answered: "We are the helpers of God." Then a section among the children of Israel believed, but a section among them did not. So We helped those who believed against their enemies, and they prevailed over them
ALL THAT IS in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of God the King, the Holy, Omnipotent, the Wise
It is He who raised among the gentiles an apostle from amongst them, who recites His revelations to them, reforms them and teaches them the Scripture and the Law, for before him they were clearly in error
And for others among them who have not joined them yet. He is all-mighty and all-wise
This is the bounty of God, He gives whosoever He please. God is master of great bounty
The likeness of those who were charged with (the law of) the Torah which they did not observe, is that of a donkey who carries a load of books (oblivious of what they contain). How wretched the semblance of the people who deny the words of God! God does not show an unjust people the way
Say: "O you Jews, if you claim that you are the favourites of God apart from all men, then wish for death, if you speak the truth
But they will never wish for death because of what they had done in the past, and God knows the sinners well
Tell them: "Death from which you run, will surely come to you. You will then be sent back to Him who knows the unknown and the known, who will tell you what you used to do
O you who believe, when the call to prayer is made on the day of congregation, hasten to remember God, putting aside your business. This is better for you if you can understand
And when the service of prayer is over spread out in the land, and look for the bounty of God. and remember God a great deal that you may prosper
Yet when they see some buying and selling, or some sport, they go for it, leaving you standing. Tell them: "What is with God is better than your sport and commerce. And God is the best of providers
WHEN THE HYPOCRITES come to you, they say: "We affirm that you are the Apostle of God." God indeed knows you are His Apostle. God bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars
They have made their oaths a shield in order to obstruct others from the way of God. It is certainly evil what they do
That is because they came to believe, and then renounced (their faith). So their hearts were sealed; and now they do not understand
Pleasing seem their persons when you look at them; and when they talk, you listen to their speech. Yet they are like the wooden panelling of a wall. They imagine every rebuke to be directed against them. They are the enemies, beware of them. May God damn them, how pervert are they
When you tell them: "Come, let the Apostle of God ask forgiveness for you," they turn their heads, and you see them turning away with arrogance
Whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask, it is all the same; God will not forgive them. Surely God does not show a disobedient people the way
They are the ones who say: "Do not spend on those who are with the Apostle of God till they break away (from him)." To God belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth; but the hypocrites do not understand
They say: "If we now go back to Madina, the stronger will turn the weaker out." But power belongs to God, His Apostle and the faithful, though the hypocrites do not know
O you who believe, let not your wealth and children make you negligent of the remembrance of God. Those who do so will be losers
Spend of what We have given you before death comes to one of you, when he will say: "O Lord, why did you not defer my term for a while that I could give alms and be among the doers of good
But God does not grant a soul respite once its term has come to end. And God is aware of what you do
ALL THAT THERE is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of God. His the sovereignty and His is the praise, and He has power over everything
It is He who created you, though one of you is an infidel and one of you a believer; yet God perceives what you do
He created the heavens and the earth with deliberation, and gave you form, and shaped you well; and to Him is your returning
He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you hide and what you disclose; God knows what is in the hearts
Has not the account of those who disbelieved before come to you, who tasted the torment of their action, and for whom is grievous punishment
This was so because their apostles came to them with clear proofs, but they said: "What. Can a mortal show us the way?" And they denied and turned away; but God was unconcerned. God is all-sufficient, worthy of praise
The unbelievers claim that they will not be raised again. Tell them: "Why not? By my Lord, you will certainly be raised again, and then informed of what you had done. That is how the law of God works inevitably
So believe in God, His Apostle and the Light We have sent down. God is well aware of what you do
The day He will gather you together on the Day of Gathering, will be the day of Judgement. He who believed and did the right, will have his evil deeds expunged by God and admitted to gardens with rivers flowing by, and abide there perpetually. This will be the great achievement of success
Those who did not believe and denied Our revelations will be inmates of Hell, where they will abide for ever, and how evil a journey's end
No calamity befalls unless God dispenses. He guides the heart of whosoever believes in God; and God has knowledge of everything
Obey God and obey His Apostle. If you turn away, the duty of the Apostle is to convey the message clearly
God: There is no god but He; and in God should believers place their trust
O believers, some of your spouses and children are your enemies, so beware of them! Yet if you forbear, overlook, and forgive, God is indeed forgiving and kind
Your wealth and children are surely meant as trial for you: But with God is the great reward
So fear God as much as you can, and listen and obey, and spend in charity for your own good. He who is saved from his own avarice will be successful
If you lend a goodly loan to God, He will double it for you, and forgive you. God knows the worth of good deeds and is clement
The knower of the unknown and the known, all-mighty and all-wise
O PROPHET WHEN you divorce women, divorce them at their appointed period, and calculate that period, and fear God, your Lord. Do not expel them from their houses, nor should they go away themselves, unless they are openly guilty of adultery. These are the limits set by God. Any one who exceeds the limits set by God sins against his own self. You never know that God may perchance lead to a new situation after this
When they have reached their appointed time, then either keep them lawfully or let them go honourably; but have two witnesses from among you, and give truthful evidence for (being acceptable to) God. This is to warn him who believes in God and the Last Day. God will furnish a way out for him who fears Him
And provide for him from where he does not reckon. God is sufficient for him who places his trust in Him. Certainly God fulfills His purpose. God has indeed fixed a measure of everything
As for your women who have lost hope of menstruation, and in case you have a doubt, the prescribed period (of waiting) for them is three months, as also for those who have not menstruated yet. As for those who are pregnant, their prescribed period is until the delivery of the child. God will make things easy for him who is mindful of God
This is the commandment of God that is sent down to you. God will forgive the ills of those who fear Him, and increase their reward
House the (divorced) women where you live, according to your means; but do not harass them so as to reduce them to straitened circumstances. If they are pregnant, then spend on them until they give birth to the child. And if they suckle the child for you, then make the due payment to them, and consult each other appropriately. But if you find this difficult, let some other woman suckle (the child) for her
Let the man of means spend according to his means, and he whose means are limited, should spend of what God has given him. God does not burden a soul beyond what He has given him. God will bring ease after hardship
How many habitations rebelled against their Lord's command and His apostles; but We took them to severe task, and punished them with the harshest punishment
So they tasted the pain of their actions; and the consequence of their deeds was ruin
God has prepared for them severe punishment. So, you men of wisdom, and those who believe, take heed for yourselves and fear God. God has indeed sent down a Reminder for you
An Apostle who recites before you the explicating revelations of God that He may bring those who believe and do the right out of darkness into light. Whosoever believes in God and does the right, He will admit into gardens with rivers flowing by, where they will abide for ever. How excellent a provision has God made for him
It is God who created several skies, and as many earths. The commandment is sent down among them so that you may know that God has power over everything, and everything is held within the knowledge of God
O PROPHET, WHY should you forbid (yourself) what God has made lawful for you, in order to please your wives? Yet God is forgiving and kind
Surely God has sanctioned the dissolution of your vows. God is your Lord: He is all-knowing, and all-wise
When the Prophet told one of his wives something in confidence and she disclosed it, God revealed this to him. So he made some of it known to her, and held back some. When, however, he informed her about it, she asked: "Who told you this?" He said: "I was told this by the All-knowing, All-Informed
If both of you two (women) turn to God in penitence (it would be better). Your hearts have been impaired; and if you assist one another against him, then surely his helper is God, and Gabriel and the righteous believers, and, besides them, the angels are his helpers
In case he divorces you, his Lord will give him better wives in return, who will be modest, true believers, obedient to God, repentant, observant of prayer and fasting, both widows and virgins
O you who believe, save yourselves and your families from the Fire whose fuel is men and rocks, over which are appointed angels stern and severe as wardens who never disobey what God commands them, and do what they are commanded
(And say:) "O you who do not believe, make no excuses today. You will be requited only for what you had done
O you who believe, turn to God truly in repentance. Perhaps your Lord may forgive your ills and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing by on the day when God will not humiliate the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their light will move in front of them and to their right, and they will say: "O Lord, perfect our light and forgive us. You have power over every thing
O Prophet, fight the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be severe with them. Their abode is Hell, an evil destination
God advances the example of Noah's wife and the wife of Lot for those who do not believe. They were married to Our two pious devotees, but they were unfaithful to them, and even (the apostles) could not avail them in the least against God; and it was said to them: "Enter Hell with those (who are condemned) to enter it
And God presents the example of Pharaoh's wife for those who believe, when she said: "O Lord, build me a house in Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his deeds, and save me from a wicked people
And of Mary, daughter of 'Imran, who guarded her chastity, so that We breathed into her a new life from Us, and she believed the words of her Lord and His Books, and was among the obedient
BLESSED BE HE who holds the (reins of) Kingship in His hand, who has power over everything
Who created death and life in order to try you to see who of you are best of deed. He is all-mighty and forgiving
Who created the seven skies one above the other. Do you see any disproportion in the creations of Ar-Rahman? Turn your eyes again. Do you see any fissures
Turn your eyes again and again. Your gaze turns back dazed and tired
We have adorned the lowest sky with lamps, and made them missiles against the devils, for whom We have prepared a torment of most intense fire
For those who believe not in their Lord there is the punishment of Hell; and what a wretched destination
When they are cast into it, they will hear it roar and raging
As though it would burst with fury. Every time a crowd is thrown into it, its wardens will ask: "Did no warner come to you
And they will answer: "Surely; a warner came to us, but we denied him, and said: 'God did not send down any thing; you are greatly deluded, in fact
They will say: "If we had listened and been wise, we would not have been among the inmates of Hell
So will they confess their guilt. Deprived (of all joys) will be the inmates of Hell
For those who fear their Lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward
Whether you say a thing secretly or openly, He knows the innermost secrets of your hearts
Can He who has created not know (His creation)? He is all-penetrating, all-aware
It is He who made the earth subservient to you that you may travel all around it, and eat of things He has provided; and to Him will be your resurrection
Are you so unafraid that He who is in Heaven will not open up the earth to swallow you, when it will begin to tremble
Or have you become so unafraid that He who is in Heaven will not send a violent wind to shower stones at you? Then you will know the import of My commination
Those before them had also denied. And how was My punishment then
Do they not see the birds above them flying wings spread out or folded? Nothing holds them aloft but God. All things are within His purview
What other army do you have to help you apart from Ar-Rahman? The unbelievers are surely lost in delusion
Who is there to give you food in case He withholds His bounty? Yet they persist in rebellion and aversion
Will he find the way who grovels flat on his face, or he who walks straight on the right path
Say: "It is He who raised you and gave you ears and eyes and hearts. How little are the thanks you offer
Say: "It is He who dispersed you all over the earth, and to Him you will be gathered
But they say: "When will this promise come to pass, if what you say is true
Say: "God alone has knowledge. My duty is only to warn you clearly
When they realise it has come upon them, distraught will be the faces of unbelievers. They will be told: "This is what you asked for
Say: "Just think: If God destroys me and those with me, or is benevolent to us, who will then protect the unbelievers from a painful doom
Say: "He is the benevolent; in Him do we believe, and in Him do we place our trust. You will now realise who is in manifest error
Say: "Just think: If your water were to dry up in the morning who will bring you water from a fresh, flowing stream
NUN. I CALL to witness the pen and what they inscribe
You are not demented by the grace of your Lord
There is surely reward unending for you
For you are verily born of sublime nature
So you will see, and they will realise
Who is distracted
Verily your Lord knows those who have gone astray from His path, and He knows those who are guided on the way
So do not comply with those who deny
They only want that you should relent, so that they may come to terms
Do not heed a contemptible swearer
Or backbiter, calumniator, slanderer
Who hinders men from (doing) good, the transgressor, the iniquitous
Crude, and above all, mean and infamous
Simply because he possesses wealth and children
When you recite Our revelations to him, he says: "These are fables of long ago
We shall brand him on the muzzle
We have tried you as We tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
But did not add: "If God may please
Then a calamity from your Lord fell upon it, but they remained fast asleep
So by the morning it seemed as though picked clean
At daybreak they called to each other
If you want to gather the fruits, let us go early to the plantation
So they departed, talking in low voices
Let no needy person come to you within it today
They left early in the morning bent on this purpose
When they saw (and did not recognise it) they said: "Surely we have lost the way
No. In fact we have been deprived of it
One who was temperate among them, said: "Did I not say: 'Why don't you priase God
Glory to our Lord," they said; we were really in the wrong
Then they started blaming one another
Saying: "Alas the woe, we were iniquitous
Maybe our Lord will give us better than this. We turn to our Lord in supplication
Such is Our chastisement; and the punishment of the Hereafter will be greater, if only they knew
For those who fear God there are pleasure gardens with their Lord
Should We treat those who submit and obey in the same way as those who are culpable
What has come upon you that you judge in such a wise
Or have you a Book in which you read
That you can surely have whatever you choose
Or have you taken a binding promise from Us which would hold till the Day of Judgement, that you will get whatever you demand
Ask them: "Which of you is able to vouch for this
Or have they any partners? Let them bring their partners then, if what they say is true
On the day the great calamity befalls, and they are called to bow in homage, they will not be able to do so
Lowered will be their eyes, disgrace overwhelming them. They had indeed been called to bow in homage when they were free of blame
So leave those who deny this Discourse to Me. We shall lead them step by step to (ruin) in a way they will not know
Yet I will give them respite: Surely My plan is compact
Do you ask for any compensation from them that they are burdened with want
Or do they have knowledge of the unknown which they copy down
So wait with patience for the judgement of your Lord, and do not be like (onah) of the fish who called (to his Lord) when he was choked with anger
Had it not been for a favour from his Lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren plain
Then his Lord chose him and placed him among the upright
But the unbelievers would like to stare you out of balance when they hear the warning, and say: "Surely he is possessed
Whilst it is no more than reminder for the people of the world
THE CONCRETE REALITY
What is the concrete reality
What do you comprehend by the concrete reality
The Thamud and 'Ad denied the consequential calamity
So destroyed were the Thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning
And the 'Ad were destroyed by the furious cold blast of roaring wind
Which He sent to assail them for seven nights and eight days running. You should have seen the people prostrate like the decayed trunks of date-palm trees
Do you see any trace of them
Then came the Pharaoh, and those before him whose habitations were overthrown while they were committing crimes
When they disobeyed the apostle of their Lord He seized them with an overwhelming punishment
When the water rose in flood, We bore you in the ark
In order to make it a warning for you, and that the ear retentive may preserve it
When the single blast is sounded on the trumpet
And the earth and mountains heaved and crushed to powder with one levelling blow
On that Day will come what is to come
The sky will cleave asunder on that day and fall to pieces
On its fringes will be angels, eight of them, bearing their Lord's throne aloft
You will then be set before Him, and not one of you will remain unexposed
He who is given his ledger in his right hand, will say: "Here, read my ledger
I was certain I'll be given my account
So he shall have an agreeable life
In high empyrean
With fruits hanging low within reach
(And told:) "Eat and drink to your fill as reward for (good) deeds you had done in days of yore
But whosoever gets his ledger in his left hand, will say: "Would that I were never given my ledger
And not known my account
I wish death had put an end to me
Of no use was even my wealth
Vanished has my power from me
Seize him and manacle him
Then cast him to be burnt in Hell
And string him to a chain seventy cubits long
He did not believe in God the supreme
Nor urged others to feed the poor
That is why he has no friend today
Nor food other than suppuration (filth)
Which none but the hellish eat
So, I call to witness what you see
And what you do not see
That this is indeed the word of the noble Messenger
And not the word of a poet. How little is it that you believe
Nor is it the word of a soothsayer. Little is it that you reflect
It has been sent down by the Lord of all the worlds
Had he attributed falsely any words to Us
We would have seized him by his right hand
Then cut off his aorta
And not one of you would have been able to stop (Us)
It is really a reminder for those who fear God and follow the straight path
We certainly know that some among you do deny it
It is surely the nemesis of unbelievers
And He, He is indeed the ultimate Reality
So glorify your Lord, the most supreme
AN INQUIRER ASKED for the affliction that is to come
Upon the infidels -- which none would be able to repel
From God, the Lord of the steps (of progression)
To whom the angels and the soul take a day to ascend, whose length is fifty thousand years
So persevere with becoming patience
They surely take it to be far away
But We see it very near
The day the sky becomes like molten brass
The mountains like the tufts of (carded) wool
And no friend inquires after friend
Though within sight of one another. The sinner would like to ransom himself from the torment of that Day by offering his sons
His wife and his brother
And his family who had stood by him
And all those who are on the earth, to save himself
But never. It is pure white flame
That would skin the scalp
It will summon whoever turns his back and flees
Who amasses and then hoards
Surely man is greedy by nature
If evil befalls him he is perturbed
If good comes to him he holds back his hand
Except those who closely follow (the Book of God)
Who persevere in devotion
In whose wealth a due share is included
For the needy and those dispossessed
And those who believe in the Day of Judgement
And those who fear the punishment of their Lord
Surely no one can be secure from the punishment of his Lord
And those who guard their sex except from their wives and women slaves of old
Are free of blame
But those who seek more than this will be transgressors
And those who fulfil their trusts and covenants
Who uphold their testimonies
And those who are mindful of their moral obligations
They will live in gardens with honour
What is the matter with unbelievers that they stare at you with fixed gazes and hasten towards you
In crowds, right and left
Does every one of them wish to enter the garden of tranquility
Never so. We have created them from what they know
So I swear by the Lord of the Easts and the Wests that We are certainly able
To bring better people than they in their place; and they will not be able to thwart Us
So leave them to their vain disputes and amusement till they meet their day (of reckoning) promised them
The day when they will come out of their graves in all haste as though rushing to their altars
Eyes lowered, shame attending. That is the day they have been promised
SENT NOAH to his people to warn them before the painful punishment came upon them
He said: "O my people, I warn you clearly
That you should worship God and fear Him, and follow me
That He may forgive some of your sins and prolong your term till an appointed time. Surely when God's appointed time is come it will not be put off, if only you knew
He said: "O Lord, I called my people night and day
But the more I called, they only ran the farther away
And every time I called them that You may forgive them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, and covered themselves with their garments, and became wayward, and behaved with downright insolence
Then I called them loudly and more openly
And declared to them in public and in private
And I told them: 'Ask your Lord to forgive you. He is verily forgiving
He will send you abundant rain from the sky
And will give you increase of wealth and sons, and give you gardens and springs of water
What has come upon you that you do not fear the majesty of God
Knowing that He has created you by various stages
Do you not see how God has fashioned seven skies one above the other
And has placed the moon therein, an illumination, and has placed the sun, a lighted lamp
God produced you from the earth like a vegetable growth
He will then return you back to it, and bring you out again
God has made the earth for you a spreading
So that you may walk upon its spacious paths
But they did not listen to me," Noah said, "and followed him whose wealth and children only added to his ruin
And they contrived a plot of great magnitude
And said: 'Do not abandon your gods, and do not abandon Wadda or Suwa', or Yaghuth, Ya'uq or Nasr
And they misled many. So do not give the evil-doers increase but in error
They were drowned because of their habitual sinfulness, and sent to Hell, and did not find any helper other than God
Noah said: "O Lord, do not leave a single habitation of unbelievers on the earth
If you leave them, they will lead Your creatures astray, and beget but iniquitous and ungrateful offspring
O Lord, forgive me, my parents, and any one who enters my house as a believer, and all believing men and women, and do not give the evil-doers increase save in ruin
SAY: "I HAVE been informed that a number of jinns had listened; then said: 'We have heard the wondrous Qur'an
Which guides to the right path; and we have come to believe in it, and will not associate any one with our Lord
Exalted is the glory of our Lord; He has neither wife nor son
Certainly the foolish among us say preposterous things of God
We had in fact thought that men and jinns would never speak a lie about God
But some men used to seek refuge with some jinns, and this increased their waywardness
So they began to think, even as you do, that God would not resurrect any one
We sought to pry into the secrets of the heavens, but found it full of fierce guards and shooting flames
We sat in observatories to listen; but any one who listened found a shooting star in wait for him
We do not know if this means ill for the dwellers of the earth, or their Lord wishes guidance for them
For some of us are upright and some otherwise: Surely we follow different ways
We realised that we could not weaken the power of God on earth, nor outpace Him by running away
So when we heard the guidance we believed in it; and he who believes in his Lord will neither fear loss nor force
Some of us have come to submission, and some of us are iniquitous.'" Those who have submitted have taken the right course
But those who are iniquitous will be fuel for Hell
(Say): "If they keep to the right path We shall give them water in abundance to drink
In order to try them through it. But whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, will be given increasing torment by Him
All places of worship are for God; so do not invoke any one with God
When the devotee of God stood up to invoke Him (the jinns) crowded upon him (to listen)
Say: "I call on my Lord alone and I do not associate any one with Him
Say: "Neither is your loss within my power nor bringing you to guidance
Say: "No one can save me from God, nor can I find a place of refuge apart from Him
Unless I convey from God and deliver His message." For those who disobey God and His Apostle is the fire of Hell, where they will abide for ever
Until they see what they are promised, when they will understand who is weaker in aid and poorer in numbers
Say: "I do not know if what is promised you is near, or if my Lord prolongs its term
He is the knower of the Unknown, and He does not divulge His secret to any one
Other than an apostle He has chosen, when He makes a sentinel walk in front of him and a sentinel behind
So that He may know if they have delivered their Lord's messages. He comprehends all that has been given them, and keeps count of everything
O YOU ENWRAPPED in the cloak (of Prophethood)
Keep watch all the night except some
A half of it or a little less
Or a little more, and recite the Qur'an slowly and distinctly
We shall soon entrust to you a message heavy (with solemnity)
Surely in the watches of the night the soul is most receptive and words more telling
Indeed during the day you have a long schedule of occupations
But recite the name of your Lord withdrawing yourself from everything, devoting yourself exclusively to Him
He is the Lord of the East and the West. There is no god but He. So take Him alone as your protector
Bear with patience what they say, and gracefully come away from them
Leave those to Me who deny, the lovers of ease and comfort; and bear with them for a while
Verily We shall have fetters with Us, and a roaring furnace
And food that will stick in the throat, and painful torment
On the day the earth and mountains will rock violently, and the mountains turn to a heap of poured-out sand
We have sent an Apostle to you as a witness against you, as We had sent an apostle to the Pharaoh
But the Pharaoh disobeyed the apostle; so We seized him with a grievous punishment
How then, if you disbelieve, will you preserve yourselves on the day which will even turn the children hoary
The heavens itself will be rent asunder (on that day). His promise is bound to be fulfilled
Verily this is a reminder. So let him who desires take the way to his Lord
Your Lord surely knows that you are occupied with your devotions for nearly two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or one-third of it, as do many others with you. Yet God prescribes the measure of night and day. He knows you cannot calculate it, and so turns to you in benevolence. So recite as much of the Qur'an as you can easily. He knows some among you will be sick, and some will be travelling over the earth in search of the bounty of God, and some fighting in the way of God. So read as much from it as you can easily, and be firm in devotion, pay the zakat, and lend a goodly loan to God. And what you send for yourself of the good, you will find it with God better and greater in reward. So ask for God's forgiveness. Indeed God is forgiving and kind
O YOU ENFOLDED in your mantle (of reform)
Arise and warn
Glorify your Lord
Purify your inner self
And banish all trepidation
Do not bestow favours in expectation of return
And persevere in the way of your Lord
For when the trumpet blows
It will be a day of distress
Dolorous for the unbelievers
Leave him to Me whom I created alone
And gave him abundant wealth
And sons always present by his side
And made things easy for them
Yet he wants that I should give him more
Never. He is refractory of Our signs
I shall inflict on him hardship
For he had thought and calculated
May he be accursed, how he planned
May be then be accursed, how he plotted
Then he looked around
And frowned and puckered his brow
Then turned his back and waxed proud
And said: "This is nothing but the magic of old
Nothing more than the speech of a man
I will cast him into the fire of Hell
What do you think Hell-fire is
It leaves nothing, nor does it spare
It glows and burns the skin
Over it are nineteen (guards)
We have not appointed any one but angels as keepers of Hell, and their number that We have fixed is to make it a means of contention for disbelievers, so that those who were given the Book may be certain, and the faith of the believers may have greater increase, and the people of the Book and believers may not be deceived, and the sceptics and infidels may say: "What does God mean by this parable?" That is how God leads whosoever He will astray, and guides whosoever He will. None knows the armies of your Lord save Him self. This is no more than reminder for mankind
I say the truth, and call the moon to witness
And the night when on the wane
The morning when it is unveiled
That (Hell) is surely one of the greater (signs)
A warning for people
Whoever of you desires to progress or lag behind
Every soul is pledged to what it does
Except those of the right hand
Sitting in the gardens, asking
Of evil-doers
What was it that brought you to Hell
They will answer: "We did not fulfil our devotional obligations
And did not feed the needy
And plunged into useless things with those who were obstinate
And rejected the Day of Judgement as a lie
Until the certainty (of death) had come upon us
So, the intercession of intercessors will not avail them
Why then do they turn away from the admonition
As though they were frightened asses
Fleeing from a lion
In fact every one of them wants to be given open books (like the prophets)
By no means. In fact they do not fear the Hereafter
Never so, as this is a reminder
Let him then who heeds remember it
But they will not remember except as God wills: He is worthy to be feared, and He is worthy of forgiving
I CALL TO WITNESS the Day of Resurrection
And I call the reprehensive soul to witness
Does man think We shall not put his bones together
Surely We are able to reform even his finger-tips
Yet man is sceptical of what is right before him
He asks: "When will the Day of Resurrection be
Yet when the eyes are dazzled
The moon eclipsed
And the sun and moon are conjoined
That day man will say: "Where can I find escape
Never so, for there will be no escape
With your Lord alone will be the retreat on that day
Then man will be told what he had sent ahead (of good) and what he had left behind
In fact man is a witness against himself
Whatever the excuses he may offer
Do not forestall (the revelation before its completion) by acting in haste
Surely its collection and recitation are Our responsibility
So, as We recite it, follow its reading
The exposition of its meaning surely rests on Us
But no. You love this transient life
And neglect the Hereafter
How many faces will be refulgent on that Day
Waiting for their Lord
And how many faces on that Day will be woe-begone
Fearing that a great disaster is going to befall them
Never so, for when life withdraws into the clavicula
And it is asked: "Is there any reciter of charms and amulets
He will then realise it is the parting
And anguish will be heaped upon anguish
To your Lord then will be the driving
For he neither believed nor prayed
But only disavowed and turned away
Then he strutted back to his people
Alas the woe for you, alas
Alas, the woe for you
Does man think that he will be left alone to himself, free
Was he not an emitted drop of semen
Then formed into an embryo? Then He fashioned, shaped and proportioned
And assigned it sexes, male and female
Cannot such as He bring the dead to life
WAS THERE NOT a time in the life of man when he was not even a mentionable thing
Verily We created man from a sperm yoked (to the ovum) to bring out his real substance, then gave him hearing and sight
We surely showed him the way that he may either be grateful or deny
We have prepared for unbelievers chains and collars and a blazing fire
Surely the devotees will drink cups flavoured with palm blossoms
From a spring of which the votaries of God will drink and make it flow in abundance
Those who fulfil their vows and fear the Day whose evil shall be diffused far and wide
And feed the needy for the love of Him, and the orphans and the captives
(Saying): "We feed you for the sake of God, desiring neither recompense nor thanks
We fear the dismal day calamitous from our Lord
So God will protect them from the evil of that day, and grant them happiness and joy
And reward them for their perseverence Paradise and silken robes
Where they will recline on couches feeling neither heat of the sun nor intense cold
The shadows will bend over them, and low will hang the clusters of grapes
Passed round will be silver flagons and goblets made of glass
And crystal clear bottles of silver, of which they will determine the measure themselves
There will they drink a cup flavoured with ginger
From a spring by the name of Ever-flowing-Salsabil
And boys of everlasting youth will go about attending them. Looking at them you would think that they were pearls dispersed
When you look around, you will see delights and great dominion
On their bodies will be garments of the finest green silk and brocade, and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver; and their Lord will give them a purest draught to drink
This in truth is your recompense, and acceptance of your endeavours
We have revealed the Qur'an to you gradually
So wait for your Lord's command, and do not follow any sinner or disbeliever among them
Meditate upon the name of your Lord morning and evening
And bow in homage part of the night, and glorify Him far into the night
Surely men love what hastes away and forget the grievous day (ahead)
We created them and fixed their bones and joints; and We could replace them when We like with others like them
This surely is a reminder: Therefore whosoever desires may take the way to his Lord
But you will not desire except as God wills. Verily He is all-knowing and all-wise
He admits whosoever He will to His benevolence. But for the evil-doers He has prepared a painful punishment
I CALL TO WITNESS those who are sent consecutively
And those that strike violently
And those that revive by quickening
And those that distinguish distinctly
And those that bring down the Reminder
To end all argument or to warn
What is promised will surely come to pass
When the stars are obliterated
The heavens split asunder
The mountains reduced to dust and blown away
And when the time comes for raising the little girls (buried alive)
For what day is that time fixed
The Day of Judgement
How will you comprehend what the Day of Judgement is
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
Have We not destroyed the earlier generations
So shall We make the later ones to follow them
That is what We shall do to those who are guilty of crime
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
Did We not create you from contemptible water
Then We lodged you in a secure place (the womb)
For a certain appointed time
Then We facilitated (your birth). How well do We calculate
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
Have We not made the earth a repository
For the living and the dead
And placed in it lofty and broad stablisers, and gave you sweet water to drink
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
Go to what you used to deny
Go to the shadow with three ramifications
Neither shady nor protecting against the blazing Fire
It will throw out sparks as logs of wood
So like golden camels
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
They will not be able to speak that day
Nor given leave to make excuses
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
That will be the Day of Reckoning. Gathered will be (you) and the earlier (generations)
So if you have any plot to devise against Me, then devise it
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
Those who take heed for themselves and fear God, will be amidst shade and springs of water
And such fruits as they desire
Eat and drink with relish as reward for what you had done
That is how We reward the good
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
Eat and enjoy for a while: You are certainly sinners
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
When it is said to them: "Bow in homage," they do not bow
Alas the woe that day for those who deny
In what other lore after this will they then believe
OF WHAT ARE they asking one another
(Is it) of the great announcement
About which they have been differing
Indeed they will come to know soon
They will indeed come to know soon
Did We not make the earth a spreading
The mountains tent-pins
We created you in pairs
And made sleep for you to rest
The night a covering
And the day for seeking livelihood
We raised over you several secure (skies)
And placed a lamp therein brightly burning
And We sent down rain from water-laden clouds pouring in torrents
That We may produce from it grain and vegetation
And orchards full of trees and interlacing boughs
Surely a time is fixed for the Day of Judgement
The day the trumpet blast is sounded you will come in hordes
The heavens will be opened wide and turn into so many doors
The mountains put in motion turning into a mirage
Certainly Hell lies in wait
The rebels' abode
Where they will remain for aeons
Finding neither sleep nor any thing to drink
Except boiling water and benumbing cold
A fitting reward
They were those who did not expect a reckoning
And rejected Our signs as lies
We have kept account of everything in a book
So taste (the fruit of what you sowed), for We shall add nothing but torment
As for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path, there is attainment for them
Orchards and vineyards
And graceful maidens of the same age
And flasks full and flowing
They will hear no blasphemies there or disavowals
A recompense from your Lord, a sufficient gift
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that lies between them, most benevolent, to whom none may dare address a word
The day the Spirit takes its stand, with the angels ranged in rows. None will speak except who is permitted by Ar-Rahman and says what is right
That day is certain. So whosoever likes may prepare a way to his Lord
We have indeed warned you of a calamity near at hand, a day when man will see what he had sent (of his deeds) ahead, and the unbeliever will say: "Woe alas. Ah would that I were dust
I CALL TO WITNESS those who dive and drag
And those who undo the bonds gently
And those who glide swimmingly
Then outpace the others swiftly
And direct affairs by command
The day the convulsive (first blast) shatters convulsively
Followed by the second blast
Hearts will pound loudly on that day
Eyes be lowered in submission
They say: "Shall we go back to our original state
After having turned to carious bones
They say: "Then this returning will be a dead loss
It will only be a single blast
And they will wake up suddenly
Has the story of Moses come to you
When his Lord called to him in Tuwa's holy vale
Go to the Pharaoh who has become refractory
And say: 'Would you like to grow (in virtue)
Then I will guide you to your Lord that you may come to fear Him
So he showed him the greater sign
But (the Pharaoh) disavowed and disobeyed
Then he turned away, deliberating
And assembled (his council) and proclaimed
Saying: "I am alone your lord, the highest of them all
So God seized him for the punishment of the Hereafter and this world
Truly there is a lesson in this for those who fear (the consequences)
Are you more difficult to create or the heavens? He built it
Raised it high, proportioned it
Gave darkness to its night, and brightness to its day
And afterwards spread out the earth
He brought out its water and its pastures from it
And stabilized the mountains
As convenience for you and your cattle
When the great calamity comes
The day when man remembers all that he had done
And Hell made visible to him who can see
Then he who had been rebellious
And who preferred the life of the world
Will surely have Hell for his abode
But he who feared standing before his Lord, and restrained his self from vain desires
Will surely have Paradise for abode
They ask you: "When will the Hour be? When is its time fixed
What do you have to do with explaining it
The extent of its knowledge goes to your Lord
Your duty is only to warn him who fears it
The day they see it, it will seem they had stayed in the world but only an evening or its turning into dawn
HE FROWNED AND turned away
Because a blind man came to him
What made you think that he will not grow in virtue
Or be admonished, and the admonition profit him
As for him who is not in want of any thing
You pay full attention
Though it is not your concern if he should not grow (in fulness)
As for him who comes to you striving (after goodness)
And is also fearful (of God)
You neglect
Assuredly this is a reminder
For any one who desires to bear it in mind
(Contained) in honoured pages
Exalted and holy
In the hands of scribes
Noble and pious
Accursed is man. How ungrateful is he
Of what substance God created him
From a single sperm He created, then proportioned him
Then made his passage easy (at birth)
He will then send him to death and have him laid in the grave
Then He will raise him up again when He please
But no. He has not fulfilled what was enjoined on him
Let man therefore consider (the sources of) his food
We poured down rain abundantly
Then We cracked the earth open under pressure (of germination)
And We made corn grow
And grapes and herbage
Olives and dates
Orchards thick with trees
And fruits and fodder
A provision for you and your cattle
But when the great calamity comes
Man will fly from his brother
Mother and father
As well as his wife and children
Each man will have enough cares that day
Many faces will that day be bright
Laughing and full of joy
And many will be dust-begrimed
Covered with the blackness (of shame)
They will be the unbelievers, transgressors
WHEN THE SUN is folded up
The stars turn dim and scatter
The mountains made to move
The ten-month pregnant female camels are abandoned
The wild beasts stampede on the run
When the oceans surge and swell
When souls are reunited (with the bodies)
And the little girl buried alive is asked
For what crime she was put to death
When the ledgers are laid open
The curtain drawn back from the skies
When Hell is set ablaze
And Paradise brought near
(Then) every soul will know what it had prepared (for itself)
So, I call the receding stars to witness
The planets withdrawing into themselves
The closing night
The rising dawn
That this is indeed the word of an honoured Messenger
Full of power, well-established (in position) with the Lord and Master of the Throne
Obeyed and worthy there of trust
Your companion is not mad
He had surely seen Him on the clear horizon
He is not chary of making public what is unknown
This is not the utterance of an accursed devil
So whither do you stray
This is a reminder for all the peoples of the world
For those of you who desire to walk the path that is straight
Though you cannot desire except as God will, the Lord of all the worlds
WHEN THE SKY is split asunder
And the stars dispersed
When the oceans begin to flow
When the graves are overturned
Each soul will know what it had sent ahead and what it had left behind
O man, what seduced you from your munificent Lord
Who created you then formed your symmetry, then gave you right proportion
Shaping you into any form He pleased
Even then you deny the Judgement
Surely there are guardians over you
Illustrious scribes
Who know what you do
The pious will surely be in heaven
The wicked certainly in Hell
They will burn in it on the Day of Judgement
And will not be removed from it
How can you comprehend what the Day of Judgement is
How then can you comprehend what the Day of Judgement is
It is the day when no soul will have power to do the least for a soul, and God's alone will be done
WOE TO THOSE who give short measure
Who insist on being given full when they take from others
Whilst when they measure or weigh for them, give less
Do they not think they will be raised (to life) again
On a grievous day
The day all mankind will stand before the Lord of all the worlds
Indeed the ledger of the wicked will be in (the lowest depths) Sijjin
How will you comprehend what Sijjin is
It is a (repository of) distinctly written record
Ah the woe that day for those who deny
Who call the Day of judgement a lie
None denies it but the sinful transgressors
When Our revelations are recited before him, he says: "These are fables of long ago
No. In fact what they have been doing has rusted their hearts
Therefore they will be screened off from their Lord that day
Then they will indeed burn in Hell
They will then be told: "This is what you had denied
Surely the ledger of the pious will be in 'Illiyun (heights above the heights)
But how will you comprehend what 'Illiyun is
It is a (repository of) distinctly written record
Witnessed by those who are honoured
Verily the pious will be in heaven
On couches face to face
On their faces you will see the glow of beatitude
They will be served the choicest wine, sealed
With a sealing of musk, which those who aspire for the best should desire
Blended with the water of Tasnim, (heights ultimate of evolution)
A fountain from which only they who are honoured drink
The sinners indeed laughed at believers
And winked at one another as they passed by them
And when they went back to their people turned to make fun of them
And when they saw them, they said: "They have indeed gone astray
But they were not Sent to be guardians over them
So, the believers will laugh at the infidels on that day
Regarding them from their cushioned seats
Will not the infidels pay for what they had done
WHEN THE SKY is cleft asunder
And hearkens to its Lord and is dutiful
When the earth is stretched out taut
And throws out whatever it contains and is empty
And hearkens to its Lord and is dutiful
O man, you have to strive and go on striving towards your Lord, then will you meet Him
And he who is given his ledger in his right hand
Will have an easy reckoning
And will return to his people full of joy
But he who is given his ledger from behind his back
Will pray for death
But will be roasted in the fire
He lived rejoicing among his people
Never thinking he will return
Why not? His Lord was always watching him
So indeed I call to witness the evening twilight
And the night and all it gathers
And the moon when at the full
That you will climb from stage to stage
So, wherefore do they not believe
And when the Qur'an is recited to them do not bow in adoration
In fact the unbelievers disavow
But God knows what they harbour in their breasts
So give them news of painful punishment
Except those who believe and do the right: For them there is reward unending
I CALL TO witness the sky (bespangled) with the signs of the Zodiac
And the promised day
And the witness and the witnessed
That accursed are the men of the trench
Full of fire fed by faggots
As they sat around it
Witnessing what they had done to the believers
They had no other reason for hating them except that they believed in God the mighty, worthy of praise
Whose kingdom spreads over the heavens and the earth. God is witness over everything
Surely for those who persecute believers, men and women, and do not repent afterwards, is the punishment of Hell, and the punishment of burning
Surely for those who believe and do the right are gardens with rivers running by. That is the greatest success
The grip of your Lord is severe indeed
It is verily He who initiates and repeats
He is the forgiving and the loving
The Lord of the glorious Throne
Who does as He pleases
Has the story of the hordes
Of Pharaoh and Thamud come to you
Yet the infidels persist in denial
But God surrounds them from all sides
This is indeed the glorious Qur'an
(Preserved) on the guarded tablet
I CALL TO witness the heavens and the night Star
How will you comprehend what the night star is
It is the star that shines with a piercing brightness
That over each soul there is a guardian
Let man consider what he was made of
He was created of spurting water
Issuing from (the pelvis) between the backbone and the ribs
God has certainly power to bring him back (from the dead)
The day all secrets are examined
He will have no strength or helper
So I call to witness the rain-producing sky
And the earth which opens up (with verdure)
That this (Qur'an) is a decisive word
And no trifle
They are hatching up a plot
But I too am devising a plan
So bear with unbelievers with patience, and give them respite for a while
GLORIFY THE NAME of your Lord, most high
Who creates and proportions
Who determines and directs
Who brings out the pastures
Then reduces them to rusty rubbish
We shall make you recite (the Qur'an) so that you will not forget it
Unless God may please. He knows the visible and knows what is hidden
We shall take you slowly towards ease
So remind them if reminder is profitable
Those who fear will understand
Only the wretch will turn aside
Who will burn in the terrible Fire
In which he will neither die nor live
Surely he will succeed who grows in goodness
And recites the name of his Lord and serves with devotion
But no, you prefer the life of the world
Though the life to come is better and abiding
This is surely in the earlier Books
The Books of Abraham and Moses
HAS NEWS OF the Overpowering Event reached you
Many faces will be contrite on that day
Labouring, wearied out
Burning in the scorching fire
Given water from the boiling spring to drink
They will have no food except bitter thorn
Neither nourishing nor banishing hunger
Many faces will be joyous on that day
Well-pleased with their endeavour
In the high empyrean
Never hearing idle talk
There is a stream of running water in it
And within it are couches placed on high
Goblets set
Cushions arranged
And rich carpets spread
Do they not then ponder how the clouds were formed
And the heavens, how it was raised high
And the mountains, how they were fixed
And the earth, how it was spread out
Remind them; you are surely a reminder
You are not a warden over them
Other than him who turns his back and denies
In which case he will be punished by God with the severest punishment
To Us is surely their returning
Ours is surely then to reckon with them
I CALL TO witness the dawn
And the Ten Nights
The multiple and the one
The night as it advances
Is there not an evidence in this for those who have sense
Have you not seen what your Lord did to the 'Ad
Of Eram with lofty pillars (erected as signposts in the desert)
The like of whom were never created in the realm
And with Thamud who carved rocks in the valley
And the mighty Pharaoh
Who terrorised the region
And multiplied corruption
So your Lord poured a scourge of punishment over them
Your Lord is certainly in wait
As for man, whenever his Lord tries him and then is gracious and provides good things for him, he says: "My Lord has been gracious to me
But when He tries him by restraining his means, he says: "My Lord despises me
No. In fact you are not generous to the orphans
Nor do you urge one another to feed the poor
And you devour (others') inheritance greedily
And love wealth with all your heart
Surely when We pound the earth to powder grounded, pounded to dust
And comes your Lord, and angels row on row
And Hell is brought near, that day will man remember, but of what avail will then remembering be
He will say: "Alas the woe! Would that I had sent ahead something in my life
None can punish as He will punish on that day
And none can bind as He will bind
O you tranquil soul
Return to your Lord, well-pleased and well-pleasing Him
Enter then among My votaries
Enter then My garden
I CALL THIS earth to witness
And you are free to live upon it
And the parent and the offspring
That We created man in toil and trouble
Does he think that no one has power over him
He says: "I have wasted a great deal of wealth
Does he think that no one sees him
Did We not give him two eyes
One tongue, and two lips
And showed him two highways (of good and evil)
But he could not scale the steep ascent
How will you comprehend what the Steep ascent is
To free a neck (from the burden of debt or slavery)
Or to feed in times of famine
The orphan near in relationship
Or the poor in distress
And to be of those who believe, and urge upon one another to persevere, and urge upon each other to be kind
They are the people of the right hand (and will succeed)
But those who deny Our revelations are the people of the left hand
The Fire will vault them over
I CALL TO witness the sun and his early morning splendour
And the moon as she follows in his wake
The day when it reveals his radiance
The night when it covers him over
The heavens and its architecture
The earth and its spreading out
The soul and how it was integrated
And given the faculty of knowing what is disruptive and what is intrinsic to it
He who nourishes it will surely be successful
And he who confines it will surely come to grief
The Thamud denied (the truth) in their perverseness
When among them the great wretch arose
And the apostle of God had to tell them: "This is God's she-camel, let her drink
But they called him a liar and hamstrung her. So God obliterated them for their crime, and (destroyed) all of them alike
He does not fear the consequence
I CALL THE night to witness when it covers over
And the day when it shines in all its glory
And Him who created the male and female
That your endeavour is for different ends
Yet he who gives to others and has fear
And affirms goodness
We shall ease the way of fortune for him
But he who does not give and is unconcerned
And rejects goodness
For him We shall ease the way of adversity
And his riches will not avail him when he falls headlong (into the Abyss)
It is indeed for Us to show the way
And to Us belong the End and the Beginning
So, I warn you of the blazing Fire
No one will burn in it but the most wretched
Who denied (the truth) and turned away
But save him who fears
And gives of his wealth that he may grow in virtue
And is under no one's obligation to return his favour
Other than seeking the glory of his Lord, most high
Will surely be gratified
I CALL TO witness the early hours of morning
And the night when dark and still
Your Lord has neither left you, nor despises you
What is to come is better for you than what has gone before
For your Lord will certainly give you, and you will be content
Did He not find you an orphan and take care of you
Did He not find you perplexed, and show you the way
Did He not find you poor and enrich you
So do not oppress the orphan
And do not drive the beggar away
And keep recounting the favours of your Lord
HAVE WE NOT opened up your breast
And removed your burden
Which had left you devoid of hope
And exalted your fame
Surely with hardship there is ease
With hardship indeed there is ease
So when you are free work diligently
And turn to your Lord with all your love
I CALL TO witness the Fig and the Olive
The Mount Sinai
And this Soil Secure
That We created man of finest possibilities
Then brought him down to the lowest of the low
Except those who believe and do the right, for whom there is reward undiminished
Who should then make you deny the Judgement after this
Is not God the most equitable of all judges
READ IN THE name of your Lord who created
Created man from an embryo
Read, for your Lord is most beneficent
Who taught by the pen
Taught man what he did not know
And yet, but yet man is rebellious
For he thinks he is sufficient in himself
Surely your returning is to your Lord
Have you seen him who restrains
A votary when he turns to his devotions
Have you thought, if he had been on guidance
Or had enjoined piety, (it would have been better)
Have you thought that if he denies and turns away
Does he not know that God sees
And yet indeed if he does not desist We shall drag him by the forelock
By the lying, the sinful forelock
So let him call his associates
We shall call the guards of Hell
Beware! Do not obey him, but bow in adoration and draw near (to your Lord)
TRULY WE REVEALED it on the Night of Determination
How will you know what the Night of Determination is
Better is the Night of Determination than a thousand months
On (this night) the angels and grace descend by the dispensation of their Lord, for settling all affairs
It is peace till the dawning of the day
THOSE AMONG THE people of the Book who disbelieve, and the idolaters, would not have been freed (from false beliefs) until the clear proof came to them
An Apostle from God, reading out hallowed pages
Containing firm decrees
The people of the Book were not divided among themselves till after the clear proof had come to them
They were commanded only to serve God with all-exclusive faith in Him, to be upright, and to fulfil their devotional obligations, and to give zakat; for this is the even way
Surely the unbelievers among the people of the Book and the idolaters, will abide in the fire of Hell. They are the worst of creatures
But those who believe and do the right are surely the best of created beings
Whose reward is with their Lord -- gardens of Eden with rivers flowing by, where they will abide for ever, God pleased with their service, they with obedience to Him. This (awaits) him who stands in awe of his Lord
WHEN THE WORLD is shaken up by its cataclysm
And the earth throws out its burdens
And man enquires: "What has come over it
That day it will narrate its annals
For your Lord will have commanded it
That day people will proceed separately to be shown their deeds
Whosoever has done even an atom's weight of good will behold it
And whosoever has done even an atom's weight of evil will behold that
I CALL TO witness the chargers, snorting, rushing to battle before the others
Then those striking sparks of fire
Then those charging in the morning
Raising clouds of dust
Penetrating deep into the armies
That man is ungrateful to his Lord
And is himself witness to it
And is intractable in his love of worldly goods
Does he not know when the contents of the graves are laid bare
And the secrets of the hearts exposed
Surely their Lord will be aware of their (deeds)
THE STARTLING CALAMITY
What is the startling calamity
How will you comprehend what the startling calamity is
A Day on which human beings would be like so many scattered moths
The mountains like the tufts of carded wool
Then he whose deeds shall weigh heavier in the scale
Will have a tranquil life
But he whose deeds are lighter in the balance
Will have the Abyss for abode
How will you comprehend what that is
It is the scorching fire
THE AVARICE OF plenitude keeps you occupied
Till you reach the grave
But you will come to know soon
Indeed you will come to know soon
And yet if you knew with positive knowledge
You have indeed to behold Hell
Then you will see it with the eye of certainty
Then on that day you will surely be asked about the verity of pleasures
TIME AND AGE are witness
Man is certainly loss
Except those who believe, and do good and enjoin truth on one another, and enjoin one another to bear with fortitude (the trials that befall)
WOE TO EVERY slanderer, back-biter
Who amasses wealth and hordes it
Does he think his wealth will abide for ever with him
By no means. He will be thrown into Hutama
How will you comprehend what Hutama is
It is the fire kindled by God
Which penetrates the hearts
(And) vaults them over
In extending columns
HAVE YOU NOT seen how your Lord dealt with the people of the elephants
Did He not make their plan go wrong
And sent hordes of chargers flying against them
(While) you were pelting them with stones of porphyritic lava
And turned them into pastured fields of corn
SINCE THE QURAISH have been united
United to fit out caravans winter and summer
Let them worship the Lord of this House
Who provided them against destitution and gave them security against fear
HAVE YOU SEEN him who denies the Day of Judgement
It is he who pushes the orphan away
And does not induce others to feed the needy
Woe to those who pray
But who are oblivious of their moral duties
Who dissimulate
And withhold things of common use (from others)
HAVE SURELY given you pre-eminence (in numbers and following)
So serve your Lord with full dedication and sacrifice
It is surely your opponents whose line will come to end
SAY: "O YOU unbelievers
I do not worship what you worship
Nor do you worship who I worship
Nor will I worship what you worship
Nor will you worship who I worship
To you your way, to me my way
WHEN THE HELP of God arrives and victory
And you see men enter God's discipline horde on horde
Then glorify your Lord and seek His forgiveness. Verily He is relenting
DESTROYED WILL BE the hands of Abu Lahab, and he himself will perish
Of no avail shall be his wealth, nor what he has acquired
He will be roasted in the fire
And his wife, the portress of fire wood
Will have a strap of fibre rope around her neck
SAY: "HE IS God the one the most unique
God the immanently indispensable
He has begotten no one, and is begotten of none
There is no one comparable to Him
SAY: "I SEEK refuge with the Lord of rising day
From the evil of what He has created
And the evil of evening darkness when it overspreads
From the evil of sorceresses who blow incantations on knots
From the evil of the envier when he envies
SAY: "I SEEK refuge with the Lord of men
The King of men
The God of men
From the evil of him who breathes temptations into the minds of men
Who suggests evil thoughts to the hearts of men
From among the jinns and men
{
    "name": "eng-ahmedali",
    "author": "Ahmed Ali",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "http://tanzil.net",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-ahmedali.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-ahmedali.min.json"
}