In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful
All praise is for Allah, the ‘Lord’ of the Worlds
The Compassionate, the Merciful
Master of the Day of Judgment
O’Allah! You Alone we worship and You Alone we call on for help
O’Allah! Guide us to The Right Way
The Way of those whom You have favored; not of those who have earned Your wrath, or of those who have lost The Way
Alif L'am M'im
This is the Book in which there is no doubt. (Since its Author, Allah, the Creator of this universe, possesses complete knowledge, there is no room for doubt about its contents.) It is a guide for those who are God conscious
who believe in the Unseen, who establish Salah (five regular daily prayers) and spend in charity out of what We have provided for their sustenance
who believe in this Revelation (the Qur'an) which is sent to you (O Muhammad) and the Revelations which were sent before you (Torah, Psalms, Gospel...) and firmly believe in the Hereafter
They are on true Guidance from their Lord and they are the ones who will attain salvation
In fact, as for those who reject Faith; it is the same, whether you warn them or you don't, they will not believe
Allah has sealed their hearts and their hearing, their eyes are covered, and there is a grievous punishment for them
There are some people who say: "We believe in Allah and the Last Day" yet they are not true believers
They try to deceive Allah and the believers. However, they deceive none except themselves yet they do not realize it
There is a disease of deception in their heart; and Allah lets their disease increase, and they shall have painful punishment for the lies they have told
When it is said to them: "Do not make mischief on earth," they say: "We make peace
Beware! They are the ones who make mischief but they do not realize it
When they are told: "Believe as the others believe" they ask: "Should we believe like fools?" Be aware! They themselves are the fools, if only they could understand
When they meet the believers they say: "We are believers," but when they are alone with their Satans, they say: "We are really with you, we were only mocking the believers
Allah will throw back their mockery on them and leave them alone in their trespasses; so they wander to and fro like the blind
These are the people who barter guidance for error: but their bargain is profitless and they are not going to be guided
Their example is that of a man who kindled a fire; when it illuminated all around him Allah took away their light (their eyesight) and left them in utter darkness: they could see nothing
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will never return to the Right Way
Or another example is that of a dark storm-cloud in the sky charged with thunder and lightning. They press their fingers to their ears at the sound of each stunning thunderclap for fear of death: Allah is encircling the unbelievers from all sides
The lightning terrifies them as if it was going to snatch away their eyesight; whenever it flashes they walk on; when it becomes dark, they stand still. And if Allah wanted He could have totally taken away their hearing and their sight; for Allah has power over everything
O mankind! Worship your Lord Who created you and created those who came before you; by doing this you may expect to guard yourself against evil
It is He Who has made the earth a floor for you and the sky a canopy; and it is He Who sends down rain from the sky for the growth of fruits for your sustenance. Therefore, do not knowingly set up rivals to Allah
If you are in doubt as to whether the revelations which We have sent to Our servant (Muhammad) are from Us or not, then produce one Surah like this; and call your witnesses (gods that you call upon) besides Allah to assist you, if you are right in your claim
But if you are unable to do so, and you can never do so, then fear the Hell fire, whose fuel is men and stones which is prepared for the unbelievers
Give glad tidings to those who believe in this Book and do good deeds in accordance with its teachings that for them there will be Gardens beneath which rivers flow. Whenever they will be given fruits to eat they will say: "This is similar to the one we used to eat before on earth," for the fruits will resemble the fruits on the earth for their easy identification and enjoyment; and for them there will be chaste virgin spouses, and they shall live therein for ever
Allah does not mind using the similitude of a gnat or an even more insignificant creature to teach a lesson. Those who believe, know that it is the truth from their Lord; but the unbelievers say: "What does Allah mean by such a similitude?" By such a similitude Allah confounds many and enlightens many. He confounds none except the transgressors
those who break Allah’s Covenant after accepting it, and who cut aside what Allah has ordered to be united and cause mischief on earth. It is they who are the losers
How can you deny Allah? Did He not give you life when you were lifeless; and will He not cause you to die and again bring you to life; and will you not ultimately return to Him
It is He Who has created for you all that there is in the earth; and directed Himself towards the sky and fashioned it into seven heavens. He has perfect knowledge of everything
Note that occasion, when your Lord said to the angels: I am going to place a vicegerent on earth. They said: "Will You place there one who will make mischief and shed blood while we sing Your praises and glorify Your name?" Allah said: "I know what you know not
He taught Adam the names of all things; then He presented the things to the angels and said: "Tell Me the names of these if what you say is true
Glory to You, they replied, "we have no knowledge except what You have taught us: in fact You are the One who is perfect in knowledge and wisdom
Allah said: "O Adam! Tell them the names." When Adam told them the names, Allah said: "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and I know what you reveal and what you conceal
When We ordered the angels: "Prostrate before Adam in respect," they all prostrated except Iblees (Satan) who refused in his arrogance and became a disbeliever
To Adam We said: "Dwell with your wife in Paradise and eat anything you want from its bountiful food from wherever you wish, but do not approach this tree, or you shall both become transgressors
But Satan tempted them with the tree to disobey Allah’s commandment and caused them to be expelled from Paradise, and We said: "Get out from here, some of you being enemies to others, and there is for you in the earth an abode and provisions for a specified period
Then Adam received appropriate words from his Lord and repented, and Allah accepted his repentance. Surely He is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful
Get down from here all of you, We said at the time of Adam’s departure from Paradise. "Henceforth there shall come to you guidance from Me, those who accept and follow it shall have nothing to fear or to regret
But those who reject and defy Our revelations will be inmates of Hellfire, wherein they shall live forever
O children of Israel! Remember My favors which I bestowed upon you; fulfill your covenant with Me and I will fulfill My covenant with you, that you should fear none but Me
Believe in My revelations, which are confirming your scriptures; do not be the first one to deny My revelations, and do not sell them for a petty price, fear Me and Me Alone
Do not mix the Truth with falsehood, or knowingly conceal the truth
Establish Salah (prayers); give Zakah (charity); and bow down with those who bow down in worship
Would you ask others to be righteous and forget to practice it yourselves? Even though you read your Holy Book? Have you no sense
Seek Allah’s help with patience and Salah; it is indeed hard except for those who fear Allah
who are certain in their mind that they are going to meet their Lord and that they are going to return to Him for final judgment
O’ Children of Israel! Remember My favors which I bestowed upon You; that I exalted you above all other nations
Guard yourselves against the Day on which one soul shall not avail another - no intercession shall be accepted, no ransom shall be taken and no help shall be given
Remember how We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh: they had subjected you to severe torment, killing your sons and sparing your daughters; you were facing a tremendous trial from your Lord
And We parted the Sea for you, taking you to safety, and drowned Pharoah’s people before your very eyes
Remember when We communed with Moses for forty nights and in his absence you took the calf for worship, thus committing a wicked transgression
Even then We forgave you, so that you might become grateful
We gave Moses the Holy Book (Torah) and the criterion of right and wrong so that you might be rightly guided
Remember when Moses returned with the Divine Book, he said to his people: "O my people! You have indeed grievously wronged yourselves by taking the calf for worship; so turn in repentance to your Creator and slay the culprits among you; that will be best for you in His sight." He accepted your repentance; surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
Remember when you said: "O Moses! We shall never believe you until we see Allah with our own eyes," a thunderbolt struck you while you were looking on and you fell dead
Then We raised you up after your death; so that you might be grateful
(And We even provided you the shade of clouds and sent down to you manna and salva) saying: "Eat of the good things We have provided for you;" in spite of these favors your forefathers violated our commandments. However, by violating our commandments they did not harm Us, but they harmed their own souls
Remember when We said: "Enter this town and eat whatever you wish to your heart's content; make your way through the gates, with humility saying; ‘we repent.' We shall forgive you your sins and We shall increase the provisions for the righteous among you
But the wrongdoers changed Our Words from that which they were asked to say, so We sent down a scourge from heaven as a punishment for their transgression
Remember the time when Moses prayed for water for his people; We said: "Strike the rock with your staff." Thereupon twelve springs came out of it. Each tribe was assigned its own drinking-place. Then they were commanded: "Eat and drink of what Allah has provided and do not create mischief in the land
Remember when you said: "O Moses! We cannot endure one kind of food; call on your Lord to give us a variety of food which the earth produces, such as green-herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions." ‘What?’ Moses asked. ‘Would you exchange the better for the worse? If that’s what you want, go back to some city; there you will find what you have asked for. Gradually they became so degraded that shame and misery were brought upon them and they drew upon themselves the wrath of Allah; this was because they went on rejecting the commandments of Allah and killed His prophets unjustly, furthermore, it was the consequence of their disobedience and transgression
Rest assured that Believers (Muslims), Jews, Christians and Sabians - whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and performs good deeds - will be rewarded by their Lord; they will have nothing to fear or to regret
Remember O Children of Israel when We took a covenant from you and when We lifted the Mount (Tur) over your heads saying: "Hold firmly to what We have given you (Torah) and follow the commandments therein, so that you may guard yourself against evil
But even after that you backed out; if there would not have been the Grace and Mercy of Allah upon you, you surely would have been among the losers
You very well know the story of those of you who transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath; We ordered them: "Be detested apes
Thus, We made their fate an example to their own people and to succeeding generations, and a lesson to those who are God-conscious
Remember the incident when Moses said to his people: "Allah commands you to sacrifice a cow," they replied, "do you ridicule us?" Moses answered, "I seek the protection of Allah from being one of the ignorant
Request your Lord, they said, "to give us some details of that cow." Moses replied: "Allah says, the cow should neither be too old nor too young but of middle age;" do, therefore, what you are commanded
Request your Lord again they said, "to clarify for us her color." Moses replied: "Allah says, the said cow should be of a rich and deep yellow color pleasing to the eyes
Again they said: "Request your Lord to clarify for us the exact type of cow she should be, for to us all cows look alike; if Allah wills, we shall be rightly guided
Moses replied: "Allah says, the said cow should have neither been used to till the soil nor water the fields; a healthy one free from any blemish." "Now you have brought us the accurate description," they said. Then they slaughtered her, after they had nearly declined
And remember the incident when you killed a man and started disputing as to who killed him, Allah made it known what you concealed
So We said: "Strike the dead body with a piece of the slaughtered cow." That’s how Allah brought the dead to life to show you His Signs so that you may understand His power to restore life
But even after seeing that your hearts became hard like a rock or even harder, for there are some rocks from which rivers gush out, and there are some which break asunder and water comes out of them, and there are some which fall down with the fear of Allah. And Allah is not unaware of what you do
Do you, O Believers, still hope that they (people of the Book) will believe in what you say, when some of them have already heard the word of Allah and perverted it knowingly after they understood it
When they meet the believers (Muslims) they say: "We too are believers," but when they (people of the Book) meet each other in private, they say: "Would you disclose to the believers (Muslims) what Allah has revealed to you? So that they (Muslims) may use it as an argument against you in the court of your Lord? Have you no sense
Do they not really know that Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal
Among them there are some illiterates who do not know their Holy Book; they follow their own desires and do nothing but conjecture
Woe to those who write the Book with their own hands and then say: "This is from Allah," so that they may sell it for a petty price! Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they have earned
The Jews say: "The fire shall not touch us except for a few days." Ask them: "Have you obtained such a promise from Allah which He would not break ? Or do you assert against Allah what you do not know
Yea! Those who commit evil and become encircled in sin are the inmates of Hellfire; they shall live there for ever
As for those who believe and do good deeds, they will be the residents of Paradise and live there forever
Remember, We took a covenant (firm commitment) from the children of Israel: "You shall worship none but Allah; be good to your parents, relatives, orphans and destitute, speak fair to the people, establish 'Salah', and pay 'Zakah.'" But you broke the covenant, except a few of you, and you paid no heed
Also remember another covenant which We took from you: That you shall not shed blood among yourselves and you shall not expel your own people from your homes; you confirmed it and you are witness to it
Yet there you are, killing your own people, expelling a group amongst you from their homes, backing each other with sin and aggression; and if they come to you as captives, you trade them for ransoms whereas their expulsion was unlawful for you to begin with. Do you believe in a part of your Holy Book and reject the rest? So what other punishment do such people among you, who behave like this, deserve, than disgrace in this world and to be driven to grievous punishment on the Day of Judgment? Allah is not unaware of what you do
Such are the people who trade the life of this world at the expense of the Hereafter; so neither their punishment shall be lightened nor shall they be helped
To Moses We gave the Book (Torah) and sent after him other Messengers in succession; then We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, clear Signs and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit (Gabriel). Why is it that whenever there came to you a Messenger with a message which did not suit your desires, you became so arrogant that to some of them you called impostors and others you killed
They say: "Our hearts are in secure wrappers;" but the fact of the matter is that Allah has cursed them for their disbelief, so little is that which they believe
Now when there has come to them a Book from Allah confirming the Holy Books of Torah and Gospel which they already have - even though before this they used to pray for victory against the unbelievers - when there came to them that which they very well recognize, they knowingly rejected it; Allah’s curse is on such disbelievers
Ridiculous is the price for which they have sold away their souls, that they deny Allah’s revelation merely because of their grudge, that Allah should send His grace (on an Israelite rather than) on whom He pleases from His servants (Muhammad)! They have drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath, and for such disbelievers there is a disgraceful punishment
When they are asked to believe in what Allah has revealed, they reply: "We only believe in what Allah has sent to us (Torah), and we reject what is beside that," while it is the truth confirming their own scriptures! Well, ask them, "If you sincerely believe in what was sent to you , why did you kill the Prophets of Allah who were sent to you from amongst yourselves before
Moses came to you with clear Signs, no sooner was he away from you, than you committed evil by worshipping the calf
Remember when We took a Covenant from you and We lifted the Mount of Tur over your heads saying: "Take what We have given you firmly and listen to Our Commandments," you replied: "we have heard but we will not obey." So much was the love of that calf in their hearts due to their unbelief. Tell them: "If you are real believers, then why does your faith prompt you to do such evil things
Say O Muhammad: "If the Home of the Hereafter is exclusively for you and not for the rest of mankind, then wish for death if you are true in your claim
But they will never wish for death, because they are fully aware of the consequences of what they have sent before them for the Hereafter. And Allah knows the mentality of the wrongdoers
You will find them the greediest of men for life, even greedier than the pagans; each one of them wishes to be given a life of a thousand years; but the grant of such a life will not save them from the punishment, for Allah is watching whatever they do
Say O Muhammad: "Whoever is the enemy of Jibra'el (Gabriel) should know that he revealed this Qur'an to your heart by Allah’s command, which confirms previous scriptures, and is a guidance and good news for the believers
Let them know that whoever is an enemy to Allah, His angels, His Messengers, Jibra'el (Gabriel) and Mika‘el (Michael); Allah is an enemy to such unbelievers
We have sent down to you clear revelations: no one can deny them except the transgressors
Has it not been the case that every time they made a covenant a group of them threw it aside? But the fact is that most of them are faithless
Whenever there came to them a Messenger from Allah confirming their own Holy Book, a group from those to whom the Holy book were given cast off the Book of Allah behind their backs as if they knew nothing about it
and accepted what the Satans falsely attributed to the kingdom of Solomon; not that Solomon was an unbeliever, it was the Satans who were unbelievers; they taught witchcraft to the people and that which was revealed to the two angels, Harut and Marut in the city of Babylon. Yet, these two angels never taught magic to anyone without saying: "We have been sent to tempt you; do not renounce your faith." In spite of this warning, those people kept on learning from the angels, the magic of which could cause discord between husband and wife; although they could harm none with it except with Allah’s permission. They learned, indeed, what harmed them and did not profit them; even though they knew fully well that the buyers of magic would have no share in the happiness of the Hereafter. Surely, they sold their souls for a bad price, if they could understand it
If they would have believed (accepted Islam) and kept themselves away from evil, there would have been a better reward from Allah, if they could understand it
O Believers, do not say to our Messenger: "Ra'ina" (an ambiguous word for: "Listen, may you become deaf" or "Our shepherd" or in Judeo-Arabic language conveys the sense, "our evil one.") But say "Unzurna" ("look upon" us "or pay attention" to us) and listen to him carefully; and remember that there is a painful punishment for the unbelievers
The unbelievers among the People of the Book, and the pagans, would never wish that any good be sent down to you, O Muhammad, from your Lord, but Allah chooses for His special Mercy whom He pleases, and Allah is the most Gracious
We do not abrogate any of Our verses of the Qur'an or cause it to be forgotten except that We substitute it with something better or similar; don't you know that Allah has full power over everything
Do you not know that to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and that besides Allah, you have no protector or helper
Do you intend to ask questions from your Messenger (Muhammad) as Moses was questioned before? But whoever barters belief for unbelief, has indeed lost the direction of the Right Way
Many among the people of the Book (Jews and Christians) wish they could somehow turn you back to unbelief, due to their selfish envy, after the truth has become quite clear to them. Forgive them and bear with them until Allah brings about His decision; rest assured that Allah has power over everything
Establish Salah and pay Zakah, and whatever good you send ahead of you to the Hereafter for yourselves, you shall find it with Allah; surely Allah is watching all your actions
They say: "None shall enter paradise except the one who is a Jew or a Christian." These are their vain desires. Say O Muhammad: "Let us have your proof if you are right in your claim
Yea! Whoever submits himself entirely to Allah and is good to others will be rewarded by his Lord; and will have nothing to fear or to regret
The Jews say: "The Christians are not on the right track," and the Christians say: "It is the Jews who are not on the right track," yet both read their Holy Books (Torah or Gospel). And those who have no knowledge (the pagan Arabs) say like to what both of them say; so Allah will judge between them in their dispute on the Day of Judgment
Who is more unjust than the one who prevents people from the Masajid (place of worship) of Allah , forbids the mention of His name therein, and strives to ruin them ? It is not proper for such people to enter in them except with His fear. For them there is disgrace in this world and grievous punishment in the Hereafter
To Allah belong the East and the West; whichever direction you turn your face there is the presence of Allah. Surely Allah is All-Embracing and All-Knowing
They say: "Allah has taken to Himself a son;" Allah is above such things! Rather, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth; all are obedient to Him
He is the Creator of the heavens and the earth ! When He decrees a thing, He needs only to say, "Be," and there it becomes
Those who have no knowledge ask: "Why does Allah not speak to us face to face or send us a sign ?" The same demand was made by those before them: they all have the same mentality. We have already shown clear signs to those whose faith is firm
What clearer sign could there be than this Book? We have sent you (O Muhammad) with the knowledge of the Truth and made you the bearer of good news and warning; now, you will not be called upon to answer about the actions of the companions of the blazing fire
The Jews and the Christians will never be pleased with you, until you follow their faith. O Muhammad, tell them : "Allah’s guidance is the only guidance;" and if after all the knowledge you have received, you yield to their desires, there shall be none to protect you or help you from the wrath of Allah
Those to whom We have given the book and who read it as it ought to be read, they are the ones who believe in it; as for those who reject it, they are for sure the losers
O Children of Israel! Remember the special favor which I bestowed upon you; that I exalted you above all other nations
Guard yourselves against the Day when one soul shall not avail another, no ransom shall be taken, no intercession shall profit anyone, and no help shall be given
Remember when Abraham was tested by his Lord with certain commands, he fulfilled them. Allah said: "Surely, I will make you the leader of mankind." "What about my offspring?" Asked Abraham. "My pledge," said Allah, "will not apply to the evil doers
Remember when We made the House (the Ka'bah) a center and sanctuary for mankind saying, "Take the station of Abraham as a place of prayer;" We entrusted Abraham and Isma‘il to cleanse Our House for those who walk around it, who meditate in it, and who kneel and prostrate in prayers
Abraham said: "My Lord, make this (Mecca) a secure town and provide its people with plenty of food from fruits, those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day." He answered, "As for those who do not, I shall also provide for them in this life, though in the Hereafter I shall drag them to the torture of Hellfire and it is an evil destination indeed
Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House and dedicated it by saying: "Accept this from us, O Lord, You are the one who hears all and knows all
O Lord, make us both Muslims (submissive to You); and make our descendants a nation that will be Muslims (submissive to You). Teach us our rites of worship and forbear our shortcomings; surely, You are the Acceptor of repentance, the Merciful
O Lord, appoint from among them a Messenger who shall recite to them Your Revelations and teach them the Book and the Wisdom and sanctify them; surely, You are the All-Mighty, the Wise
Who but a foolish man would renounce the faith of Abraham? We chose him in this worldly life, while in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous
When his Lord asked him: "Be a Muslim," he answered: "I have become a Muslim to the Lord of the worlds
This was the legacy that Abraham left to his sons and so did Jacob, when he said: "O my sons! Allah has chosen for you this Deen (way of life), therefore, die not unless you are Muslims
Were you present when death approached Jacob? He asked his sons: "Who will you worship after me?" They replied: "We will worship the same One God Who is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac, and to Him we all submit as Muslims
They were a people that have passed away. They shall reap the fruits of what they did, and you shall for what you do. You shall not be questioned about what they did
Jews and Christians say: "Be Jews or Christians, you shall then be rightly guided." O Muhammad, say: "By no means! We follow the faith of Abraham, the upright one; and he was not one of the pagans
Say: "We believe in Allah and that which is revealed to us; and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and their descendants, and that which was given to Moses, Jesus and other Prophets from their Lord. We do not discriminate any of them, and to Allah we have surrendered ourselves (in Islam)
So, if they accept Islam like you, they shall be rightly guided; if they reject it, they will surely fall into dissension (divide into differing factions); Allah will be your sufficient defender against them, and He hears and knows everything
Baptism is from Allah; and who is better than Allah in baptizing? Him do we worship
Say, O Muhammad: "Would you dispute with us concerning Allah, who is our Lord and your Lord as well? We shall be accountable to Him for our deeds and you for yours; to Him Alone we are devoted
Do you claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and their descendants were all Jews or Christians? Are you more knowledgeable than Allah?" Who is more wicked than the one who hides the testimony received from Allah? Allah is not unaware of what you do
That was a nation who has already passed away. They are responsible for what they did and you are for what you do, you shall not be questioned about their deeds
The foolish will ask: "Why did they turn away from the Qiblah (the direction in prayer) towards which they used to face?" O Muhammad, say: "East and West belong to Allah; He guides whomever He wishes to the Right Way
We have made you a moderate Ummah (nation) so that you may testify against mankind and that your own Messenger may testify against you. We decreed your former Qiblah only to distinguish those who are the real followers of the Messenger from those who would back away from the faith. It was indeed a hard test except for those whom Allah has guided. Allah wants not to make your faith fruitless. Allah is Compassionate and Merciful to mankind
O Muhammad, many a time We noticed you turning your face towards heaven; now We will make you turn towards a Qiblah that will please you. Turn your face during Salah towards the Sacred Mosque (Ka'bah); wherever you are turn your face in that direction. The people of the Book know this to be the truth from their Lord. Allah is not unaware of what they do
Even if you give every proof to the people of the Book, they will not accept your Qiblah, nor will you accept theirs. Neither of them (the Jews and Christians) are the followers of each other’s Qiblah. If, after all the knowledge you have been given, you yield to their desires then surely you will be among the wrongdoers
Those to whom We have given the Book (Jews and Christians) recognize this fact as they recognize their own children
Nevertheless, a group of them deliberately conceal the truth. The truth is from your Lord; therefore, you should never be among the doubters
Everyone has a direction towards which one turns, therefore, emulate one another in good deeds. Wherever you are, Allah will bring all of you together; Allah has power over all things
From whatever place you come forth, turn your face during Salah towards the Sacred Mosque; this is in fact a commandment from your Lord. Allah is not unaware of what you do
Again, whatever place you come forth, turn your face during Salah towards the Sacred Mosque; and wherever you are, face towards it, so that people will not have any argument against you, except those among them who are wrongdoers. Do not fear them; fear Me, so that I may perfect My favors to you and that you may be rightly guided
just as We bestowed Our favor upon you when We sent among you a Messenger of your own who recites to you Our revelations, sanctifies you, teaches you the Book and wisdom, and teaches you that which you did not know
Therefore, remember Me, and, I will remember you, be grateful to Me and never deny Me
O’ You who believe! Seek My help with patience and prayer: surely, Allah is with those who are patient
Do not say about those who are slain in the cause of Allah (martyrs), that they are dead. Nay, they are alive, but you do not perceive it
We shall surely test your steadfastness with fear and famine, with loss of property, life and produce. Give good news to those who endure with patience
who, when afflicted with calamity, say: "We belong to Allah and to Him we shall return
Such are the people on whom there are blessings and Mercy from Allah; and they are the ones that are rightly guided
Behold! Safa and Marwah (two hills in the Sacred Mosque) are among the symbols of Allah. So anyone who performs Hajj or Umrah (pilgrimage) to the House, there is no blame if one goes around both of them; and anyone who does good voluntarily should know that surely Allah knows the grateful
Those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance, after We have made it clear in the Book for mankind will have Allah's curse and that of those who are entitled to curse
except those who repent, reform and let the truth be known; I will accept their repentance, for I am the Receiver of Repentance, the Merciful
Surely those who are unbelievers and die while they are unbelievers, they are the ones on whom is the curse of Allah, the angels and all mankind
they will live in it for ever; neither their punishment shall be lightened nor shall they be given respite
Your God is one God; there is no one worthy of worship except Him, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Surely, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, in the alternation of the night and the day, in the sailing of the ships through the ocean for the profit of mankind, in the rain which Allah sends down from the skies, with which He revives the earth after its death and spreads in it all kinds of animals, in the change of the winds and the clouds between the sky and the earth that are made subservient, there are signs for rational people
There are some who worship other deities besides Allah (pagans), they love them as they should love Allah, whereas the believers are strong in love for Allah. If those who are unjust could visualize (the Day of Judgement) when they will see the chastisement, they would come to know for sure that all powers belong to Allah and that Allah is stern in retribution
On that Day those leaders who were being followed, when faced with their punishment, will renounce those who followed them and the bonds which united them will break asunder
The followers will say: "If it could be possible for us to live again, we would renounce them as they have renounced us today." Thus Allah will show them the fruits of their deeds. They will sigh with regret, and shall not be able to come out of the Hell fire
O Mankind! Eat of what is lawful and clean on the earth and do not follow the footsteps of Satan, surely he is your open enemy
He enjoins you to commit evil and indecency and to say certain things against Allah about which you have no knowledge
When it is said to them: "Follow what Allah has revealed." They reply: "Nay! We will follow what our forefathers practiced." Well! Even if their forefathers had no sense at all and lacked guidance
The parable of those who reject faith is like cattle which, call out to them as one may, hear nothing but a shout and a cry since they are unable to understand; they are deaf, dumb and blind, and understand nothing
O believers! Eat the clean things which We have provided you and give thanks to Allah, if you worship only Him
He has forbidden you to eat dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which any name other than Allah has been invoked; but if someone is compelled by absolute necessity, intending neither to sin nor to transgress, they shall incur no sin. Surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Surely those who conceal any part of the Book which Allah has revealed and sell His revelations for a petty price (material gain), shall swallow nothing but fire into their bellies. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will neither speak to them nor purify them and they shall have painful punishment
These are the kind of people who barter guidance for error and forgiveness for punishment. How stubborn are they to encounter Hell fire
Their doom is because Allah has revealed the Book with the truth; surely those who seek causes of dispute in the Book (the Qur'an) are in extreme schism (divergence)
Righteousness is not whether you turn your face towards East or West; but righteousness is to believe in Allah, the Last Day, the Angels, the Books and the Prophets, and to spend wealth out of love for Him on relatives, orphans, helpless, needy travellers, those who ask for and on the redemption of captives; and to establish Salah (prayers), to pay Zakah (alms), to fulfill promises when made, to be steadfast in distress, in adversity, and at the time of war. These people are the truthful and these are the pious
O believers! Retaliation is prescribed for you in the cases of murder: a free man for a free man, a slave for a slave, and a female for a female. But if anyone is pardoned by his aggrieved brother, then bloodwit (a ransom for manslaughter) should be decided according to the common law and payment should be made with gratitude. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord. Now, whoever exceeds the limits after this, shall have a painful punishment
O men of understanding! There is security of life for you in the law of retaliation, so that you may learn self-restraint
The will is made obligatory before the death of anyone of you who is leaving some property behind to bequest it equitably to his parents and relatives. This is a duty incumbent on the righteous
If anyone changes the bequest after hearing it, the sin of it then is on those who make the change. Allah hears and knows everything
But there is no blame on the one who suspects an error or an injustice on the part of the testator and brings about a settlement among the parties. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O believers! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you so that you may learn self-restraint
Fast the prescribed number of days; except if any of you is ill or on a journey, then fast a similar number of days later. For those who can not endure it for medical reasons, there is a ransom: the feeding of one poor person for each missed day. Whoever does more good than this voluntarily, it is better for him. However, if you truly understand the rationale of fasting, it is better for you to fast
It is the month of Ramadhan in which the Qur’an was revealed, a guidance for mankind with clear teachings showing the Right Way and a criterion of truth and falsehood. Therefore, anyone of you who witnesses that month should fast therein, and whoever is ill or upon a journey shall fast a similar number of days later on. Allah intends your well-being and does not want to put you to hardship. He wants you to complete the prescribed period so that you should glorify His Greatness and render thanks to Him for giving you guidance
When my servants question you about Me, tell them that I am very close to them. I answer the prayer of every suppliant when he calls Me; therefore, they should respond to Me and put their trust in Me, so that they may be rightly guided
It is made lawful for you to approach your wives during the night of the fast; they are an apparel for you and you for them. Allah knows that you were committing dishonesty to your souls. So He has relented towards you and pardoned you. Now, you may approach and seek what Allah has written for you. Eat and drink until the white thread of dawn appears to you distinct from the black thread of night, then complete your fast till nightfall. Do not approach your wives during I‘htikaf (retreat in the mosques in last ten days of Ramadhan). These are the limits set by Allah: do not ever violate them. Thus Allah makes His revelations clear to mankind so that they may guard themselves against evil
Do not misappropriate one another’s property unjustly, nor bribe the judges, in order to misappropriate a part of other people’s property, sinfully and knowingly
They question you about the new moon. Tell them: it is to determine the periods of time for the benefit of mankind and for the Hajj (pilgrimage). It is not righteous to enter your houses from the back doors during Hajj times. Righteousness is to fear Allah. Enter your houses through the proper doors and fear Allah so that you may prosper
Fight in the cause of Allah with those who fight against you, but do not exceed the limits. Allah does not like transgressors
Kill them wherever they confront you in combat and drive them out of the places from which they have driven you. Though killing is bad, creating mischief is worse than killing. Do not fight them within the precincts of the Sacred Mosque unless they attack you there; but if they attack you, put them to the sword; that is the punishment for such unbelievers
If they cease hostility, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Fight against them until there is no more disorder and Allah’s supremacy is established. If they desist, let there be no hostility except against the oppressors
The Sacred month, in which fighting is prohibited, is to be respected if the same is respected by the enemy: sacred things too are subject to retaliation. Therefore, if anyone transgresses a prohibition and attacks you, retaliate with the same force. Fear Allah, and bear in mind that Allah is with the righteous
Give generously for the cause of Allah and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands. Be charitable: Allah loves those who are charitable
Complete the Hajj (obligatory pilgrimage to Mecca) and the Umrah (optional visit to Mecca) for the sake of Allah. If you are prevented from proceeding then send such offering for sacrifice as you can afford and do not shave your head until the offerings have reached their destination. But if any of you is ill or has an ailment in his scalp which necessitates shaving, he must pay ransom either by fasting or feeding the poor or offering a sacrifice. If in peacetime anyone wants to take the advantage of performing Umrah and Hajj' together, he should make an offering which he can afford; but if he lack the means, let him fast three days during the Hajj and seven days on his return making ten days in all. This order is for the one whose household is not in the precincts of the Sacred Mosque. Fear Allah and know that Allah is strict in retribution
Hajj is in the well known months. One who undertakes to perform it must abstain from husband-wife relationship, obscene language, and wrangling during Hajj. Whatever good you do, Allah knows it. Take necessary provisions with you for the journey, and piety is the best provision of all. Fear Me, O People endowed with understanding
There is no blame on you if you seek the bounty of your Lord during this journey. When you return from Arafat, (stop at Muzdalifah and) praise Allah near Mash‘ar-al-Har’am. Praise Him as He has guided you, for before this you were from the people who had lost the Right Way
Then return from where the others return and ask Allah’s forgiveness; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
When you have fulfilled your sacred duties, praise Allah as you used to praise your forefathers or with deeper reverence. There are some who say: "Our Lord! Give us abundance in this world." Such people will not have any share in the hereafter
But there are others who say: "Our Lord! Give us the good life, both in this world and in the Hereafter and save us from the torment of the fire
Such people shall have their due share in both worlds according to what they have earned, Allah is swift in settling all accounts
Celebrate the praises of Allah during these appointed days. If anyone hastens to leave Mina after two days or stays there a day longer there is no blame on him provided he spends these days in piety. Fear Allah and remember that you will surely be gathered before Him
Among the people there is one whose speech fascinates you in this worldly life; he may even call upon Allah to witness what is in his heart, yet he is your staunch opponent
And when he leaves you, he directs his efforts towards causing mischief in the land, destroying crops and cattle. Allah, Whom he makes his witness, does not like mischief
When it is said to him "Fear Allah," arrogance carries him off to sin. Hell will be the proper place for such a person, which is indeed an evil refuge
And among people there is one who would give away his life to seek the pleasure of Allah. Allah is affectionate to His devotees
O believers enter into Islam completely and do not follow the footsteps of Satan, surely he is your clear-cut enemy
If you falter after receiving the clear-cut message, then keep in mind that Allah is Mighty, Wise
Are they waiting for Allah to come down to them in the shadow of clouds, along with the angels and make His decision known? Ultimately, all matters will be presented to Allah for decision
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear-cut signs We have given them. Anyone who substitutes the favor of Allah (changes the revelations of Allah) after it has come to him, should know that Allah is strict in retribution
The life of this world is charming to those who are unbelievers and they mock at those who believe, but they forget that those who fear Allah will rank above them on the Day of Resurrection; Allah gives sustenance without measure to whom He wants
Mankind was one nation having one religion. Later when people invented other religions, Allah appointed Prophets as bearers of good news and warnings; and revealed to them the Book with the True Guidance to settle the matters of dispute between mankind. But the very people to whom it was given, started disputes after the clear arguments had come to them, because of rivalry between one another. Allah has guided the believers by His will to the truth in those matters in which they had differences. Allah guides whom He pleases towards the Right Way
Do you think that you will enter Paradise without any trials while you have known the examples of those who passed away before you? They were afflicted with suffering and adversity and were so violently shaken up that even the Messenger and the believers with him cried out: "When will Allah’s help come?" Then they were comforted with the words, Be aware! Allah’s help is ever close
They ask you what they should spend in charity. Say: "Whatever you spend with a good heart, give it to parents, relatives, orphans, the helpless, and travellers in need. Whatever good you do, Allah is aware of it
Fighting has been made obligatory for you, much to your dislike. It is quite possible that something which you don’t like is good for you and that something which you love is bad for you. Allah knows, and you do not
They ask you about war in the Sacred Month. Tell them: "Fighting in this month is a heinous offence; but to prevent from the path of Allah, to deny Him, to prevent access and expel His worshippers from the Sacred Mosque is a more severe crime, since mischief is worse than killing in His sight. As for unbelievers: they will not cease fighting until they succeed in turning you back from your religion if they can; and if any of you turns back from his religion and dies as an unbeliever, his deeds will become void in this life and in the hereafter. He will be the inmate of the hellfire, to live in there forever
Surely those who are believers, and migrated and struggled in the path of Allah, they can hope for the mercy of Allah; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
They ask you about drinking and gambling. Tell them: "There is great sin in both, although they may have some benefit for men; but the sin is greater than the benefit." They ask you what they should spend; tell them: "Whatever you can." Thus Allah makes His revelations clear to you, so that you may reflect upon
this world and the hereafter. They ask you about orphans. Tell them: "It is best to deal with them justly; you may become copartners with them, after all they are your brethren; Allah knows who means harm and also who means their welfare. If Allah had wanted He could be hard on you in this matter, surely Allah is Mighty, Wise
Do not marry pagan women until they become believers; a believing slave woman is better than a free pagan woman even though she may be more attractive to you. Likewise, do not marry pagan men until they become believers: a believing slave is better than a free pagan even though he may be more pleasing to you. These pagans invite you to the hellfire while Allah invites you towards paradise and forgiveness by His grace. He makes His revelations clear to mankind so that they may take heed
They ask you about menstruation. Tell them: "This is a discomfort; therefore, keep away from women (do not have sexual intercourse) during their menstrual periods and do not approach them until they are clean again. When they have cleansed themselves then you may approach them in the manner Allah has enjoined for you. Surely Allah loves those who turn to Him in repentance and keep themselves clean
Your wives are your tilth; so go to your tilth when you like. Take care of your future and refrain from the displeasure of Allah. Bear in mind that you shall meet Him in the Hereafter, and give good news to the believers
Do not use Allah's name in your oaths as an excuse to prevent you from dealing justly, guarding against evil and making peace between people; Allah hears and knows everything
Allah will not hold you accountable for what is inadvertent in your oaths, but He will hold you accountable for what you intended in your hearts; Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
Those who renounce conjugal relationship with their wives on oath have a limitation of four months. If they reconcile and restore their relationship, surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
But if they decide to divorce them, they may do so, surely Allah hears and knows everything
Divorced women must keep themselves waiting for three menstrual periods, it is not lawful for them to hide what Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the Last Day. In such cases their husbands have a right to take them back in that period if they desire reconciliation. Women have rights similar to those exercised against them in an equitable manner, although men have a status (degree of responsibility) above them. Allah is Mighty, Wise
The pronouncement of revocable divorce is only allowed twice: then she should be allowed to stay with honor or let go with kindness after the third pronouncement. It is not lawful for husbands to take anything back which they have given them except when both parties fear that they may not be able to follow the limits set by Allah; then if you fear that they both will not be able to keep the limits of Allah, there is no blame if, by mutual agreement the wife compensates the husband to obtain divorce. These are the limits set by Allah; do not transgress them, and those who transgress the limits of Allah are the wrongdoers
So if a husband divorces his wife three times, it is not lawful for him to remarry her until after she has married another man and gotten the divorced. In that case there is no blame on either of them if they reunite in marriage, provided they think that they can keep the limits of Allah. Such are the limits of Allah which He makes clear to the people of understanding
When you divorce women and they have reached the end of their waiting period (‘Iddat) either allow them to stay with honor or let them go with kindness; but you should not retain them to harm them or to take undue advantage; if anyone does that he wrongs his own soul. Do not take Allah’s revelations as a joke. Remember the favors of Allah upon you and the fact that He sent down the Book and Wisdom for your guidance. Fear Allah and know that Allah has knowledge of everything
When you have divorced women and they have reached the end of their waiting period do not prevent them from marrying their prospective husbands if they have come to an honorable agreement. This is enjoined on everyone amongst you who believes in Allah and the Last Day. This is more virtuous and chaste for you; Allah knows what you do not know
The mothers shall breast-feed their offspring for two whole years if the father wishes the breast-feeding to be completed. The reasonable cost of their maintenance and clothing will be the responsibility of the child’s father. No one should be charged with more than they can afford. Neither a mother should be made to suffer on account of her child nor a father on account of his child. The father’s heirs are under the same obligation. But if, with mutual agreement, they both decide to wean the child, there is no blame on them. If you decide to have a foster-mother for your offspring, there is no blame on you provided you pay what you have promised to pay in an honorable manner. Fear Allah and beware that Allah observes your actions
As for those of you who die and leave widows behind, let them abstain from marriage for four months and ten days: when they have reached the end of this period, there is no blame on you for what they do for themselves in a decent manner. Allah is aware of what you do
There is no blame on you if you make a proposal of marriage during their waiting period openly or keep it in your hearts. Allah knows that you will naturally cherish them in your hearts; however, be careful not to make any secret agreement, and if you wish to marry, speak to them in an honorable manner. Do not confirm the marriage tie until the prescribed waiting period expires. You should know that Allah is aware of what is in your hearts, so fear Him. Bear in mind that Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
There is no blame on you if you divorce women before the marriage is consummated or the dowry is settled. Pay them something anyhow, the rich man according to his means and poor according to his, a reasonable amount in all fairness. This is an obligation on the righteous people
And if you divorce them before the marriage is consummated but after the fixation of a dowry, give them half of their dowry unless the woman wants to waive it or the man in whose hand is the marriage tie agrees to forego (and pay the dowry in full). To forego and give full dowry is closer to piety. Do not forget to show kindness to each other. Surely Allah observes your actions
Guard your Salah (obligatory regular prayers) especially the middle Salah and stand up with true devotion to Allah
If you are in danger, pray on foot or while riding; and when you are safe, remember Allah in the manner that He has taught you which you did not know before
Those of you who die and leave widows should bequeath for them a year’s maintenance without causing them to leave their homes; but if they leave the residence on their own there is no blame on you for what they chose for themselves in a fair way. Allah is Mighty, Wise
Reasonable provisions must also be made for divorced women. That is an obligation upon those who fear Allah
That’s how Allah makes His Revelations clear to you so that you may understand
Have you reflected on the case of thousands of people (Israelites) who fled their homes for fear of death? Allah said to them: "Die" (gave them death). Then He gave them life again. Surely Allah is bountiful to mankind, but most of the people are ungrateful
O believers, fight in the path of Allah without fear of death and bear in mind that Allah hears and knows everything
Who will loan to Allah a beautiful loan which Allah will increase many fold? Allah alone can decrease and increase wealth, and to Him you all shall return
Have you not reflected on what the leaders of the children of Israel demanded from one of their Prophets after the death of Moses? "Appoint for us a king," they said, "and we will fight in the cause of Allah." The Prophet replied: "What if you refuse to fight when you are ordered to do so?" They replied, "How could we refuse to fight in the cause of Allah, while we along with our children were driven out of our homes?" But when, on their demand, they were ordered to fight, all refused except a few of them. Allah knows the evildoers
Their Prophet told them: "Allah has appointed TaLut to be your king." They replied: "How can he be our king when some of us are more deserving than him? Besides, he is not rich." The Prophet said: "Allah has chosen him to rule over you and blessed him with knowledge and stature. Allah grants kingship to whom He pleases and Allah has boundless knowledge
Furthermore, their Prophet told them: "The sign of his appointment as a king is that there will come to you the chest in which there is tranquillity from your Lord and the residue of relics which the family of Moses and the family of Haroon (Aaron) left behind, and that chest will be carried by the angels. Surely therein is a sign for you if you are true believers
When TaLut marched forth with his army, he announced: "Allah will test you at a certain river; anyone who will drink from its water shall cease to be my soldier, and those who will not drink to quench their thirst with its water except a sip or so from the hollow of their hands shall fight on my side." They all drank from it, inspite of this warning, except a few of them. When he and those who believed with him crossed the river, they said: "We have no power left this day against JaLut (Goliath) and his warriors." But the believers, who knew they would meet Allah, replied: "It has often happened that a small group, by the grace of Allah, has vanquished a mighty army. Allah is with those who endure with patience
When they advanced to face JaLut (Goliath) and his warriors, they prayed: "Our Lord! Fill our hearts with steadfastness, make our steps firm, and help us (give us victory) against the unbelievers
By Allah’s will they put the unbelievers to flight, and Davidkilled JaLut. Allah gave David the kingdom and wisdom and taught him what else He pleased. If Allah had not been repelling one set of people by the might of others, there would indeed be disorder on earth, but Allah is Gracious to all the worlds
These are the revelations of Allah; We recite them to you in truth. Surely you, O Muhammad, are one of Our Messengers
These are the Messengers (which We have sent for the guidance of mankind). We have exalted some above others. To some Allah spoke directly; others He raised high in ranks; to Jesus the son of Mary We gave clear Signs and supported him with the Holy Spirit. If Allah wanted, the people who received the clear signs would not have fought against each other; but they disputed as a result, there were some who believed while others rejected. Yet If Allah wanted, they would not have fought each other; but Allah does what He intends
O believers! Spend out of the sustenance which We have provided for you before the arrival of that Day when there will be no bargaining, friendship or intercession. It is the unbelievers who are wrongdoers
Allah! There is no god but Him: the Living, the Eternal. He neither slumbers nor sleeps. To Him belongs all that is in the Heavens and the Earth. Who can intercede with Him without His permission? He knows what is before them and what is behind them. They cannot gain access to any thing out of His knowledge except what He pleases. His throne is more vast than the heavens and the earth, and guarding of these both does not fatigue Him. He is the Exalted, the Supreme
There is no compulsion in religion. True guidance has been made clearly distinct from error. Therefore, whoever renounces ‘Taghut’ (forces of Satan) and believes in Allah has grasped the firm hand-hold that will never break. Allah, Whose hand-hold you have grasped, hears all and knows all
Allah is the Wali (Protector) of those who believe, He brings them out of the depth of darkness and leads them into the light. As for the unbelievers, whose wali (protector) is Taghut (forces of Satan), he takes them out of the light and leads them into the depths of darkness. As a result they will become the companions of the Hell fire and shall live therein forever
Have you ever reflected upon the one, to whom Allah had given a kingdom, who argued with Abraham about his Lord. When Abraham said: "My Lord is He Who has power to give life and to cause death." He replied: "I too have the power to give life and to cause death." Abraham said: "Well, Allah causes the sun to rise from the east; just make it rise from the west." Thus the unbeliever was confounded; Allah does not guide the evildoers
Or take another example of the one (Prophet Ezra) who passed by a town which had fallen down upon its roofs. He exclaimed: "How can Allah bring this dead township back to life?" Thereupon Allah caused him to die, and after one hundred years brought him back to life. Allah asked: "How long did you remain here?" Ezra replied: "Perhaps a day or part of a day." Allah said: "Nay! You have remained here for one hundred years: now just have a look at your food and drink; they are not rotten; and then look at your donkey and see that his very bones have decayed. We have done this to make you a Sign for mankind. Look at the bones of your donkey how We bring them together then clothe them with flesh and bring him back to life! When this all was shown clearly to him he said: "Now I know that Allah has power over everything
Yet another example is when Abraham said: "My Lord! Show me how you give life to the dead." He replied: "Have you no faith in this?" Abraham humbly submitted: "Yes! But I ask this to reassure my heart." Allah said: "Take four birds; train them to follow your direction, cut their bodies into pieces and scatter those pieces on hilltops, then call them back; Allah will bring them back to life and they will come to you right away. Thus you will know that Allah is All-powerful and Wise
The parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is that of a grain that sprouts into seven ears, each bearing one hundred grains. Allah gives manifold increase to whom He wishes. Allah has boundless knowledge
Those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah and do not follow their charity with reminders of their generosity or injure the feeling of the recipient, shall get their reward from their Lord; they shall have nothing to fear or to regret
Kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury. Allah is Self-sufficient, Forbearing
O believers! Do not make your charity worthless by reminders of your generosity or by injury to the recipients feelings, like those who spend their wealth to be seen by people and believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. Their parable is like a hard barren rock covered with a thin layer of soil; a heavy rain falls, leaving it just a bare stone. Such people will not gain any reward that they thought they had earned. Allah does not guide the unbelievers
The example of those who spend their wealth to seek the pleasure of Allah and to strengthen their souls is like a garden on a high and fertile ground: when heavy rain falls on it, it yields up twice its normal produce; and if no rain falls, even a light moisture is sufficient. Whatever you do is in the sight of Allah
Would any one of you like that his garden, which is full of palm trees, grape vines, and all kinds of fruits and watered by running streams, be blasted and consumed by a fiery whirlwind at the time when he has become too old and his children are too feeble to earn anything? Thus Allah makes His revelations clear to you so that you may ponder over them
O believers, spend in Allah’s Way the best portion of the wealth you have lawfully earned and that which We have produced for you from the earth, and do not pick out for charity those worthless things that you yourselves would not accept but with closed eyes. Bear in mind that Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
Satan threatens you with poverty and prompts you to commit what is indecent, while Allah promises you His forgiveness and bounties, and Allah has boundless knowledge
He grants wisdom to whom He pleases; and whoever is granted wisdom is indeed given a great wealth, yet none except people of understanding learn a lesson from it
Whatever you spend in charity or whatever vow you make, surely Allah knows it. The wrongdoers shall have no helpers
To give charity in public is good, but to give to the poor in private is better and will remove from you some of your sins. Allah is aware of your actions
O Prophet, you are not responsible for their guidance, it is Allah Who guides whom He pleases. Whatever wealth you spend in charity, it is to your own advantage; provided you give to seek the pleasure of Allah. Whatever wealth you spend for the sake of Allah, will be paid back to you in full, and you will not be wronged
Charity is for those needy people who are engaged so much in the cause of Allah that they cannot move about in the land to earn their livelihood: the ignorant think that they are wealthy on account of their modest behavior. You can recognize them by their look because they do not make insistent demands on people. Whatever you spend on them, surely Allah knows it
Those who spend their wealth in charity by night and day, secretly and openly, they will have their reward from their Lord. They shall have nothing to fear or to regret
Those who live on usury will not rise up before Allah except like those who are driven to madness by the touch of Satan. That is because they claim: "Trading is no different than usury, but Allah has made trading lawful and usury unlawful. He who has received the admonition from his Lord and has mended his way may keep his previous gains; Allah will be his judge. Those who turn back (repeat this crime), they shall be the inmates of hellfire wherein they will live forever
Allah has laid His curse on usury and blessed charity to prosper. Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner
Those who believe and do good deeds, establish regular prayers, and give regular charity will have their reward with their Lord. They will have nothing to fear or to regret
O You who believe! Fear Allah and waive what is still due to you from usury if you are indeed believers
or war shall be declared against you by Allah and His Messenger. If you repent, you may retain your principal, causing no loss to debtor and suffering no loss
If the debtor is in a difficulty, grant him time till it is easy for him to repay; but if you waive the sum by way of charity it will be better for you, if you understand it
Fear the Day when you shall all return to Allah; when every one shall be paid in full what they have earned and none shall be dealt with unjustly
O believers! When you deal with each other in lending for a fixed period of time, put it in writing. Let a scribe write it down with justice between the parties. The scribe, who is given the gift of literacy by Allah, should not refuse to write; he is under obligation to write. Let him who incurs the liability (debtor) dictate, fearing Allah his Lord and not diminishing anything from the settlement. If the borrower is mentally unsound or weak or is unable to dictate himself, let the guardian of his interests dictate for him with justice. Let two witnesses from among you bear witness to all such documents, if two men cannot be found, then one man and two women of your choice should bear witness, so that if one of the women forgets anything the other may remind her. The witnesses must not refuse when they are called upon to do so. You must not be averse to writing (your contract) for a future period, whether it is a small matter or big. This action is more just for you in the sight of Allah, because it facilitates the establishment of evidence and is the best way to remove all doubts; but if it is a common commercial transaction concluded on the spot among yourselves, there is no blame on you if you do not put it in writing. You should have witnesses when you make commercial transactions. Let no harm be done to the scribe or witnesses; and if you do so, you shall be guilty of transgression. Fear Allah; it is Allah that teaches you and Allah has knowledge of everything
If you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe to write down the transaction, then transact your business by taking possession of a pledge. If one of you entrust another with a pledge, let the trustee deliver the pledged property to its owner, and let him fear Allah, his Lord. Do not conceal testimony, and whoever conceals it, his heart is surely sinful. Allah is aware of all your actions
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. Whether you reveal what is in your minds or conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it. He, however, has full authority to pardon or punish anyone He pleases. Allah has complete power over everything
The Messenger believes in the Guidance revealed to him from his Lord and so do the Believers. They all believe in Allah, His angels, His books and His Messengers. They say: "We do not discriminate against anyone of His Messengers." And they say: "We hear and we obey. Grant us Your forgiveness, O Lord; to You we shall all return
Allah does not burden any human being with more than he can bear. Everyone will enjoy the credit of his deeds and suffer the debits of his evil-doings. The believers say: "Our Lord! Do not punish us if we forget or make a mistake. Our Lord! Do not place on us a burden as You placed on those before us. Our Lord! Lay not on us the kind of burden that we have no strength to bear. Pardon us, Forgive us, Have mercy on us. You are our Protector, help us against the unbelievers
Alif L'am M'im
Allah! There is no god but Him; the Living, the Eternal
He has revealed to you this Book with the Truth, confirming the scripture which preceded it, as He revealed the Torah and Gospel
before this, as a guidance for mankind and also revealed this Al-Furqan (criterion for judgment between right and wrong). Surely those who reject Allah’s revelations will be sternly punished; Allah is Mighty, capable of retribution
For sure nothing in the earth or in the heavens is hidden from Allah
It is He Who shapes your bodies in the wombs of your mothers as He pleases. There is no god but Him; the Mighty, the Wise
He is the One Who has revealed to you the Book. Some of its verses are decisive they are the foundation of the Book - while others are allegorical. Those whose hearts are infected with disbelief follow the allegorical part to mislead others and to give it their own interpretation, seeking for its hidden meanings, but no one knows its hidden meanings except Allah. Those who are well grounded in knowledge say: "We believe in it; it is all from our Lord." None will take heed except the people of understanding
They say: "Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate from the truth after you have guided us, and grant us Your own mercy; You are the Grantor of bounties without measure
Our Lord, You will surely gather all mankind before You on the Day about which there is no doubt; surely Allah does not break His promise
Surely neither their wealth nor their children will save the unbelievers from the wrath of Allah: they are the ones who will become the fuel for hellfire
Their end will be the same as that of the people of Pharaoh and their predecessors who denied Our revelations, so Allah called them to account for their sins. Allah is strict in retribution
O Muhammad, say to the unbelievers: "Soon you will be overpowered and driven together to Hell - which is a horrible refuge
Indeed there was a sign (lesson) for you in the two armies which met on the battlefield (of Badr): one was fighting for the cause of Allah and the other had rejected Allah; the believers saw with their own eyes that the unbelievers were twice their number. But the result of the battle proved that Allah strengthens with His own aid whom He pleases. Surely there is a lesson in this for those who have sight
The life of men is tempted by love and desire for women, children, the hoarding of treasures of gold and silver, branded horses, wealth of cattle and plantations. These are the comforts for the transitory life of this world; the everlasting best comfort, however, is with Allah
Say : "Shall I tell you of better things than these, with which the righteous will be rewarded by their Lord? There will be gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever with spouses of perfect chastity and the good pleasure of Allah. Allah is watching His servants very closely
The righteous people are those who pray: "Our Lord! We sincerely believe in You: please forgive our sins and save us from the agony of the hellfire
who are steadfast, sincere, obedient, and charitable, and who pray for forgiveness in the morning time
Allah Himself has testified to the fact that there is no god but Him and so do the angels and those who are well grounded in knowledge standing firm on justice. There is no Ilah (God) except Him, the Mighty, the Wise
Surely the only Deen (true religion and the Right Way of life) in the sight of Allah is Al-Islam. Those to whom the Book was given did not adopt ways different than this except out of envy among themselves, and after true knowledge had come to them. They should know that Allah is swift in calling to account those who deny His revelations
So if they argue with you (O Muhammad), tell them: "I have submitted myself entirely to Allah and so have those who follow me." Then ask those who are given the Book and those who are illiterate: "Will you also submit yourselves to Allah?" If they become Muslims they shall be rightly guided but if they turn back, you need not worry, because your sole responsibility is to convey the Message. Allah is watching all His servants very closely
Give a warning to those who deny Allah’s revelations, who slay the Prophets without any justification, and who kill those from among the people who enjoin justice, that there is a painful punishment for them
They are the ones whose deeds will become void in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers
Have you not seen the behavior of those (Jews) who have been given a portion of the Book? When they are invited to settle their disputes according to the Book of Allah, some of them turn back and decline
This is because they say: "The fire of Hell shall not touch us; even if it does, it will be for a few days." In their religion they are deceived by their own self-invented beliefs
What will they do when We will gather them together on the Day which is sure to come, when every soul will be given what it has earned and there shall be no injustice
Say: "O Allah! Master of all the Kingship, You give the kingdom to whom You please and take away the kingdom from whomsoever You please; You give honor to whom You please and disgrace whom You please; all the good is in Your hand; surely You have power over everything
You cause the night to pass into the day and You cause the day to pass into the night; You draw the living from the dead and You draw the dead from the living; and You provide sustenance for anyone You wish without measure
Let not the believers make unbelievers their protectors rather than the believers; anyone who does so will have nothing to hope for from Allah - except if you do so as a precaution to guard yourselves against their tyranny. Anyhow, Allah warns you to fear Him: because with Allah is your final refuge
Say: "Whether you conceal what is in your heart or reveal it, it is known to Allah
He knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. Allah has full power over everything. On the Day of Judgment, when every soul will be confronted with whatever good it has done - as for its evil deeds, it will wish they were a long way off. Allah cautions you to beware of Him. Allah is full of kindness towards His devotees
Tell the people O Muhammad: "If you sincerely love Allah, then follow me; Allah will also love you and forgive you your sins. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Also tell them, "Obey Allah and His Messenger." Inspite of this, if they turn back, then warn them, that Allah does not love the disbelievers
Indeed Allah exalted Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham and the family of Imran above all the worlds
They were the offsprings of one another. Allah hears all and knows all
Allah heard when the wife of `Imran said, "O my Lord! I dedicate to Your service what is in my womb. Please accept it from me. You Alone hear all and know all
When she gave birth to a girl instead of a boy, she said: "My Lord! I have given birth to a girl," - Allah knew very well what she had delivered - "and that the male is not like the female, I have named her Mary and I seek Your protection for her and her children from the mischief of Satan, the accursed
Her Lord graciously accepted that girl. He made her grow up as a good girl and entrusted her to the care of Zakariya. Whenever Zakariya entered the sanctuary to see her, he found with her food. He asked, "O Mary! From where did you get it?" She replied, "It came from Allah. In fact, Allah gives to whom He wants without measure
Thereupon Zakariya prayed to his Lord saying: "O my Lord! Grant me a righteous child as Your special favor; surely You hear all prayers
As he stood praying in the Mahrab (a prayer place in the sanctuary) the angels called out to him saying: "Allah gives you good news of a son to be named John, he will confirm the word of Allah, he will be a great leader, chaste and a Prophet from among the righteous
He said: "O my Lord! How can I have a son now that I have reached an old age and my wife is barren?" "Such is the will of Allah" he replied, " Allah does what He wants
Zakariya said: "My Lord! Grant me a sign." It was said: "Your sign is that you will not be able to speak to people for three days except through gestures. During this time you should remember your Lord very much and glorify Him in the evening and in the morning
There came the time when angels said: "O Mary! Surely Allah has exalted you, purified you, and preferred you for His service over all the women of the worlds
O Mary! Be obedient to your Lord, prostrate and bow down in worship with other worshippers
O Muhammad, this is the news from the Unseen which We are revealing to you. You were not present with them when priests of the temple cast their pens to decide which of them should be the guardian of Mary; nor were you with them when they argued about it
When the angels said "O Mary! Allah gives you the good news with a Word from Him that you will be given a son: his name will be Messiah, Jesus (Jesus Christ) the son of Mary. He will be noble in this world and the Hereafter; and he will be from those who are very close to Allah
He will speak to the people in the cradle and in his old age and he will be among the righteous
Hearing this, Mary said, "O my Lord! How can I have a son when no man has ever touched me?" He replied, "Even so, Allah creates however He wants; whenever He decides to do anything, He only says to it, 'Be,' and it is
Allah will teach your son the Book, the Wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel
and send him forth as a Messenger to the Children of Israel with this message: 'I have brought you signs of my appointment from your Lord. I will make for you the likeness of a bird from clay; I will breathe into it and, with Allah’s leave, it will become a living bird. I will heal the blind and the lepers, and raise the dead to life, by Allah's leave. Furthermore, I will tell you what you have eaten and what you have stored in your houses. Surely these are the signs to convince you if you are believers
I am appointed to confirm that which is before me from the Torah and to make lawful to you some of the things forbidden to you. Now I have brought you the signs from your Lord, therefore fear Allah and obey me
In fact, Allah is my Lord as well as your Lord, therefore, worship Him; this is the Right Way
When Jesus found out that they (most of the children of Israel) had no faith, he asked: "Who will help me in the cause of Allah?" The Disciples replied: "We will help you in the cause of Allah. We believe in Allah. Be our witness that we are Muslims
(Then they invoked Allah and said): "Our Lord! We believe in what you have revealed and we follow Your Messenger. Please count us with those who bear witness
The unbelievers among the children of Israel plotted against Jesus and Allah also devised a plan to raise him up, and Allah is the best in planning
Allah said: "O Jesus! I am going to recall you (from your mission) and raise you up to Myself. I will clean you of those who rejected you and exalt your followers above the unbelievers until the Day of Resurrection; then to Me shall be your return and I shall judge those matters in which you have been disputing
Those who are unbelievers will be punished with severe punishment in this world and the Hereafter; they shall have no helpers
As for those who believe and do good deeds, Allah will pay them their full reward. Allah does not love the transgressors
This revelation which We recite to you is full of signs and wise reminders
In fact, the example of the birth of Jesus ( Jesus) in the sight of Allah is like the example of Adam who had no father and mother, whom He created out of dust, then said to him: "Be" and he was
This is the Truth from your Lord, therefore, do not be of those who doubt it
If anyone disputes with you concerning this matter (the birth of Jesus) after full knowledge has come to you, say: "Come! Let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves: then let us earnestly pray and invoke the curse of Allah on the liars
Verily this is the absolute true explanation. The fact of the matter is, that there is no god but Allah; and for sure Allah is the Mighty, the Wise
But if they turn away from accepting this challenge, it will be clear proof of their mischief and Allah has full knowledge of mischief-mongers
Say: "O people of the Book! Let us get together on what is common between us and you: that we shall worship none but Allah; that we shall not associate any partners with Him; that we shall not take from among ourselves any lords beside Allah." If they reject your invitation then tell them: "Bear witness that we are Muslims (who have surrendered to Allah)
O people of the Book! Why do you argue with us about Abraham, as to whether he was a Jew or a Christian? You know that the Torah and the Gospel were revealed long after him? Have you no sense at all
So far you have been arguing about things of which you had some knowledge! Must you now argue about that of which you know nothing at all? Allah knows while you do not
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian but he was a Muslim, true in faith. He was not one of the Pagans (who set up partners with Allah)
Surely the people nearest to Abraham are those who follow him, which are this Prophet (Muhammad) and those who believe with him; Allah is the Protector of only those who are the believers
Some of the People of the Book want to mislead you; but they mislead none except themselves, though they do not realize it
O People of the Book! Why do you deny the revelations of Allah when you know that they are true
O People of the Book! Why do you confound the truth with falsehood and knowingly conceal the truth
Some of the People of the Book say to one another: "Believe in what is revealed to the believers (Muslims) in the morning and deny it in the evening; so that they (the Muslims) may follow suit and abandon their faith
Do not follow anyone except the one who follows your own religion." O Muhammad, tell them: "The only true guidance is the guidance of Allah." These people of the Book do not believe that revelation could be sent to anyone besides themselves, like that which has been sent to you; or that they will ever argue with you in the presence of your Lord. Tell them: "For sure, grace is in the hands of Allah: He bestows it on whom He pleases; Allah has boundless knowledge
He chooses for His mercy whom He pleases, Allah is the Owner of mighty grace
Among the People of the Book there are some who, if you trust them with a heap of gold, will readily return it back; and there are others who, if you trust them with a single dinar (silver coin) will not return it back unless you constantly keep on demanding; because they say, "We are not going to be called to account for our behavior with the illiterates (non Jews or Christians)." Thus they deliberately ascribe a lie to Allah -knowing well that He never permitted such wrongdoing
In fact, those who keep their promise and guard themselves against evil are His beloved, for Allah loves only those who guard themselves against such evils
In fact, those who sell the covenants of Allah and their own oaths for a petty price, shall have no portion in the hereafter. Allah will neither speak to them nor even look at them nor cleanse them from their sins on the Day of Judgment. They shall have painful punishment
There are some among them who twist their tongues pretending a quote from their Holy Book; so that you may think that what they read is a part of the Book, whereas, in fact it is not a part of the Book. They also assert, "It is from Allah" whereas, in fact it is not from Allah. Thus they deliberately ascribe a lie to Allah
It is not possible for a man whom Allah has given the Book, the Wisdom and the Prophethood, that he would say to the people: "Worship me instead of Allah." On the contrary he would say: "Be devoted worshippers of your Lord in accordance with the Holy Book you have been teaching and reading
He would never ask you to take angels and prophets as your lords. Would he ask you to become kafir (unbeliever) after you have become Muslim (believer)
Allah took a covenant with the Prophets, saying: "Now that you have been given the Book and Wisdom; there will come to you a Messenger who will confirm that which is with you, you will have to believe in him and help him in his mission." Then He said "Do you affirm this covenant and agree to take this heavy responsibility?" The Prophets replied, "Yes, we do affirm." Allah said, "Very well, bear witness to this and I too bear witness with you
Now if anyone turns back after this, he will become the transgressor
Are they looking for a religion other than the Deen (religion and Way of Life) of Allah knowing well that everything in the heavens and in the earth, willingly or unwillingly, has submitted to Him? And to Him they shall all return
O Prophet, say: "We believe in Allah and what is revealed to us and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and their descendants; and in that which was given to Moses, Jesus and other Prophets from their Lord; we do not discriminate between any one of them, and to Allah do we submit in Islam
If anyone is looking for a religion other than Islam, then let it be known that it will not be accepted from him; and in the Hereafter he will be among the losers
How can it be that Allah would guide those people who commit Kufr (reject faith) after their Iman (acceptance of faith), acknowledge that the Messenger is true, and clear proofs have come to them? Allah does not guide such wrongdoers
The reward of such people is that upon them is the curse of Allah, the angels and all mankind
They shall remain under it forever; neither will their punishment be lightened nor will they be given respite
However, those who repent after this and mend their ways, verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
However, those who disbelieve after their belief (acceptance of Islam) then go on adding to their disbelief, their repentance will never be accepted; because they intentionally chose to go astray
As to those who are unbelievers and die while they were unbelievers, if they were to fill the whole earth with gold and offer it as a ransom for each one of them, that would not be accepted. These are the ones who shall have the painful punishment, and shall have no helpers
You can never attain righteousness unless you spend in the cause of Allah that which you dearly cherish; and whatever you spend surely it is known to Allah
All food was lawful to the Children of Israel, except what Israel (Jacob) made unlawful for himself, before the Torah (of Moses) was revealed. Say: "Bring ye the Torah and study it, if ye be men of truth
If any, after this, invent a lie and attribute it to Allah, they are indeed unjust wrong-doers
Say: "Allah speaketh the Truth: follow the religion of Abraham, the sane in faith; he was not of the Pagans
The first House (of worship) appointed for men was that at Bakka: Full of blessing and of guidance for all the worlds
In it are Signs Manifest; (for example), the Station of Abraham; whoever enters it attains security; Pilgrimage thereto is a duty men owe to Allah,- those who can afford the journey; but if any deny faith, Allah stands not in need of any of His creatures
Say: "O People of the Book! Why reject ye the Signs of Allah, when Allah is Himself witness to all ye do
Say: "O ye People of the Book! Why obstruct ye those who believe, from the path of Allah, seeking to make it crooked, while ye were yourselves witnesses (to Allah's Covenant)? But Allah is not unmindful of all that ye do
O ye who believe! If ye listen to a faction among the People of the Book, they would (indeed) render you apostates after ye have believed
And how would ye deny Faith while unto you are rehearsed the Signs of Allah, and among you lives the Messenger. Whoever holds firmly to Allah will be shown a way that is straight
O ye who believe! Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not except in a state of Islám
And hold fast, all together, by the Rope which Allah (stretches out for you), and be not divided among yourselves; and remember with gratitude Allah's favor on you; for ye were enemies and He joined your hearts in love, so that by His Grace, ye became brethren; and ye were on the brink of the pit of Fire, and He saved you from it. Thus doth Allah make His Signs clear to you that ye may be guided
Let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good, enjoining what is right, and forbidding what is wrong: They are the ones to attain felicity
Be not like those who are divided amongst themselves and fall into disputations after receiving Clear Signs: For them is a dreadful penalty
On the Day when some faces will be (lit up with) white, and some faces will be (in the gloom of) black: To those whose faces will be black, (will be said): "Did ye reject Faith after accepting it? Taste then the penalty for rejecting Faith
But those whose faces will be (lit with) white,- they will be in (the light of) Allah's mercy: therein to dwell (for ever)
These are the Signs of Allah. We rehearse them to thee in Truth: And Allah means no injustice to any of His creatures
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: To Allah matters return
Ye are the best of peoples, evolved for mankind, enjoining what is right, forbidding what is wrong, and believing in Allah. If only the People of the Book had faith, it were best for them: among them are some who have faith, but most of them are perverted transgressors
They will do you no harm, barring a trifling annoyance; if they come out to fight you, they will show you their backs, and no help shall they get
Shame is pitched over them (like a tent) wherever they are found, except when under a covenant (of protection) from Allah and from men; they draw on themselves wrath from Allah, and pitched over them is (the tent of) destitution. This because they rejected the Signs of Allah, and slew the prophets in defiance of right; this because they rebelled and transgressed beyond bounds
Not all of them are alike: Of the People of the Book are a portion that stand (for the right): They rehearse the Signs of Allah all night long, and they prostrate themselves in adoration
They believe in Allah and the Last Day; they enjoin what is right, and forbid what is wrong; and they hasten (in emulation) in (all) good works: They are in the ranks of the righteous
Of the good that they do, nothing will be rejected of them; for Allah knoweth well those that do right
Those who reject Faith,- neither their possessions nor their (numerous) progeny will avail them aught against Allah. They will be companions of the Fire,- dwelling therein (for ever)
What they spend in the life of this (material) world may be likened to a wind which brings a nipping frost: It strikes and destroys the harvest of men who have wronged their own souls: it is not Allah that hath wronged them, but they wrong themselves
O ye who believe! Take not into your intimacy those outside your ranks: They will not fail to corrupt you. They only desire for you to suffer: Rank hatred has already appeared from their mouths: What their hearts conceal is far worse. We have made plain to you the Signs, if ye have wisdom
Ah! ye are those who love them, but they love you not,- though ye believe in the whole of the Book. When they meet you, they say, "We believe": But when they are alone, they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you in their rage. Say: "Perish in your rage; Allah knoweth well all the secrets of the heart
If aught that is good befalls you, it grieves them; but if some misfortune overtakes you, they rejoice at it. But if ye are patient and do right, not the least harm will their cunning do to you; for Allah Compasseth round about all that they do
(Remember that morning) thou didst leave thy household (early) to post the faithful at their stations for battle: And Allah heareth and knoweth all things
Remember two of your parties Meditated cowardice; but Allah was their protector, and in Allah should the faithful (ever) put their trust
Allah had helped you at Badr, when ye were a contemptible little force; then fear Allah. thus may ye show your gratitude
Remember thou saidst to the faithful: "Is it not enough for you that Allah should help you with three thousand angels (Specially) sent down
Yea, - if ye remain firm, and act aright, even if the enemy should rush here on you in hot haste, your Lord would help you with five thousand angels clearly marked
Allah made it but a message of hope for you, and an assurance to your hearts: (in any case) there is no help except from Allah. The Exalted, the Wise
That He might cut off a fringe of the unbelievers or expose them to infamy, and they should then be turned back, frustrated of their purpose
Not for thee, (but for Allah), is the decision: Whether He turn in mercy to them, or punish them; for they are indeed wrong-doers
To Allah belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth. He forgiveth whom He pleaseth and punisheth whom He pleaseth; but Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
O ye who believe! Devour not usury, doubled and multiplied; but fear Allah. that ye may (really) prosper
And fear the Fire, which is repaired for those who reject Faith
And obey Allah and the Messenger; that ye may obtain mercy
Be quick in the race for forgiveness from your Lord, and for a Garden whose width is that (of the whole) of the heavens and of the earth, prepared for the righteous
Those who spend (freely), whether in prosperity, or in adversity; who restrain anger, and pardon (all) men;- for Allah loves those who do good
And those who, having done an act of indecency to be ashamed of, or wronged their own souls, remember Allah, and ask for forgiveness for their sins,- and who can forgive sins except Allah? - and are never obstinate in persisting knowingly in (the wrong) they have done
For such the reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens with rivers flowing underneath,- an eternal dwelling: How excellent a recompense for those who work (and strive)
There have been examples that have passed away before you: Travel through the earth, and see what was the end of those who rejected Truth
Here is a plain statement to men, a guidance and instruction to those who fear Allah
So lose not heart, nor fall into despair: For ye must gain mastery if ye are true in Faith
If a wound hath touched you, be sure a similar wound hath touched the others. Such days (of varying fortunes) We give to men and men by turns: that Allah may know those that believe, and that He may take to Himself from your ranks martyr-witnesses (to truth). And Allah loveth not those that do wrong
Allah's object also is to purge those that are true in Faith and to deprive of blessing those that resist Faith
Did ye think that ye would enter Heaven without Allah testing those of you who fought hard (In His Cause) and remained steadfast
Ye did indeed wish for death before ye met him: Now ye have seen it with your own eyes, (and ye flinch)
Muhammad is no more than a messenger: many were the a messengers that passed away before him. Is it that if he died or were slain, will ye then turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah. But Allah (on the other hand) will swiftly reward those who (serve Him) with gratitude
Nor can a soul die except by Allah's leave, the term being fixed as by writing. If any do desire a reward in this life, We shall give it to him; and if any do desire a reward in the Hereafter, We shall give it to him. And swiftly shall We reward those that (serve us with) gratitude
How many of the prophets fought (in Allah's way), and with them (fought) large bands of godly men? But they never lost heart if they met with disaster in Allah's way, nor did they weaken (in will) nor give in. And Allah Loves those who are firm and steadfast
All that they said was: "Our Lord! Forgive us our sins and anything we may have done that transgressed our duty: Establish our feet firmly, and help us against those that resist Faith
And Allah gave them a reward in this world, and the excellent reward of the Hereafter. For Allah Loves those who do good
O ye who believe! If ye obey the unbelievers, they will drive you back on your heels, and ye will turn back (from Faith) to your own loss
Nay, Allah is your Protector, and He is the best of helpers
Soon shall We cast terror into the hearts of the unbelievers, for that they joined companions with Allah, for which He had sent no authority: their abode will be the Fire: And evil is the home of the wrong-doers
Allah did indeed fulfill His promise to you when ye with His permission were about to annihilate your enemy,-until ye flinched and fell to disputing about the order, and disobeyed it after He brought you in sight (of the booty) which ye covet. Among you are some that hanker after this world and some that desire the Hereafter. Then did He divert you from your foes in order to test you But He forgave you: For Allah is full of grace to those who believe
Behold! ye were climbing up the high ground, without even casting a side glance at any one, and the Messenger in your rear was calling you back. There did Allah give you one distress after another by way of requital, to teach you not to grieve for (the booty) that had escaped you and for (the ill) that had befallen you. For Allah is well aware of all that ye do
After (the excitement) of the distress, He sent down calm on a band of you overcome with slumber, while another band was stirred to anxiety by their own feelings, moved by wrong suspicions of Allah - suspicions due to ignorance. They said: "What affair is this of ours?" Say thou: "Indeed, this affair is wholly Allah's." They hide in their minds what they dare not reveal to thee. They say (to themselves): "If we had had anything to do with this affair, We should not have been in the slaughter here." Say: "Even if you had remained in your homes, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death"; but (all this was) that Allah might test what is in your breasts and purge what is in your hearts. For Allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts
Those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts met,-it was Satan who caused them to fail, because of some (evil) they had done. But Allah Has blotted out (their fault): For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing
O ye who believe! Be not like the unbelievers, who say of their brethren, when they are traveling through the earth or engaged in fighting: "If they had stayed with us, they would not have died, or been slain." This that Allah may make it a cause of sighs and regrets in their hearts. It is Allah that gives Life and Death, and Allah sees well all that ye do
And if ye are slain, or die, in the way of Allah, forgiveness and mercy from Allah are far better than all they could amass
And if ye die, or are slain, Lo! it is unto Allah that ye are brought together
It is part of the Mercy of Allah that thou dost deal gently with them. Wert thou severe or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from about thee: so pass over (their faults), and ask for (Allah's) forgiveness for them; and consult them in affairs (of moment). Then, when thou hast taken a decision put thy trust in Allah. For Allah loves those who put their trust (in Him)
If Allah helps you, none can overcome you: If He forsakes you, who is there, after that, that can help you? In Allah, then, let believers put their trust
No prophet could (ever) be false to his trust. If any person is so false, He shall, on the Day of Judgment, restore what he misappropriated; then shall every soul receive its due,- whatever it earned,- and none shall be dealt with unjustly
Is the man who follows the good pleasure of Allah like the man who draws on himself the wrath of Allah, and whose abode is in Hell?- A woeful refuge
They are in varying grades in the sight of Allah, and Allah sees well all that they do
Allah did confer a great favor on the believers when He sent among them a messenger from among themselves, rehearsing unto them the Signs of Allah, sanctifying them, and instructing them in Scripture and Wisdom, while, before that, they had been in manifest error
What! When a single disaster smites you, although ye smote (your enemies) with one twice as great, do ye say?- "Whence is this?" Say (to them): "It is from yourselves: For Allah hath power over all things
What ye suffered on the day the two armies met, was with the leave of Allah, in order that He might test the believers
And the Hypocrites also. These were told: "Come, fight in the way of Allah, or (at least) drive (the foe from your city)." They said: "Had we known there would be a fight, we should certainly have followed you." They were that day nearer to Unbelief than to Faith, saying with their lips what was not in their hearts. But Allah hath full knowledge of all they conceal
(They are) the ones that say, (of their brethren slain), while they themselves sit (at ease): "If only they had listened to us they would not have been slain." Say: "Avert death from your own selves, if ye speak the truth
Think not of those who are slain in Allah's way as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the presence of their Lord
They rejoice in the bounty provided by Allah. And with regard to those left behind, who have not yet joined them (in their bliss), the (martyrs) glory in the fact that on them is no fear, nor have they (cause to) grieve
They glory in the Grace and the bounty from Allah, and in the fact that Allah suffereth not the reward of the Faithful to be lost (in the least)
Of those who answered the call of Allah and the Messenger, even after being wounded, those who do right and refrain from wrong have a great reward
Those to whom men said: "A great army is gathering against you, so fear them!". But it (only) increased their Faith: They said: "For us Allah sufficeth, and He is the best Guardian
And they returned with Grace and bounty from Allah.: no harm ever touched them: For they followed the good pleasure of Allah. And Allah is the Lord of bounties unbounded
It is only Satan suggests to you the fear of his votaries: Be ye not afraid of them, but fear Me, if ye have faith
Let not those grieve thee who rush headlong into Unbelief: Not the least harm will they do to Allah. Allah's plan is that He will give them no portion in the Hereafter, but a severe punishment
Those who purchase Unbelief at the price of faith,- not the least harm will they do to Allah, but they will have a grievous punishment
Let not the Unbelievers think that our respite to them is good for themselves: We grant them respite that they may grow in their iniquity: But they will have a shameful punishment
Allah will not leave the believers in the state in which ye are now, until He separates what is evil from what is good. Nor will He disclose to you the secrets of the Unseen. But He chooses of His Messengers (for the purpose) whom He pleases. So believe in Allah, and His messengers: And if ye believe and do right, ye have a great reward (without measure)
And let not those who covetously withhold of the gifts which Allah Hath given them of His Grace, think that it is good for them: Nay, it will be the worse for them: soon shall the things which they covetously withheld be tied to their necks like a twisted collar, on the Day of Judgment. To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do
Allah hath heard the taunt of those who say: "Truly, Allah is indigent and we are rich!"- We shall certainly record their word and (their act) of slaying the prophets in defiance of right, and We shall say: "Taste ye the penalty of the Scorching Fire
This is because of the (unrighteous deeds) which your hands sent on before ye: For Allah never do injustice to His servants
They (also) said: "Allah took our promise not to believe in a messenger unless he showed us a sacrifice consumed by Fire (from heaven)." Say: "There came to you messengers before me, with clear Signs and even with what ye ask for: why then did ye slay them, if ye speak the truth
Then if they reject thee, so were rejected messengers before thee, who came with Clear Signs, The Scriptures, and the Book of Enlightenment
Every soul shall have the taste of death: And only on the Day of Judgment shall you be paid your full recompense. Only he who is saved far from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will have succeeded: For the life of this world is but goods and chattels of deception
Ye shall certainly be tried and tested in your possessions and in your personal selves; and ye shall certainly hear much that will grieve you, from those who received the Book before you and from those who worship partners besides Allah. But if ye persevere patiently, and guard against evil,-then that will be of great resolution
And remember Allah took a Covenant from the People of the Book, to make it known and clear to mankind, and not to hide it; but they threw it away behind their backs, and purchased with it some miserable gain! And vile was the bargain they made
Think not that those who exult in what they have brought about, and love to be praised for what they have not done,- think not that they can escape the penalty. For them is a penalty grievous indeed
To Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth; and Allah hath power over all things
Behold! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of night and day,- there are indeed Signs for men of understanding
Men who celebrate the praises of Allah, standing, sitting, and lying down on their sides, and contemplate the (wonders of) creation in the heavens and the earth, (with the thought): "Our Lord! Not for naught Hast Thou created (all) this! Glory to Thee! Give us salvation from the Chastisement of the Fire
Our Lord! any whom Thou dost admit to the Fire, truly Thou coverest with shame, and never will wrong-doers find any helpers
Our Lord! we have heard the call of one calling (us) to Faith, 'Believe ye in the Lord,' and we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, blot out from us our iniquities, and take to Thyself our souls in the company of the righteous
Our Lord! Grant us what Thou didst promise unto us through Thine messengers, and save us from shame on the Day of Judgment: For Thou never breakest Thy promise
And their Lord hath accepted of them, and answered them: "Never will I suffer to be lost the work of any of you, be he male or female: Ye are members, one of another: Those who have left their homes, or been driven out therefrom, or suffered harm in My Cause, or fought or been slain,- verily, I will blot out from them their iniquities, and admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath;- A reward from Allah, and from Allah is the best of rewards
Let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee
Little is it for enjoyment: Their ultimate abode is Hell: what an evil bed (to lie on)
On the other hand, for those who fear their Lord, are Gardens, with rivers flowing beneath; therein are they to dwell (for ever),- a gift from Allah; and that which is from Allah is the best (bliss) for the righteous
And there are, certainly, among the People of the Book, those who believe in Allah, in the revelation to you, and in the revelation to them; bowing in humility to Allah: They will not sell the Signs of Allah for a miserable gain! For them is a reward with their Lord, and Allah is swift in account
O ye who believe! Persevere in patience and constancy; vie in such perseverance; strengthen each other; and fear Allah. that ye may prosper
O mankind! Have fear of your Lord, the One who created you from a single soul, from that soul He created its mate, and through them He spread countless men and women. Fear Allah, the One in whose name you demand your rights from one another and the ties of relationship; surely Allah is watching you very closely
Give orphans the property which belongs to them when they are able to handle it themselves and do not substitute your worthless things for their valuable ones; and do not cheat them of their possession through mixing it up with your own. For this would indeed be a great sin
If you fear that you shall not be able to treat the orphans with fairness, then you should not marry the women with orphan children; marry other women of your choice: two, three or four. But if you fear that you will not be able to maintain justice between your wives, then marry only one or any slave girl you may own. That will be more suitable , so that you may not deviate from the Right Way
At the time of marriage, give the women their dowries willingly as an obligation; but if they, by their own free will, give up to you a portion of it then you may enjoy it with pleasure
Do not entrust your property which Allah has made a means of support for your family, to feebleminded people for investment in business, however, provide such people with food and clothing and speak to them nicely and give them good advice
Observe the orphans through testing their abilities until they reach the age of marriage, then if you find them capable of sound judgment, hand over to them their property; and do not consume it wastefully in haste lest they grow up to demand it. If the guardian is well-off, he should not take compensation from the orphan's property, but if he is poor let him take a just and reasonable remuneration. When you hand over their property to them, call in some witnesses; even though Allah is sufficient in taking the accountability
Men will have a share in what their parents and their near relatives leave; and women will have a share in what their parents and their near relatives leave: whether it be a little or much, they shall be legally entitled to their shares
If the relatives, orphans or needy are present at the time of the division of an inheritance, give them something out of it, and speak to them kind words
Let those (disposing of an estate) have the same fear in their minds as they would have for their own if they were to leave a helpless family behind: they should, therefore, fear Allah and speak for justice
In fact, those who misappropriate the property of orphans unjustly, swallow but fire into their bellies; they will soon be cast into the blazing fire
In regard to inheritance Allah commands you concerning your children: that the share of a boy shall be twice that of a girl. In the case where there are more than two girls, their share will be two thirds of the estate; but if there is only one girl, her share will be one half of the estate. If the deceased left children behind, each of the parents shall get one sixth of the estate, but if the deceased left no children and the parents are the only heirs, the mother shall get one third of the estate, but if the deceased left brothers and sisters, then the mother will get one sixth of it. The distribution in all cases shall be after fulfilling the terms of the last will and the payment of debts. With regards to your parents and your children, you do not know who is more beneficial to you, therefore, Allah issued this ordinance. Surely Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
You shall inherit one half of your wives' estate if they leave no child, but if they leave behind a child then you will get one fourth of their estate, after fulfilling the terms of their last will and the payment of debts. Your wives shall inherit one fourth if you leave no child behind you; but if you leave a child, then they shall get one-eighth of your estate; after fulfilling the terms of your last will and the payment of debts. If a man or a woman leaves neither ascendant nor descendants but has left a brother or a sister, they shall each inherit one sixth, but if they are more than two, they shall share one third of the estate; after fulfilling the terms of the last will and the payment of debts, without prejudice to the rights of the heirs. Thus is the commandment of Allah. Allah is Knowledgeable, Forbearing
These are the limits set by Allah: those who obey Allah and His Messenger will be admitted to paradise, in which rivers flow, to live therein forever, and that is the Great Achievement
But the ones who disobey Allah and His Messenger and transgress His limits will be cast to Hellfire to live therein forever, and they shall have a humiliating punishment
If any of your women are guilty of fornication, ask for four reliable witnesses from among yourselves against them; and if they testify and their guilt is proved, confine them to their houses until they die or Allah opens some other way out for them
And the two, whether married or unmarried, who are guilty of this offense, punish them both. If they repent and mend their ways, leave them alone. Surely Allah is the Acceptor of Repentance, Merciful
Repentance with Allah (right to be forgiven by Allah) is only for those who do something evil in ignorance and repent as soon as they realize it; Allah will pardon them. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
There is no repentance for those who persist in their evil deeds until death approaches anyone of them and he says: "surely now I repent." Similarly, there is no repentance for those who die while they were still unbelievers; for them We have prepared a painful punishment
O believers! It is not lawful for you consider women as a part of your inheritance and retain them against their will in order that you may force them to give up a part of the dowry you have given them, unless they are guilty of proven fornication. Treat them with kindness even if you dislike them; it is quite possible that you dislike something in which Allah has placed much good
If you wish to marry another wife in place of the one you already have, do not take back anything of what you have given her even if it be a heap of gold. Would you take it back through slander and open sin (accusing her unjustly)
And how could you take it back when you have enjoyed conjugal happiness and she had taken from you a firm pledge of marriage
Do not marry those women whom your fathers had married, - except what happened prior to this commandment. - Surely it was shocking, disgusting, and an evil practice
Forbidden to you for marriage are: your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your paternal aunts, your maternal aunts, daughters of your brothers, daughters of your sisters, your foster-mothers, your foster-sisters, the mothers of your wives, your stepdaughters under your guardianship from those wives with whom you have consummated your marriage, but there is no blame on you in marrying your stepdaughters if you have not consummated your marriage with their mothers, whom you have divorced, and the wives of your own real sons; and you are also forbidden to take in marriage two sisters at one and the same time except what happened prior to this commandment; surely Allah is forgiving, ,erciful
Also forbidden for you are married women, except those who have fallen in your hands as prisoners of war. This is the order of Allah relating to marriage prohibitions. All women other than these are lawful provided you seek them in marriage with gifts from your property (dowry), desiring chastity and not lust. Give them their dowry as an obligation for the benefit you have received from your marriage relationship. However, there is no blame on you if you change the agreement of dowry with mutual consent. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
If any of you cannot afford to marry a free believing woman, let him marry one of his own slave girls who is a believer; Allah knows how good you are in your faith. You all belong to one and the same community. Marry them with the permission of their family and give them their fair dowry so that they may live a decent life in wedlock and not live as prostitutes or look for secret illicit relationships. Then if after marriage they commit adultery, they shall be given half the punishment prescribed for a free adulteress. The concession of such a marriage is for those of you who fear that they might commit a sin if they do not get married, but it is better for you to practice self- restraint. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah desires to clarify, and guides you to the ways which were followed by the righteous people before you, and turns to you in mercy. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
Allah wishes to forgive you, but those who follow their lusts wish to see you deviate far away from the Right Way
Allah wishes to lighten your burdens because humans have been created weak by nature
O believers! Do not consume one another’s wealth through unlawful means; instead, do business with mutual consent; do not kill yourselves by adopting unlawful means. Indeed Allah is Merciful to you
Anyone who commits such acts of aggression and injustice will soon be thrown into hellfire, and this is very easy for Allah to do
If you avoid the heinous sins which you have been forbidden, We will do away with your small sins and cause you to enter a place of great honor (paradise)
Do not envy that Allah has given some of you more than the others. Men will be rewarded according to their deeds and women will be rewarded according to theirs. Ask Allah for His grace. Surely Allah has perfect knowledge of everything
For every parent and relative We have appointed the rightful heirs to inherit what they leave. As for those with whom you have made firm agreements, give them their share. Surely Allah is a Witness to everything
Men are overseers over women because Allah has given the one more strength than the other, and because men are required to spend their wealth for the maintenance of women. Honorable women are, therefore, devoutly obedient and guard in the husband’s absence what Allah requires them to guard their husband’s property and their own honor. As to those women from whom you fear disobedience, first admonish them, then refuse to share your bed with them, and then, if necessary, beat them. Then if they obey you, take no further actions against them and do not make excuses to punish them. Allah is Supremely Great and is aware of your actions
If you fear a breach of marriage between a man and his wife, appoint one arbiter from his family and another from hers; if they wish to reconcile, Allah will create a way of reconciliation between them. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Aware
Serve Allah and do not commit shirk (associate any partner) with Him, and be good to your parents, kinfolks, orphans, the helpless, near and far neighbors who keep company with you, the travellers in need, and the slaves you own. Allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful
who are themselves stingy and enjoin others to be stingy, who hide the bounties which Allah has bestowed on them. For such unbelievers We have prepared a disgraceful punishment
Similarly, Allah does not like those who spend their wealth to show off to the people, believing neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. In fact the one who chooses Satan as his companion has chosen a very evil companion
What harm would they have suffered if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day and spent in charity out of what Allah had given them? Allah Knows them all
Rest assured that Allah does not wrong anyone even by an atom’s weight. If someone does a good deed He increases it many fold and also gives an extra great reward on His own
Just imagine how they will feel when We shall bring a witness from every nation and call upon you , O Muhammad, to testify against them
On that Day (the Day of Judgment) those who rejected faith and disobeyed the Messenger will wish that they were levelled with earth; for they will not be able to hide a single word from Allah
O believers! Do not offer your Salah when you are drunk until you know what you are saying; nor after seminal emission, except when you are travelling, unless you wash your whole body. If you are sick, or on a journey, or one of you has used the toilet, or has had contact with women (sexual relation with wives) and can find no water, then make Tayammum: take some clean earth and rub your faces and hands with it. Allah is Lenient, Forgiving
Have you not considered the case of those to whom a portion of the Book was given? They purchased error for themselves and wish to see you lose the Right Way
Allah knows your enemies very well. Sufficient is Allah to protect you, and Sufficient is Allah to help you
Among the Jews there are some who take the words out of their context and utter them with a twist of their tongues to slander the true Deen (faith) and say: "We hear and we disobey;" and "Hear, may you (O Muhammad) hear nothing!" And "Ra'ina" (an ambiguous word meaning: "listen, may you become deaf," or "our shepherd," or "in judeo-Arabic language conveying the sense of "our evil one"). If only they had said: "We hear and we obey;" and "Hear us;" and "Unzurna ("look upon us," or " pay attention to us"): it would have been better for them and more proper. Due to all this Allah has cursed them for their unbelief. In fact with the exception of a few, they have no faith
O people of the Book (Jews and Christians)! Believe in what We have now revealed (The Qur'an), confirming your own scriptures, before We obliterate your faces and turn them backward, or lay Our curse on you as We laid Our curse on the Sabbath- breakers: and remember that Allah’s command is always executed
Surely Allah does not forgive shirk (associating any partner with Him); and may forgive sins other than that if He so pleases. This is because one who commits shirk with Allah, does indeed invent a great sinful lie
Have you not seen those who speak very highly of their own purity even though they are committing shirk. In fact, Allah purifies whom He wishes. If the pagans are not purified, no injustice - even equal to the thread of a date-stone - is being done to them
See how they invent a lie against Allah, and this in itself is enough to show their manifest sin
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Book? They believe in superstition and Taghut (forces of Satan) and say about the unbelievers that they are better guided to the Right Way than the believers
Those are the ones whom Allah has cursed, and the one who is cursed by Allah can find no helper
Do they have a share in the kingdom? If they had any share they would have not given other people equal to a speck on a date-stone
Or do they envy other people because Allah has given them from His grace? If so, let them know that We did give the Book and Wisdom to the descendants of Abraham, and blessed them with a great kingdom
But some of them believed in it and some turned away. Sufficient is hell to burn those who turned away
Those who rejected Our revelations will soon be thrown into the Fire. No sooner will their skins be burnt out than We shall replace their skins, so that they may taste the real torment. Allah is Mighty, Wise
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow wherein they will live for ever. Therein they will have chaste spouses, and We shall provide them with cool thick shade
Allah commands you to give back the trusts to their rightful owners, and when you judge between people, judge with fairness. Surely, excellent is the counsel which Allah gives you. Allah is He who hears and observes all
O believers! Obey Allah, obey the Messenger and those charged with authority among you. Should you have a dispute in anything, refer it to Allah and His Messenger, if you truly believe in Allah and the Last Day. This course of action will be better and more suitable
Have you not seen those who claim that they believe in what has been revealed to you and other prophets before you? Yet they desire that the judgment (in their disputes) be made by Taghut (forces of Satan) though they were commanded to reject them, and Satan’s wish is to lead them far astray into deep error
When it is said to them: "Come to be judged by the Messenger in accordance with what Allah has revealed, " you see that the hypocrites show their utmost hesitation in coming to you
But see how they behave when they get into trouble as a consequence of their own doings? They come to you swearing by Allah that they desired nothing but to promote good and bring about a reconciliation
Allah knows what really is in their hearts; therefore, neglect their attitude, admonish them, and speak to them effectual words which may go deep into their hearts
We did not send any Messenger but to be obeyed by Allah’s leave. If they would have come to you when they had wronged themselves to seek Allah’s forgiveness and if the Messenger had also asked Allah’s forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Forgiving, Merciful
Nay! O Muhammad - by your Lord - they will never be true believers until they accept you as a judge in their disputes, then they do not find any resentment in their hearts against your verdicts and accept them with complete submission
If We had commanded them to sacrifice their lives or to leave their homes, very few of them would have done it. Yet, if they would have done what they were commanded to do, it would have been better for them; not only would their faith have been strengthened
but We would have given them an extra great reward on Our own
and also guided them to the Right Way
Whosoever obeys Allah and the Messenger will be in the company of those whom Allah has blessed - the Prophets, the truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous: What excellent companions they will be
This is the real grace from Allah and sufficient is Allah’s infinite knowledge
O believers! Prepare yourselves for encounter, then advance in detachments or all together as the occasion may require
There will be someone among you who will surely lag behind, so that if you face any calamity, he will say: "Allah has been gracious to me that I did not accompany them
But if you are blessed with grace from Allah, he will say, as if there was no friendship between you and him: "I wish I had been with them; I could have attained a mighty good fortune
Let it be known that only those people should fight in the cause of Allah who are willing to exchange the life of this world for the Hereafter; and whoever fights for the cause of Allah, whether he dies or is victorious, will soon be granted a mighty reward
And what reason do you have not to fight in the cause of Allah, to rescue the helpless oppressed old men, women, and children who are crying: "Our Lord! Deliver us from this town whose people are oppressors; send us a protector by Your grace and send us a helper from Your presence
Those who are believers fight in the cause of Allah and those who are unbelievers fight in the cause of Taghut (forces of Satan): so fight against the helpers of Satan; surely, Satan’s crafty schemes are very weak
Have you not seen those who were told to restrain their hands from fighting, establish Salah (regular prayers) and pay Zakah (regular charity). Now when at length they are commanded to fight, lo! A group of them fear people as they should have feared Allah, or even more than that, and say: "Our Lord! Why have You ordered us to fight? Could you delay its implementation for a while?" Tell them: "The enjoyment of this worldly life is short, life of the hereafter is much better for those who fear Allah, and rest assured that you will not be wronged equal to the fiber of a date-stone
As for death, no matter where you may be, death is going to reach you even if you are in fortified towers. When such people are blessed with some benefit, they say: "This is from Allah;" but if they suffer a loss, they say: "this is because of you." O Muhammad tell them: "Everything is from Allah." What is the matter with these people that they do not understand a word
Whatever benefit comes to you O people, it is by Allah’s grace; and whatever loss you suffer, it is the result of your own doings. We have sent you, O Muhammad, as a Messenger to mankind. Allah is your All- Sufficient Witness
Anyone who obeys the Messenger, in fact, obeys Allah. As for those who pay no heed, they should know that We have not sent you as a taskmaster over them
They will say: "We are at your service!" Yet when they leave you, some of them meet together secretly at night to plot against what you have said. Allah notes down all their plots. Therefore, leave them alone and put your trust in Allah. Allah is your all sufficient trustee
Why don’t they research the Qur’an? Don’t they realize that if it was from someone other than Allah, they would find many discrepancies in it
Whenever they hear news of peace or of danger, they spread it quickly; but if they would report it to the Messenger and to the responsible people in the community, it would come to the knowledge of those who could draw the right conclusions. If it had not been for Allah’s grace and mercy, all of you with the exception of a few, would have followed Satan
Therefore, O Muhammad, fight in the path of Allah, you are accountable for no one except for yourself. Urge the believers to fight, it may be that Allah will overthrow the might of the unbelievers, for Allah is the strongest in might and severe in punishment
Anyone who intercedes for a good cause shall have a share in it, and anyone who intercedes for an evil cause shall also get a share in its burden. Allah has control over everything
When anyone greets you in a courteous manner, let your greetings be better than his - or at least return the same. Allah keeps account of everything
Allah! There is no god besides Him. He will certainly gather you all together on the Day of Resurrection; there is no doubt in it, and who can be more truthful in his words than Allah
What is the matter with you, why are you divided into two groups concerning the hypocrites, while Allah has cast them off on account of their misdeeds? Do you wish to guide those whom Allah has confounded? Whomever Allah has confounded you cannot find a way for them to be guided
Their real wish is to see that you become a disbeliever, as they themselves have disbelieved, so that you may become exactly like them. So you should not take friends from their ranks unless they immigrate in the way of Allah; and if they do not, seize them and kill them wherever you find them, and do not take any of them as protectors or helpers
The exception to this is for those who take refuge with your allies or come over to you because their hearts restrain them both from fighting against you and from fighting against their own people. If Allah had wanted, He would have given them power over you and they might easily have fought against you; therefore, if they withdraw from you and cease their hostility and offer you peace, in that case Allah has not granted you permission to fight against them
You will find other hypocrites who wish to be safe from you as well as from their own people; but who would plunge into mischief whenever they get an opportunity. Therefore if they do not keep distance from you and neither offer you peace, nor cease their hostilities against you, you may seize them and kill them wherever you find them, against such people We give you absolute authority
It is not befitting for a believer to kill a believer except by accident, and whoever accidently kills a believer, he is commanded to free a believing slave and pay bloodwit to the family of the victim, unless they forgo it as a charity. If the victim is from a hostile nation, then the freeing of a believing slave is enough, but if he belonged to a nation with whom you have a treaty, then bloodwit must be paid to his family along with the freeing of a believing slave. Those who do not have the means (bloodwit and / or a slave) must fast two consecutive months: a method of repentance provided by Allah. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
Whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is hell to live therein forever. He shall incur the wrath of Allah, Who will lay His curse on him and prepare for him a woeful punishment
O believers! When you struggle in the way of Allah, investigate carefully, and do not say to anyone who offers you a saLutation: "You are not a believer" in order to seek worldly gain by this. Allah has abundant spoils for you. Remember that you yourselves were in the same condition before. Allah has conferred His favors on you. Therefore, make a thorough investigation before considering someone an unbeliever. Allah is well aware of all your actions
Those believers who stay at home - having no physical disability - are not equal to those who make Jihad (struggle) in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their persons. Allah has granted a higher rank to those who make Jihad with their wealth and their persons than to those who stay at home. Though Allah has promised a good reward for all, Allah has prepared a much richer reward for those who make Jihad for Him than for those who stay at home
they have special higher ranks, forgiveness and mercy. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
When the angels of death cause those people to die who have wronged their souls, they ask: "What was your condition?" They reply: "We were oppressed in the earth." The angels say: "Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you to emigrate and go somewhere else?" Hell will be their abode and it is a very evil refuge
However, those helpless men, women and children who have neither the means to migrate nor strength to escape
Allah may pardon them. Allah is the Pardoning, Forgiving
He who emigrates in the path of Allah shall find numerous places of refuge in the Earth and abundant resources. He who leaves his home to migrate for Allah and His Messenger and dies on the way, his reward becomes due and sure with Allah. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
When you travel in the earth, there is no blame on you if you shorten your prayers, especially when you fear that the unbelievers may attack you, since the unbelievers are your open enemies
When you, O Muhammad, are with them, leading their Salah (prayer in the state of war), let one party of them stand up to pray with you, armed with their weapons. After they finish their prostrations, let them withdraw to the rear and let the other party who have not yet prayed come forward to pray with you; and let them also be on their guard, armed with their weapons. The unbelievers wish to see you neglect your arms and your baggage, so that they could suddenly attack to overpower you all in one stroke. However, there is no blame on you if you lay aside your arms because of heavy rain or because you are sick, but you should still be on your guard. Allah has prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers
When you finish your Salah (prayers) remember Allah whether you are standing, sitting or reclining; then as soon as you are safe (out of danger) establish regular Salah in full. Surely Salah are made obligatory for the believers at their prescribed times
Do not show weakness in following up the enemy; if you are suffering hardships they too are suffering similar hardships; moreover, you have hope to receive reward from Allah while they have none. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
We have revealed to you the Book with the Truth so that you may judge between people in accordance with the Right Way which Allah has shown you, so be not an advocate for those who betray trust
seek Allah’s forgiveness, surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Do not plead on behalf of those who betray their own souls; Allah does not love the treacherous, sinful
They might be able to hide their crimes from people, but they cannot hide from Allah. He is with them even when they plot by night in words that He cannot approve. Allah encompasses all their actions
You may plead for them in this life, but who will plead for them with Allah on the Day of Resurrection? Or who will be their defender
If anyone does evil or wrongs his own soul and then seeks Allah’s forgiveness, he will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful
Whoever commits a sin, he commits it against his own soul. Allah is knowledgeable, Wise
But if anyone commits a crime and charges an innocent person with it (a Muslim from the tribe of Bani Dhafar committed theft and put the blame on a Jew who was innocent), he indeed shall bear the guilt of slander and a flagrant sin
If Allah’s grace and mercy were not with you to save you from their mischief, a group of them (tribe of Bani Dhafar) was determined to lead you astray. They led astray none but themselves, and they cannot do you any harm. Allah has revealed to you the Book and wisdom and taught you what you did not know; great indeed is the grace of Allah upon you
There is no virtue in most of the secret counsels of the people; it is, however, good if one secretly enjoins charity, kindness, and reconciliation among people; the one who does this to please Allah, will soon be given a mighty reward
Anyone who is hostile to the Messenger after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him and follows a path other than that of the believers, We shall leave him in the path he has chosen and cast him into Hell, which is an evil refuge
Surely Allah will never forgive the one who commits the sin of shirk and may forgive anyone else if He so pleases. One who commits shirk has indeed gone far away from the Right Way
The pagans call upon female deities beside Him; by doing so they call nothing but the rebellious Satan
on whom Allah has laid His curse; and who has said: "I will take a good portion of Your servants and mislead them
I will create in them false desires and order them to slit the ears of cattle. I will order them to tamper with Allah’s creation." Therefore, whoever takes Satan as a guardian instead of Allah, has indeed become a clear-cut loser
Satan makes promises to stir up in them false desires; but Satan makes them promises only to deceive them
The home of such people who follow him will be hell, from where they will find no way to escape
As for those who have faith and do righteous deeds, We shall soon admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow to live therein forever. This is the promise of Allah, true indeed, and who can be truer in his words than Allah
The final result will neither be in accordance with your desires nor in accordance with the desires of the People of the Book. He who does evil will be requited with evil: he will find no protector or helper besides Allah
But the one who does righteous deeds, whether a male or a female - provided he or she is a believer - shall enter paradise and will not be harmed a speck
Who has a better Deen (way of life or religion) than the one who is a Muslim (submits himself entirely) to Allah, does good to others and follows the faith of Abraham the upright one, whom Allah chose to be His friend
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. Allah encompasses everything
They ask your decision concerning the women. Tell them: Allah makes His decision concerning them and along with it reminds you about those commandments, recited to you in the Book (The Qur'an), relating to orphan girls to whom you do not give their lawful rights and to whom you do not wish to marry. He also reminds you regarding the helpless children, and to stand firm for justice to orphans. Whatever good you do, Allah surely knows it
If a woman fears cruelty or desertion from her husband, there is no blame if both of them agree to reconcile by means of a compromise, after all compromise is better. Human souls are prone to narrow- mindedness, but if you show generosity and fear Allah in your dealings, surely Allah is well aware of your actions
It is not possible for you to do justice between your wives even if you wish to do so; therefore, in order to comply with Divine Law, do not lean towards one wife to the extent that you leave the other hanging in air. If you work out a friendly understanding and fear Allah, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
If the spouses do separate, Allah will make each one independent of the other out of His own limitless resources, Allah is Amplegiving, Wise
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. We directed the People of the Book before you and now direct you also, to fear Allah in your dealings with one another. But if you disobey ( you will do so at your own risk) for Allah owns all that is in the Heavens and in the Earth and Allah is Self-sufficient, Praiseworthy
Yes! To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth and Allah is sufficient as a Protector
If He wanted He could destroy you all, O mankind, and bring others. Allah has the power to do so
Anyone who desires the reward of this world should know that Allah possesses the rewards of both, this world and the hereafter. Allah hears all and sees all
O believers! Stand firm for justice and bear true witness for the sake of Allah, even though it be against yourselves, your parents or your relatives. It does not matter whether the party is rich or poor - Allah is well wisher of both. So let not your selfish desires swerve you from justice. If you distort your testimony or decline to give it, then you should remember that Allah is fully aware of your actions
O believers! Believe in Allah, His Messenger, the Book which He has revealed to His Messenger, and every Book which He previously revealed. He who denies Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers and the Last Day has gone far astray
As for those who accept the faith then renounce it, who again embrace it and again deny it, and go on increasing in unbelief, Allah will neither forgive them nor guide them to the Right Way
Announce the painful punishment to those hypocrites
who choose the unbelievers to be their protectors rather than believers. Are they seeking honor in being with them? Whereas all honor belongs to Allah Alone
He has already revealed for you in the Book that when you hear Allah’s revelations being denied or ridiculed by people, you must not sit with them unless they change the topic of their talk, otherwise you shall be considered guilty like them. Rest assured that Allah is going to gather the hypocrites and the unbelievers all together in hell
These hypocrites are the ones who wait and watch to see how the wind blows. If Allah grants you a victory, they say: "Were we not with you?" And if the unbelievers gain success, they will say to them: "Were we not strong enough to fight against you? Yet we protected you from the believers (Muslims)." Allah will judge between you and them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah will not leave the way for the unbelievers to triumph over the believers
Surely the hypocrites try to deceive Allah, whereas, in fact, He has reverted their deception to them; when they stand up for Salah they stand reluctantly, merely to be seen by people and do not remember Allah but a little
wavering between belief and disbelief, belonging neither to this nor to that. Whom Allah lets go astray, you cannot find a Way for him
O believers! Do not choose unbelievers to be your protecting friends instead of believers. Would you like to furnish Allah a clear proof against yourselves
Surely the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of hellfire; and you will not find any helper for them
However, those who repent and mend their ways, hold fast to Allah, and become sincere in their devotion to Allah - they are considered to be with the believers. Allah will soon grant the believers a mighty reward
Why should Allah punish you if you are grateful and a true believer? Allah knows the grateful
Allah does not like evil words to be uttered except by someone who is truly wronged. Allah hears all and knows all
If you do good deeds openly or in private or forgive an evil, then surely Allah is Pardoning, Powerful
Those who deny Allah and his Messenger and those who intend to draw a line between Allah and His Messengers saying: "We believe in some, and reject the rest" - desiring to take a middle way between belief and unbelief
these are the real unbelievers and We have prepared for such unbelievers a humiliating punishment
As for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers and do not discriminate between any of them, We shall soon give them their due rewards. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The People of the Book ask you to bring down for them a book from Heaven. From Moses they demanded an even harder miracle than that. They asked him: "Make us see Allah with our own eyes." As a result of their wickedness, the thunderbolt overtook them. Then they took the calf for worship after receiving clear revelations. After all that, We still pardoned them and gave to Moses clear authority
We lifted the mount of Tur over them and took the covenant from them that they will obey Our commandments. On another occasion We commanded them to enter the gates prostrating in humility. Yet on another occasion We commanded them not to transgress in the matter of the Sabbath and took a solemn commitment from them
After all this, they still broke their covenant, rejected the Revelation of Allah, killed the Prophets unjustly. Yet they say: "Our hearts are in secure wrappings which have preserved Allah’s Word; we need no more." Nay! It is Allah who has sealed their hearts on account of their disbelief. They have no faith except a little
They went in their unbelief to such an extent that they uttered terrible slander against Mary
They even say: "We have killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah." Whereas in fact, neither did they kill him nor did they crucify him but they thought they did because the matter was made dubious for them. Those who differ therein are only in doubt. They have no real knowledge, they follow nothing but merely a conjecture, certainly they did not kill him (Jesus)
Nay! The fact is that Allah took him up to Himself. Allah is Mighty, Wise
There is none of the People of the Book but will believe in this fact before his death; and on the Day of Resurrection Jesus will bear witness against them
Because of the iniquity of those who call themselves Jews, their hindering of many people from the way of Allah
taking of usury in spite of its prohibition, and cheating others of their properties - We made many wholesome things unlawful which were formerly lawful for them. We have prepared a painful punishment for those among them who reject faith
However, those among them who are well- grounded in knowledge and those who truly believe in what has been revealed to you, O Muhammad, and other Prophets before you, establishes Salah, pays Zakah, and believes in Allah and the Last Day, will soon be given a mighty reward
O Muhammad, We have sent revelations to you just as We sent to Noah and the Prophets who came after him; We also sent revelations to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, his descendants, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Haroon (Aaron) and Solomon, and to David We gave the Psalms
Revelations were also sent to those Messengers whom We have already mentioned to you and to those whose name We have not mentioned; to Moses Allah spoke directly
All these Messengers conveyed good news to mankind and admonished them so that, after conveying the message through the Messengers, people should have no excuse to plead against Allah. Allah is Mighty, Wise
People may or may not believe it, but Allah bears witness that what He has sent to you, O Muhammad, He has sent with His own Knowledge and so do the angels; though only Allah’s testimony is sufficient
Those who reject faith and hinder others from the Way of Allah, have indeed strayed far away from the Path
Surely Allah will neither forgive those who reject faith and act unjustly; nor guide them to any way
other than the path of hell, wherein they will live forever and this is easy for Allah
O mankind! The Messenger has brought you the Truth from your Lord, so believe in it, it is for your own benefit. If you disbelieve, then you should know that to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. Allah is the Knowledgeable, Wise
O People of the Book! Do not transgress the limits of your religion. Speak nothing but the Truth about Allah. The Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary was no more than a Messenger of Allah and His Word "Be" which He bestowed on Mary and a Spirit from Him which took the shape of a child in her womb. So believe in Allah and His Messengers and do not say: "Trinity"." Stop saying that, it is better for you. Allah is only One Deity. He is far above from the need of having a son! To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and in the Earth. Allah Alone is sufficient for protection
The Messiah (Jesus) never disdained to be the worshipper of Allah nor do the angels who are nearest to Allah. Whosoever disdains His worship and is arrogant will be brought before Him all together
As for those who have faith and do righteous deeds, He will pay them their due compensation and give them more on His own from His grace, but He will inflict painful punishment on those who are disdainful and arrogant, and they will find none (of those on whom they rely) to protect or help them besides Allah
O mankind! There has come to you convincing proof of Truth from your Lord. We have sent to you a glorious light (Al-Qur'an) that shows you the Right Way clearly
Now those who believe in Allah and hold fast to Him, Allah will soon cover them with His mercy and grace and will show them the Right Way to Himself
They ask you for a legal decision relating to inheritance in the case of a childless person. Say: Allah gives you His decision about those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs. If a man dies childless and leaves behind a sister, she shall inherit one-half of his estate. If a woman dies childless, her brother will inherit all of her estate. If the childless person leaves behind two sisters, they both shall inherit two-third of his estate; but if he leaves more than two brothers and sisters, the share of each male shall be equal to that of two females. Thus Allah makes His commandments clear to you lest you go astray. Allah has perfect knowledge of everything
O believers! Fulfil your contract obligations. All four-legged animals from livestock are lawful to you other than those which are hereby announced. However do not violate the prohibition of hunting while you are in Ihram (Hajj dress). Indeed Allah orders whatever He pleases
O believers! Do not violate the sanctity of the Symbols of Allah: the Sacred Month , the animals brought for sacrifice, the garlands that mark such animals, and those people visiting the Sacred House (Ka'bah) to seek the grace and good pleasure of their Lord. When you put off your Ihram (pilgrimage is over) then you are allowed to hunt. Let not the hatred of some people - who once hindered you from the Sacred Mosque - incite you to commit transgression. Cooperate with one another in righteousness and piety, and do not cooperate in sin and transgression. Have fear of Allah. Allah is stern in punishment
You are forbidden to eat the meat of any animal that dies by itself (dead body), blood, the flesh of swine (pork) and that on which any name other than Allah's has been invoked; also that which is strangled to death , killed by a violent blow, killed by a headlong fall and of those beaten or gored to death; and that which has been partly eaten by a wild animal unless you are able to slaughter it before its death; also that which is sacrificed on altars or is divided by raffling of arrows. All these are sinful acts. Today the unbelievers have given up all their hope of vanquishing your religion. Have no fear of them, fear Me. Today I have perfected your religion for you, completed my favor upon you and approved Al-Islam as a Deen (way of life for you). Anyone who is compelled by hunger to eat what is forbidden, not intending to commit sin, will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful
They ask you what food is lawful for them, say: All good clean things are lawful for you, as well as what you have taught your hunting birds and beasts to catch, trained by you with the knowledge given to you by Allah. Eat what they catch and hold for you, however, pronounce the name of Allah over it. Have fear of Allah. Allah is swift in settling the accounts
Today all good clean things have been made lawful for you; and the food of the People of the Book is also made lawful for you and your food is made lawful for them. Likewise, marriage with chaste free believing women and also chaste women among the People who were given the Book before you is made lawful for you, provided that you give them their dowries and desire chastity, neither committing fornication nor taking them as mistresses. Anyone who commits Kufr with Iman (rejects the rules provided by faith), all his good deeds will be in vain and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers
O believers! When you rise up for Salah (prayer), wash your faces and your hands as far as the elbows, wipe your heads with wet hands and wash your feet to the ankles. If you had an emission of semen, then take a full bath. However, if you are sick or on a journey or you have used the toilet or you had intercourse with your women (your wives) and you do not find any water then resort to Tayammum - find clean soil and rub your faces and hands with it. Allah does not wish to burden you; He only wishes to purify you and to perfect His favor upon you, so that you may be thankful
Remember Allah’s favor to you and the covenant which He ratified with you when you said: "We hear and we obey." Have fear of Allah; surely Allah knows the secrets of your hearts
O believers! Be steadfast for the sake of Allah and bear true witness and let not the enmity of a people incite you to do injustice; do justice; that is nearer to piety. Fear Allah, surely Allah is fully aware of all your actions
Allah has promised those who believe and do good deeds that for them there is forgiveness and mighty reward
As for those who reject faith and deny Our revelations, they will be the companions of hellfire
O believers! Also remember Allah’s favor which He recently bestowed upon you when He restrained the hands of those who sought to harm you (Jewish plan to kill the Prophet and eminent companions through an invitation to a dinner which Allah informed him not to attend). Have fear of Allah; and in Allah let the believers put their trust
Allah did in fact make a covenant with the Children of Israel and appointed twelve chieftains from among them and said: "I am with you; if you establish Salah (prayers) pay Zakah, believe in My Messengers, support them and give a generous loan to Allah (spend in charity), I will certainly forgive you your sins and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow. However, if any one of you, after this, violates this covenant, he will indeed go astray from the Right Way
Even after that, they broke their covenant; as a result, We laid on them Our curse and hardened their hearts. They tampered with words out of their context and neglected much of what they were enjoined. You will always find most of them deceitful except for a few of them. Yet forgive them and overlook their misdeeds. Allah loves those who are kind to others
Likewise, We also made a covenant with those who call themselves Christians, but they too have neglected much of what they were enjoined. As a result, We stirred among them enmity and hatred, which will last till the Day of Resurrection and soon Allah will inform them all of what they have done
O people of the Book (Jews and Christians)! Now Our Messenger has come to you to reveal much of what you have concealed from the Holy Books and to pass over much which is no longer necessary. There has come to you from Allah a new Light and a clear Book
with which Allah will guide to the ways of peace all those who seek His good pleasure and bring them out of the depth of darkness into the light of His grace and guide them to the Right Way
Indeed those have committed Kufr (rejected faith) who said, "God is the Messiah, son of Mary." O Muhammad, ask them, "Who has the power to prevent Allah if He chose to destroy the Messiah, the son of Mary, his mother and all that is in the earth? Allah has the sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He creates what He pleases and has power over everything
The Jews and the Christians say: "We are the children of Allah and His beloved ones." Ask them, "Why then does He punish you for your sins? Nay! In fact you are human beings like others which He has created. He forgives whom He pleases and He punishes whom He pleases. To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and to Him is the final refuge
O people of the Book! Indeed Our Messenger has now come to you making clear to you the teaching of the Right Way, after a long break in the series of the Messengers, so that you may not be able to say, "No one has come to give us good news or to warn us." Now someone has come to give you good news and warn you so listen to him. Allah has power over everything
Ponder upon the incident when Moses said to his people: "O my people! Remember the favors which Allah has bestowed upon you. He has raised Prophets from among you, made you kings and gave you that which had not been given to anyone in the worlds
O my people! Enter the holy land which Allah has assigned for you. Do not turn back, because if you do, you will become losers
They said: "O Moses! A nation of giants live in there, we will not set our foot in it until they leave. As soon as they leave we will be ready to enter
Thereupon two Allah-fearing men upon whom Allah had bestowed His Grace said: "Attack directly at the city gate, once you enter it, you will surely be victorious. Put your trust in Allah if you are really believers
They replied, "O Moses! We will never enter it so long as they remain therein. Therefore, both you and your Lord should go and fight, we will stay here
Hearing this Moses prayed, "O my Lord! I have no control over anyone except myself and my brother. Please, set us apart from these disobedient people
Allah responded, "Very well, they are forbidden this land for forty years, during this time they will wander homeless on the earth, so do not grieve for these disobedient people
Recite to them in all truth the story of Adam's two sons: How each offered a sacrifice, and how the offering of one was accepted while that of the other was not. The latter said: "I will kill you." The former replied: "Allah only accepts the sacrifice from the righteous
Even if you stretch your hand to kill me, I shall not stretch my hand to slay you, for I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds
I intend to let you bear the burden of my sins as well as yours and thus become an inmate of the Fire which is the reward for wrongdoers
The latter's soul prompted him to kill his brother; he killed him and thus became one of the losers
(He carried around the dead body of his brother and did not know what to do with it.) Then Allah sent a raven, which dug the ground to show him how to bury the dead body of his brother. "Alas!" He cried, "I failed even to be like this raven to find some way to dispose of the dead body of my brother!" So he became full of regrets
On account of that incident, We ordained for the Children of Israel that whoever kills a person, except as a punishment for murder or mischief in the land, it will be written in his book of deeds as if he had killed all the human beings on the surface of the Earth and whoever will save a life shall be regarded as if he gave life to all the human beings on the surface of the Earth. Yet, even though Our Messengers came to them one after the other with clear revelations, it was not long before, many of them committed excesses in the land
The punishment for those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and strive to create mischief in the land is death or crucifixion or the cutting off their hands and feet from opposite sides or exile from the land based on the gravity of their offense. This will be their humiliation in this world and in the Hereafter they will have grievous punishment
except those who repent before you apprehend them, in such a case, you should know that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O believers! Fear Allah and seek the means to be closer to Him and make Jihad (struggle) in His Way so that you may be successful
As for those who are unbelievers, if they have everything that the earth contains or twice as much to offer as a ransom to redeem themselves from the punishment of the Day of Resurrection, it will not be accepted from them and they shall have a painful punishment
They will desire to get out of the fire but will not be able to do so and they shall have an everlasting punishment
Male or female, whoever is guilty of theft, cut off the hand (that was used in theft) of either of them as a punishment for their crime. This is exemplary punishment ordained by Allah. Allah is Mighty, Wise
But whoever repents after committing the crime and reforms his conduct, Allah will surely turn to him with forgiveness. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Don’t you know that Allah has sovereignty over the heavens and the earth? He may punish whom He pleases and forgive whom He pleases. Allah has power over everything
O Messenger! Do not grieve for those who plunge headlong into unbelief; those who say with their tongues: We believe, but have no faith in their hearts; and do not grieve for those Jews, who listen to lies and spy for other people who had never come to you. They tamper with the words of Allah and take them out of their context and say: "If you are given such and such commandment, accept it; but if it is other than this, reject it." If Allah intends to put anyone to trial, you have no authority in the least to save him from Allah. Such people are those whose hearts Allah does not desire to purify; they will have humiliation in this world and a grievous punishment in the Hereafter
That is because they listen to falsehood and eat what is forbidden. Therefore, if they come to you with their cases, you may judge between them or refuse to do so. Even if you refuse, they will not be able to harm you the least, but if you do act as a judge, judge between them with fairness, for Allah loves those who judge with fairness
But why do they come to you for Judgment when they have the Torah which contains Allah’s commandments? Yet they turn back after that. In fact, they are not true believers
Indeed We revealed the Torah to Moses, in which there is guidance and light: By its laws, all the Prophets, who were Muslims, judged those who call themselves Jews and so did the Rabbis and jurists of law. They were entrusted the protection of Allah’s Book and they themselves were witnesses. Have no fear of people; fear Me, and do not sell My revelations for a petty price: those who do not judge by the law which Allah has revealed, are indeed kafirs (unbelievers)
We ordained in Torah for them: "A life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth and for a wound an equal retaliation." But if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity it will be an act of atonement for him; those who do not judge by the law which Allah has revealed, they are the wrongdoers
Then in the footsteps of those Prophets, We sent Jesus the son of Mary confirming whatever remained intact from the Torah in his time, and gave him the Gospel wherein was guidance and light, corroborating what was revealed in the Torah; a guidance and an admonition to those who fear Allah
Therefore, let the people who follow the Gospel judge by the Law which Allah has revealed therein; those who do not judge by the Law which Allah has revealed, they are the transgressors
To you, O Muhammad, We have revealed this Book with the truth. It confirms whatever has remained intact in the scriptures which came before it and also to safeguard it. Therefore, judge between people according to Allah’s revelations and do not yield to their vain desires, diverging from the truth which has come to you. We have ordained a law and a Way of life for each of you. If Allah wanted He could have made all of you a single nation. But He willed otherwise in order to test you in what He has given you; therefore try to excel one another in good deeds. Ultimately you all shall return to Allah; then He will show you the truth of those matters in which you dispute
So, O Muhammad, pronounce Judgment among them according to the law which Allah has revealed and do not follow their vain desires, and beware of them lest they tempt you away from a part of that which Allah has revealed to you. If they reject your Judgment, then know that it is Allah’s wish to scourge them for some of their sins. In fact most of the people are transgressors
By rejecting the Divine Law do they wish to be judged by the laws of ignorance? Who is a better Judge than Allah for those who believe in Him
O believers! Take neither Jews nor Christians as your protecting friends: they are only protecting friends of one another. Whoever of you disobeys this commandment will be counted as one of them. Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
You see that those who have the disease of hypocrisy in their hearts move around in their camp saying: "We fear lest a turn of fortune strike us." But soon when Allah gives you victory or a decision according to His will, they will regret for what they are hiding in their hearts
At that time the believers will say: "Are these the same people who solemnly swore by Allah that they would stand beside you?" As a result all their deeds will be voided and they will become losers
O believers! Whoever among you renounce Islam, let them do so; soon Allah will replace them with others whom He will love and they will love Him, who will be humble towards the believers, mighty against the unbelievers, striving hard in the way of Allah, and will have no fear of reproach from any critic. Now this is the grace of Allah which He bestows on whom He pleases. Allah has boundless knowledge
Your real protecting friends are Allah, His Messenger, and the fellow believers - the ones who establish Salah, pay Zakah and bow down humbly before Allah
Whoever makes Allah, His Messenger and the fellow believers his protecting friends, must know that Allah’s party will surely be victorious
O believers! Do not make your protecting friends those, from among the people who were given the Book before you and the unbelievers, who have made your religion a mockery or pastime, fear Allah if you are true believers
When you call for Salah (prayers) they make it as an object of mockery and pastime; this is because they are a people devoid of understanding
Tell them: "O people of the Book! What makes you against us other than that we believe in Allah and in what has been revealed to us and what was revealed before? The fact is that most of you are rebellious transgressors
Ask them: "Should I tell you of those who will have even worse than this in retribution from Allah? They are those whom Allah has cursed; who have incurred His wrath; some of whom were turned into apes and pigs; who worshipped Taghut (forces of Satan); these are worse in rank and far more astray from the Right Way
When they come to you they say: "We believe". But in fact, unbelievers they came and unbelievers they depart. Allah knows fully well what they hide in their hearts
You will see many of them try to beat each other in sin and rancor, and they consume what is unlawful. Evil indeed is what they do
Why don’t their Rabbis and the Jurists of laws forbid them from uttering sinful words and eating unlawful things? Evil indeed are their deeds
The Jews say: Allah’s hand is tied up! - Nay! Their own hands will be tied up and they will be cursed for what they utter. Both of His hands are free; However, He spends as He pleases. The fact is that the revelations that have come to you from Allah will surely make many of them increase in their wickedness and unbelief. We have stirred among them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection. Every time they kindle the fire of war, Allah extinguishes it. Now they are striving to spread mischief in the land. Allah does not love those who do mischief
If instead of this rebellious attitude the people of the Book had believed and become Godfearing, We would certainly have removed their iniquities and admitted them to the gardens of Bliss (Paradise)
If they would have observed the Laws of Torah and the Gospel and other Revelations which were sent to them from their Lord, they would have certainly enjoyed abundance from above and from beneath. Though there are some among them on the moderate course; yet most of them do nothing but evil
O Messenger! Deliver the message which has been revealed to you from your Lord, and if you do not, you are not doing justice to your mission. Allah will protect you from the mischief of the people. Rest assured that Allah will not let the unbelievers succeed against you
Tell them: O people of the Book! You have no ground to stand on unless you observe the Torah, Gospel and other revelations that have come to you from your Lord. This revelation (The Qur'an) which has come to you from your Lord will surely increase the rebellion and disbelief of many of them but you should not grieve for the disbelievers
Rest assured that the believers (Muslims), the Jews, the Sabians and the Christians - whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and does righteous deeds - will have nothing to fear or to regret
Certainly We took a covenant from the Children of Israel and sent them Messengers. Whenever there came to them a Messenger with a message that did not suit their fancies, either they called him an impostor or they put him to death
They thought no affliction would follow; so they acted blind and deaf. Yet Allah, in extreme mercy, accepted their repentance, but again many acted blind and deaf towards the message of Allah. Allah is observant of their actions
Certainly they have disbelieved who say: "Allah is Christ the son of Mary." While Christ himself said: "O children of Israel! Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord." Whoever commits shirk (joins partners with Allah), Allah will deny him the paradise, and the hellfire will be his home. There will be no helper for the wrongdoers
Certainly they are unbelievers who say: "Allah is one of three in a Trinity." There is no god except One Allah. If they do not stop saying what they say, a painful punishment will befall the disbelievers among them
Will they not then turn to Allah and seek His forgiveness? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Christ, the son of Mary, was no more than a Messenger; many Messengers had already passed away before him. His mother was a truthful woman; they both ate earthly food like other human beings. See how the Revelations are made clear to them to know the reality; yet see how they ignore the truth
Ask them: "Would you worship besides Allah someone who can neither harm nor benefit you? While Allah is He who hears all and knows all
Tell them: "O people of the Book! Do not transgress the bounds of truth in your religion, and do not yield to the fancies of those people who went astray before you, They misled many others and have themselves strayed away from The Right Way
Those who disbelieved from among the Children of Israel were cursed by the tongue of Davidand Jesus the son of Mary: because they disobeyed and committed excesses
They would not forbid one another from committing iniquities; evil indeed were their deeds
As you can see many of them are taking the side of the unbelievers. Evil is that, which their souls have sent forth for them for the Hereafter. Because they have incurred the wrath of Allah, so in punishment, they are going to live forever
Had they believed in Allah, in the Prophet, and in what was revealed to him, they would have never taken unbelievers as their protecting friends instead of believers, but most of them are rebellious transgressors
You will find the most violent in enmity to the believers are the Jews and the pagans (pagan Arabs); and nearest in affection to the believers are those who say: "We are Christians." That is because among them there are men that are priests and monks, who do not behave arrogantly
When they (monks and priests) listen to that which is revealed to the Messenger, you can see their eyes filled with tears, because they recognize the truth. They say: "Our Lord! We believe, therefore, write us down among the witnesses of truth
Why should not we believe in Allah and the truth which has come to us? Why should we not hope that our Lord will admit us to the company of the righteous
And for their prayer Allah has rewarded them with gardens beneath which rivers flow to live therein forever. Such is the recompense of the righteous (who do good to others)
As for those who reject and deny Our revelations, they shall become the inmates of hellfire
O believers! Do not make unlawful those wholesome things which Allah has made lawful for you. Do not transgress; Allah does not love the transgressors
Eat of the lawful and wholesome things which Allah has provided for you. Fear Allah, in Whom you believe
Allah will not call you to account for what is inadvertent in your oaths. But He will hold you accountable for that which you solemnly swear. The penalty for a broken oath is to feed ten indigent persons with such food as you normally provide to your own family, or to clothe ten needy people, or to free one slave. The one who cannot afford any of these must fast three days. This is the expiation for breaking your oaths. Therefore, be mindful of your oaths. Thus Allah makes clear to you His revelations that you may be thankful
O believers! Intoxicants and gambling (games of chance), dedication to stones (paying tribute to idols) and division by arrows (lottery) are the filthy works of Satan. Get away from them, so that you may prosper
Satan desires to stir up enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling and to prevent you from the remembrance of Allah and from Salah (prayers). Will you not abstain
Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and abstain from these things. If you do not, then you should know that Our Messenger’s duty is only to pass on My message clearly
There is no blame on those who believe and do good deeds for what they ate in the past, provided they abstain from those things which have been made unlawful, then remain steadfast in their belief and do righteous deeds, then abstain themselves from whatever they are forbidden and believe in Divine Law, and then fear Allah and do good deeds. For Allah loves those who do good deeds
O believers! Allah will put you to trial by making game (that which is to be hunted) well within the reach of your hands and your spears in order to see who fears Him, though unseen. There shall, therefore, be a painful punishment for those who transgress after this warning
O believers! Do not kill game while you are in Ihram (pilgrim garb). If anyone kills game intentionally, he will have to pay a penalty through an offering brought to the Ka’bah of a domestic animal equivalent to the one which was killed as determined by two just men among you; or as an expiation, either feed a few indigent or fast their equivalent days, so that he may taste the evil consequences of what he did. Allah has forgiven what happened in the past; but if anyone repeats it now, Allah will inflict retribution on him. Allah is Mighty, Capable of Retribution
Game of the sea and its use as food is lawful for you and the seafarers, but the game of the land is forbidden as long as you are in Ihram (pilgrim garb). Have fear of Allah to whom you shall all be assembled
Allah has made the Ka‘bah of the Sacred House an eternal value for mankind, and so are the Sacred Months, the animal offerings, and the animals which are collared as a mark of dedication; so you must know that Allah has knowledge of what is in the heavens and in the earth and that Allah is well aware of everything
You should also know that Allah is stern in Retribution, and that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The only duty of the Messenger is to pass on My Message. Allah knows all what you reveal and what you conceal
Tell them, "Bad and good are not equal, even though the abundance of the bad may dazzle you; so fear Allah, O people of understanding, that you may prosper
O believers! Do not ask questions about things that if revealed to you, may cause you trouble. But if you ask a question about something when the Qur’an is being revealed, it will be made known to you. Allah has forgiven you what you did to date, Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
Some people before you did ask such questions and later lost their faith because of those very things
Allah did not institute superstitions like those of a slit-ear she-camel or a she-camel let loose for free pasture or idol sacrifices for twin-births in animals or stallion-camels freed from work; this lie is invented by the unbelievers against Allah, and most of them lack understanding
When it is said to them: "Come to what Allah has revealed and come to the Messenger." They reply: "Sufficient for us are the ways on which we found our forefathers." What! Even though their forefathers knew nothing and were not rightly guided
O believers! You are accountable for none but for yourselves; anyone who has gone astray cannot harm you if you are on the Right Way. To Allah you shall all return and He will let you know the truth of all that you did
O believers! When death approaches any one of you, let two just men from among yourselves act as witnesses at the time of making your last will; or from the non-Muslims if you are travelling through the land and the calamity of death overtakes you. If you doubt their honesty, detain them after prayer and let them both swear by Allah: "We will not sell our testimony for any price, even to a relative, and we will not hide the testimony which we will be giving for the sake of Allah; for we shall be sinners if we do so
Then, if it becomes known that those two were guilty of the sin of perjury, then let two others better qualified witnesses from among those who were deprived of their right come forward and testify upon oath, "By Allah, our testimony is truer than theirs. We have not transgressed in our testimony; for we should be wrongdoers if we did so
By this procedure, it is more likely that they will bear true witness or at least fear that their oaths could be contradicted by subsequent oaths. Have fear of Allah and listen; Allah does not guide to those who are disobedient transgressors
On the Day of Resurrection when Allah gathers the Messengers and asks: "What response were you given from your addressees?" They will say: "We have no knowledge, only You have all the knowledge of the unseen
Then Allah will ask: "O Jesus son of Mary! Recall my favor upon you and to your mother, how I strengthened you with the Holy Spirit, so you could speak to the people in cradle and in old age, how I taught you the Book, Wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel. How you were able to make the figure of a bird out of a clay, by My permission, how you breathed into it and changed it into a real bird, by My permission. How you could heal the born-blind and the lepers by My permission. How you could bring the dead body back to life by My permission. How I protected you from the violence of the Children of Israel when you came to them with clear signs and the unbelievers among them said: "This is nothing but a clear sorcery
Remember, when I inspired the disciples to have faith in Me and My Messenger and they said: ‘We believe and bear witness that we have become Muslims
How when the disciples asked: "O Jesus, son of Mary! Can your Lord send down to us from heaven a table spread with food?" And you said: "Have fear of Allah if you are true believers
They said: "We only wish to eat thereof to satisfy our hearts and to know that you have indeed told us the truth, and that we bear witness to it
Jesus, son of Mary said: "O Allah, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread with food that it may mark a feast, one of a kind for those before us and for those after us, as a sign from You; and provide us our sustenance, You are the best Sustainer
Allah responded: "I shall send it down to you, but if any of you disbelieve after that, I shall punish him with a torment which I have never inflicted on anyone in the worlds
After reminding him of these favors, Allah will say: "O Jesus, son of Mary, Did you ever say to the people, "worship me and my mother as gods beside Allah?" He will answer: "Glory to You! How could I say what I had no right to say? If I had ever said so, you would have certainly known it. You know what is in my heart, but I know not what is in Yours; for You have full knowledge of all the unseen
I never said anything other than what You commanded me to say, that is to worship Allah, Who is my Lord and your Lord. I was a witness over them as long as I remained among them; but when You called me off, You were the Watcher over them and You are a Witness to everything
If You punish them, they surely are Your servants; and if You forgive them, You are Mighty, Wise
Allah will say: "This is the day on which the truthful will profit from their truth; they shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow to live therein forever. Allah is well-pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. This is the mighty achievement
To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is therein, and He has power over everything
All praise be to Allah, the One Who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light; yet the unbelievers set up equal partners with their Lord
He is the One Who has created you from clay, then decreed a fixed term of life and set a deadline for you Himself; yet you go on doubting
He is the same One Allah in both the heavens and the earth. He knows what you conceal, what you reveal and what you do
Yet the reaction of the people has been that whenever a revelation came to them from their Lord, they neglected it
Now that the truth has come to them, they have denied it. Soon they will come to know the reality which they are ridiculing
Have they not seen how many generations We have destroyed before them? We had made those nations more powerful in the land than yourselves. We sent down for them abundant rain from the sky and made the rivers to flow beneath their feet: yet for their sins We destroyed them all and raised up other generations in their places
O Prophet, if We had sent to you a Book written on paper and they could have touched it with their own hands, the unbelievers would still have said: "This is nothing but plain sorcery
They ask: "Why has no angel been sent down to us?" Well, if We had sent down an angel, the matter would have been settled at once and no respite would have been granted after that
and if We had sent an angel, We would have certainly sent him in a human form and thus involved them in the same confusion as they are in at this time
O Muhammad! many Messengers before you were also ridiculed, but in the long run those who ridiculed were hemmed in by the very thing they were ridiculing
O Muhammad, say: "Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who denied the truth
Ask them: "To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth?" If they don't respond, tell them: "To Allah!" He has decreed mercy for Himself, that is why He does not punish you for your misdeeds right away. He will certainly gather you all together on the Day of Resurrection; there is no doubt about it. Yet those who have lost their souls will not believe
To Him belongs all that takes rest in the night and in the day. He is the Hearer, the Knower
Say: "Should I take as my protector anyone other than Allah, who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth. Who feeds all and is fed by none?" Say: "Nay! I am commanded to be the first of those who submit to Allah in Islam and not of those who commit shirk
Say: "I will never disobey my Lord, for I fear the torment of a Mighty Day
He who is delivered from the torment of that Day, has indeed received Allah’s Mercy; and this is a clear cut achievement
If Allah afflicts you with any harm, none can relieve you other than Him; and if He blesses you with happiness, you should know that He has power over everything
He is the Supreme Authority over His servants; and He is the Wise, the Aware
Ask them: " Whose testimony is the most reliable? " When they say Allah, then tell them: "Let Allah be Witness between me and you (that I am the Messenger of Allah) and this Qur’an has been revealed to me by Him so that I may warn you thereby and all those whom it may reach. Can you really testify that there are other gods besides Allah?" Tell them: "As far as I am concerned I will never testify to this!" Say: "Indeed He is the One and the Only God and I am absolutely disgusted with the shirk you commit
Those to whom We have given the Book know this fact as they know their own sons. In fact those who have lost their souls, will not believe
Who can be more wicked than a person who forges a lie against Allah or denies His revelations? Surely the wrongdoers shall never get salvation
On the Day of Judgment when We shall gather them all together, We shall ask the pagans: "Where are those deities whom you ascribed to be My partners
They will have no argument but to say: "By Allah, our Lord, we were not at all pagan
See how they will lie against their own souls, and how the deities of their own inventions will leave them in the lurch
Of them there are some who pretend that they listen to you; but their prejudices have dulled their faculties and We have cast veils over their hearts and deafness in their ears so they are unable to understand. Even if they see every one of Our Signs, they will not believe. So much so, that when they come to you, they argue with you. The unbelievers say: "These are nothing but tales of the old times
They themselves have turned away from the truth and also forbid other people to believe in it. With such a behavior they harm none but their own souls but they do not perceive it
If you could witness the scene, when they will be made to stand before the hellfire, they will say: "We wish we could return to earthly life again; then we would not deny the revelations of our Lord, and we would join the believers
In fact, they will say this because they had come to know the reality which they were concealing before. As a matter of fact even if they be sent back, they would certainly repeat the same things which they had been forbidden to do. Indeed they are liars
Today they say: "There is no other life except the life on this earth and we shall never be raised to life again
If you could witness the scene when they will be brought before their Lord; He will ask, "Is this not a reality?" They will say: "Yes, our Lord, this is the reality." He will order: "Well, then taste the punishment for denying this reality
Those people are indeed lost who deny that they will ever meet Allah. When the hour of Doomsday will overtake them all of a sudden, they will exclaim: "Alas! How negligent we have been about this Hour." They will be carrying the burden of their sins on their backs; and evil indeed are the burdens that they carry
The life of this world is nothing but play and amusement, but the life of the Hereafter will be better for those who are righteous. Will you not use your common sense
O Muhammad We know it well that what they say grieves you: it is not you that they deny, these wrongdoers actually deny the revelations of Allah
Many Messengers before you were denied but patiently bore with their denial and persecution until Our help came down to them: for none can change the decrees of Allah. You have already received the news of what happened to those Messengers
If you find their aversion hard to bear, then see if you can make a tunnel in the ground or put a ladder to ascend in the skies by which you can bring them a sign. O Prophet, you know well that if Allah wanted, He would have given guidance to all. So do not be like the ignorant
Surely those who listen accept the Truth. As for the dead (those with closed minds), Allah will bring them back to life, on the Day of Judgment, to be produced in His court
They ask: "Why has a sign not been sent down to him from his Lord?" Tell them: "Allah is surely able to send down a Sign; but most of them do not understand the wisdom behind it
If you really want to see the signs of Allah, just look at any animal that walks upon the earth and any bird that flies in the air; they too are the communities like you. We have not left out anything from the Book in determining the courses of their lives. They all shall be gathered before their Lord
Those who deny Our Revelations are deaf and dumb, living in many layers of darkness. Allah confounds whom He will, and guides to the Right Way whom He pleases
Ask them to think carefully and answer: "When you face a disaster or the last Hour approaches you, do you call for help anyone other than Allah? Answer me if you are truthful
No, on Him Alone you will call, and forget those whom you have set up as His partners; then if He pleases, He relieves you from the affliction about which you have prayed to Him
We did send Messengers before you to other nations and afflicted them with suffering and adversities so that they might learn humility
Why did they not humble themselves when the sufferings overtook them? On the contrary their hearts became hardened and Satan made their sinful acts seem fair to them
When they neglected the warning they had received, then, instead of punishment, We opened the gates of every kind of prosperity for them; but just as they were rejoicing in what they were given, We suddenly seized them; lo! They were plunged into despair
Thus We cut off the roots of the wrongdoers. All praises are due to Allah the Lord of the worlds
Ask them: "Just think, if Allah takes away your hearing and your sight and seals up your hearts, is there any deity other than Allah who could restore them to you?" See how We present Our revelations over and over again and yet they turn away
Say: "Just think if the punishment of Allah comes to you whether suddenly or openly, would any be destroyed other than the wrongdoers
We have sent the Messengers only to give good news and to warn: so those who believe and mend their ways shall have nothing to fear or to regret
But those who deny Our Revelations shall be punished for their transgression
Say: "I do not claim that I possess the treasures of Allah, or that I know the unseen nor do I claim that I am an angel. What I say is that I follow only that which is revealed to me." Ask them: "Are the blind and the seeing alike? Why don’t you think
O Muhammad, admonish with this (The Qur'an), those who have the fear of being assembled before their Lord in such a condition that there will be no one to protect them or intercede on their behalf other than Him. It may be that, by this admonition, they may become righteous
Do not drive away those (poor people like Bilal, Ammar and Suhaib) who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking only to gain His favor. You are in no way accountable for their deeds nor they are in any way accountable for yours. So if you drive them away, you shall be counted among the wrongdoers
That’s how We have made some of them (poor and slaves who accepted Islam) a means for testing the others (the chiefs of Qureysh), so that they should say: "Are these the people whom Allah favors among us (the poor, indigent and low class)?" Well, does Allah not know best those who are grateful
When those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say: "Peace be upon you. Your Lord has decreed mercy upon Himself. If anyone among you commits evil because of ignorance and thereafter repents and mends his ways; you will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful
Thus, We spell out Our revelations, so that the way of the culprits may become evident
O Muhammad, tell them: "I am forbidden to worship those whom you call upon besides Allah." Say: "I am not going to follow your wishes: if I do, I would be lost and cease to be from the rightly guided
Say: "I am on a clear proof from my Lord which you have denied, but the scourge of Allah, which you are in such a rush to see, is not in my power. No one has the authority of passing Judgment except Allah: He declares the truth and He is the best of Judges
Say: "If what you rush to see was in my power, the matter between you and me would have been settled long ago; but Allah knows best how to deal with wrongdoers
He Alone has the keys of the unseen treasures, of which no one knows except Him. He knows whatever is in the land and in the sea; there is not a single leaf that falls without His knowledge, there is neither a grain in the darkness of the earth nor anything fresh or dry which has not been recorded in a Clear Book
He is the One Who takes your souls at night (makes you go to sleep) and knows what you do during the day, then next day raises you up again to complete your allotted span of life. To Him you shall all return, then He will notify you of all that you have done
He is the Irresistible (reigns supreme) over his servants and sends guardian angels over you. At length, when death approaches anyone of you, Our angels take his soul and they are not negligent in performing their duty
Then those souls are brought back to Allah, their real Master. Beware! He is the Judge and He is the swiftest in settling accounts
Ask them: "Who delivers you from calamities in the darkness of the land and of the sea, when you call upon Him in open humility and silent terror: If You deliver us from this affliction, we shall become truly grateful
Say: "Allah delivers you from these and all other calamities, yet you commit shirk (worship false gods)
Say: "He has the power to send calamities on you from above and from below or to split you into discordant factions to make you taste the violence of one another. See how We present Our revelations over and over again so that they may understand the reality
But your people are rejecting this (The Qur'an), although it is the very truth." Tell them: "I am not appointed as your caretaker
For every prophecy there is an appointed time, and soon you will come to know
When you see those who are engaged in arguments about Our revelations, turn away from them until they change their topic of discussion. If Satan ever makes you forget this commandment, then as soon as you realize, withdraw from the company of wrongdoers
Though righteous people will not be held responsible for wrongdoers' actions, yet it is their duty to admonish them; perhaps they may refrain from evil deeds
Leave those people alone, who take their religion as mere play and amusement and are deceived by the life of this world. However, keep on admonishing them with this (The Qur'an), lest their souls be damned by their own sinful deeds. They will not have any protector or intercessor to rescue them from Allah, and if they seek to offer every imaginable ransom, it shall not be accepted from them. Such are those who are damned by their own sinful deeds. They will get boiling water to drink and painful torture for their rejection of the Truth
Ask the pagans: "Should we call on those, instead of Allah, who can neither benefit us nor harm us? Should we turn upon our heels after Allah has guided us to the Right Way? Like the one whom Satan has misled and is wandering around in the land, while his friends are calling him to the right way, shouting: "Come this way!" Tell them: "Allah’s guidance is the only guidance. We are commanded to surrender (become Muslims) to the Lord of the worlds
to establish Salah and fear Him, before Whom you shall all be assembled on the Day of Judgment
He is the One Who has created the heavens and the earth to manifest the Truth. On the Day when He will say: "Be," it shall be (the Day of Resurrection). His Word is the truth. He shall be the sole Sovereign on the Day when the trumpet will be blown. He has the full knowledge of the invisible and the visible. He is the Wise, the Aware
Tell them about Abraham, who said to Azer, his father: "Are you taking idols for gods? Surely, I see you and your people in manifest error
We showed Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , as We show you with examples from nature, so he became one of the firm believers
When the night drew its shadow over him, he saw a star and said, "this is my Lord." But when it set, he said: "I do not love to worship such a god that fades away
Afterwards he saw the moon shining, he said; "This is my Lord." But when it also set, he cried: "If my Lord does not guide me, I shall certainly become one of those who go astray
Then when he saw the sun with its brighter shine, and he said: "This must be my Lord; it is larger than the other two." But when it also set, he exclaimed: "O my people! I am done with your shirk (associating partners with Allah)
As far as I am concerned, I will turn my face, being upright, to Him Who has created the heavens and the earth, and I am not one of the pagans
When his people started arguing with him, he told them: "Will you argue with me about Allah, whereas He Himself has guided me? I do not fear those whom you take for gods besides Him, none can harm me unless my Lord so wills, the knowledge of my Lord encompasses everything, why don’t you get admonition
Why should I fear your idols, when you are not afraid of your actions of making them partners with Allah, for which He has not given you any sanction? Which one from the two parties of us deserves to feel secure? Tell me, if you know the truth
As a matter of fact those who believe and do not taint their faith with wrongdoings will feel more secure and will be better guided
This was the argument which We furnished Abraham against his people. We exalt in ranks whom We please; surely your Lord is Wise, Aware
We gave him Isaac and Jacob and guided them all as We guided Noah before them, and among his descendants were David (David), Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses and Haroon (Aaron); thus do We reward those who do good to others
Other descendants include Zakariya, John, Jesus, and Ilyas (Elias); all of them were righteous
and Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah and Lot. We exalted every one of them over the worlds
as We exalted some of their forefathers, their children and their brothers. We chose them for Our service and guided them to the Right Way
This is the guidance from Allah; He bestows it upon whom He pleases of His devotees. If they had committed shirk (worshiped anyone else besides Allah) all their deeds would have become void
Such were the people to whom We gave the Book, wisdom and Prophethood. Now if these people deny this guidance, it does not matter; We would bestow this guidance upon other people who would not disbelieve
O Muhammad, those were the people who were rightly guided by Allah, therefore, follow their guidance and tell these people: "I am not asking you any compensation for this work of delivering the Message to you, this message is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds
Those people have not valued the attributes of Allah, the way His attributes should be valued, who say: "Allah has never revealed anything to a human being." Ask them: "Who then sent down the Book (Torah) which Moses brought, a light and guidance for mankind? You have transcribed it on separate sheets, publishing some and suppressing much of that given knowledge, which neither you nor your forefathers previously possessed." If they do not answer, then just say: "Allah" and leave them alone with the discourse of their useless arguments
This is the blessed Book, like the one given to Moses, which We have revealed, confirming what came before it, that you, O Muhammad, may warn the people living in the Mother City (Mecca) and those who live around her. Those who believe in the hereafter, will believe in this (Book) and will be steadfast in taking care of their Salah (prescribed prayers)
Who can be more wicked than the one who invents a lie against Allah, or says: "This was revealed to me," while nothing was revealed to him? Or the one who says: "I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed?" If you could only see these wrongdoers when they are in the agonies of death and the angels stretch forth their hands saying, "Take out your soul! Today you will be rewarded with a disgraceful punishment for saying falsehood against Allah which you had no right to say and showing arrogance against His revelations
Allah adds to what the angels said, "So you have come back to Us Alone as We created you at the first time, leaving behind all that which We gave you in that world and We don’t see with you your intercessors, whom you claimed to be Allah’s partners in your affairs; all your ties have been cut off and what you presumed has failed you
Surely it is Allah Who causes the seed and the fruit-stone to split and sprout. He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living. It is Allah, Who does all this; then why are you being misled
He causes the daybreak from the dark. He makes the night for rest and makes the rising and setting of the sun and the moon for you to determine times ( days, weeks, months and years), these are the arrangements of the Almighty, the All-Knowing
He is the One Who has made the stars for you, so that you might find your way thereby in the darkness whether you are on the land or the sea. We have spelled out Our revelations very clearly for people of common sense
He is the One Who has created you from a single soul and granted you dwelling on Earth and a resting place in the hereafter. We have spelled out Our revelation very clearly for people of understanding
It is He Who sends down rainwater from the sky and therewith produces vegetation of all kinds: He brings forth green crops producing grain piled up in the ear, palm-trees laden with clusters of dates hanging within reach, gardens of grapes, olives, and pomegranates; though their fruit resembles in kind yet is different in variety. Look at their fruits as they yield and ripen. Behold! In these things there are signs for true believers
Yet they make the Jinns (Genies: creature which has been created out of fire) as the partners with Allah, whereas He is their Creator; and also ascribe to Him sons and daughters without having any knowledge. Glory to Him! He is highly exalted far above what they ascribe
He is the creator of the heavens and the earth. How could He have a son when He has no consort? He has created everything and is aware of everything
That is Allah your Lord! There is no god but Him, the creator of everything. Therefore, worship Him, He is the Guardian of everything
No vision can grasp Him while He grasps all visions. He is the Subtle, the Aware
Now there have come to you clear proofs from your Lord to open your eyes. Therefore, anyone who will open his eyes, it is good for his own soul and anyone who will play blind, it is to his own harm, and I am the Prophet, not assigned as a keeper over you
Thus do We explain Our revelations over and over again so that the unbelievers may say: "You have learned from someone, but not from Allah" and that this may become clear to people of understanding
Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord, there is no god but Him and turn aside from the pagans
If Allah wanted they would not be pagans. We have neither appointed you their keeper nor made you their guardian
O believers, do not insult those, whom these pagans call upon besides Allah, lest in retaliation they call bad names to Allah out of their ignorance. Thus We have made the deeds of every group of people seem fair to them. In the end they will all return to their Lord and then, He will inform them of the reality of all that they have done
These pagans solemnly swear by Allah that if a Sign came to them they would most certainly believe in your Prophethood. Say: "All signs are vouchsafed by Allah." What should make you understand that if a sign comes to them they will still not believe
We will turn away their hearts and their eyes from the Truth because of their attitude which prompted them to disbelieve in the first place, and We will leave them to wander in their rebellious wrongdoing
Even if We had sent to them the angels, made the dead speak to them, and presented all the different things of the world before them as proof, they would have not believed, unless Allah wanted otherwise (and forcing someone to believe is not what He wants): Yet most of them act out of ignorance
Like this Messenger, We had granted each Messenger his opponents - Satans from among the human beings and Jinns - some of them inspire the others with seductive discourses of deception. If your Lord wanted, they would not have done so. Therefore, neglect them as well as what they invent
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may be inclined to what they say, and be pleased with it; and so that they can earn what they wish to earn
Say: Should I seek a judge other than Allah, when He is the One Who has revealed this Book (The Qur'an) with full details? Those whom We gave the Book, before you, know very well that it is revealed to you from your Lord with the Truth; therefore, you should not be of those who have doubts
The Words of your Lord have been completed with credibility and justice; there is no way to change His Words. He is the Hearer, the Knower
If you obey (other than the Messenger, then you should know that) most of the people on earth will lead you away from the Way of Allah, for they follow nothing but guesswork and preach nothing but falsehood
In fact, your Lord knows best those people who have strayed from His Way and He knows best those who are on the Right Way
So eat of that meat on which Allah’s name has been pronounced if you truly believe in His revelations
Why should you not eat that on which Allah’s name has been pronounced, when He has clearly spelled out for you in detail what is forbidden - except in a case of extreme helplessness? In fact, many do mislead people by their appetites unchecked by knowledge. Your Lord knows best those who transgress
Eschew all sin whether open or secret: surely those who earn sin will get due punishment for their wrongdoings
Do not eat of that meat on which Allah’s name has not been pronounced, since that is most surely a transgression. In fact the Satans inspire their friends that they should argue with you, and if you obey them, most surely you will be considered a pagan
Can a person who was dead (ignorant), and whom We raised to life and gave the Light to walk with among people, be like the one who is in the depths of darkness from which he can never come out? Since they treat both of them alike, the actions of the unbelievers are made lucrative to them
and that is why in every town We have placed the criminals as their ring leaders to plot therein, they plot against none but their own souls, though they do not perceive it
Whenever there comes to them a sign (verses of The Qur'an) they say: "We shall not believe until we are given directly that which is given to the Messengers of Allah." Allah knows best to whom He should give His Message. Soon these criminals will be overtaken by humiliation and by a severe punishment from Allah for their evil plots
Whomever Allah wills to guide, He opens his chest to Islam and whomever He intends to confound, He makes his chest narrow and squeezes so tight that, at the very idea of Islam, he feels as if his soul is going to climb up towards the sky. That is how Allah places a blight on those who do not believe
whereas in fact this way (Al-Islam) is the Right Way of your Lord and We have spelled out Our revelations very clearly for the people who use their common sense
For them there will be a home of peace with their Lord. He will be their protector because of their good deeds
On the Day when He will assemble them all together, (Allah will address the Jinns): "O assembly of Jinns! You seduced mankind in great number." And their votaries from among mankind will say: "Our Lord, we have both enjoyed each other's fellowship but alas! Now we have reached the end of our term which You had decreed for us." Then Allah will say: "Now hellfire is your dwelling-place; you will live therein forever unless Allah ordains otherwise." Surely your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable
That is how, in the hereafter, We will make wrongdoers the comrades of one another on account of what they earned during their life on Earth with evil friendship
At that time Allah will also ask: "O Assembly of Jinns and mankind! Did not there come to you the Messengers from amongst you who proclaimed to you My revelations and warned you about the meeting of this Day?" They will reply: "Yes they did, We bear witness against our own souls." Today this worldly life has deceived them but on that Day they will testify against themselves that they were indeed kuffar (unbelievers)
Your Lord would not destroy towns without just cause while their residents were ignorant of the Reality
All will be awarded ranks according to their deeds, and your Lord is not unaware of what they do
Your Lord is Self-Sufficient, Lord of Mercy. If He wants, He can destroy you all and replace you with others as He pleases, just as He raised you from the offspring of other people
Surely what you are being threatened with, must come to pass and you can do nothing about it
O Muhammad, tell them: "O my people! If you don’t listen to me, do whatever you want and I’ll do whatever I deem right; you will soon find out who is to gain the reward of the hereafter; rest assured that the wrongdoers will not get salvation
They set aside a share of their produce and of their cattle for Allah, saying: "This is for Allah" - so they pretend - "and this for our shoraka' (their assigned partners of Allah)." Their shoraka's share does not reach Allah, but the share of Allah is wholly given to shoraka'. What an evil decision they make
Their shoraka' have induced many pagans to kill their own children in order to ruin them and confuse them in their religion. If Allah wanted, they would not have done so. Therefore, leave them alone with their false inventions
These pagans say that such and such cattle and crops are reserved, in the name of such and such temple, and no one should eat except those whom we permit - in fact these restrictions they themselves have imposed. Then there are some animals which they have prohibited from riding or carrying loads, and there are still other animals over which they do not pronounce the name of Allah. They have falsely attributed all these things to Him. Soon He will requite them for their invented lies
They also say: "The offspring of these cattle is specially reserved for our males and forbidden to our females but if it is stillborn then all can share together." Soon He will punish them for their attribution of such superstitions to Allah. Surely He is Wise, Knowledgeable
Actual losers are those who kill their own children foolishly without knowledge and forbid food which Allah has provided them, falsely ascribing prohibitions to Allah. Certainly they have gone astray and are not at all rightly guided
It is He who has created all kinds of plants, trellised and untrellised, the palm trees, the field crops with produce of different kinds, the olives and pomegranates, similar in kind yet different in taste. Eat of their fruit in their season and give away their Zakah on the harvest day. Do not be spendthrift, surely He does not love the spendthrifts
Of the animals you have, some are for transportation and some for slaughter. Eat of that which Allah has provided for you and do not follow the footsteps of Satan; surely he is your open enemy
For eight heads of cattle, male and female, there are superstitions. Take a pair of sheep and a pair of goats, for example, and ask them, "Of these, has He forbidden you the males, females or their fetuses? Answer me based on knowledge, not superstition, if what you say is true
Likewise ask them about a pair of camels and a pair of cows, "Of these, has He forbidden you the males, females or their fetuses?" If they answer, then ask them: "Were you present when Allah gave you these commandments?" If not then Who can be more unjust than the one who forges a lie against Allah, so that he may mislead mankind without having any knowledge? Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people
O Muhammad tell them: I did not find in what has been revealed to me anything forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it, except the meat of an already dead animal, or running blood or the flesh of swine (pork) - for these are unclean - or flesh of an animal which has become profane because of slaughtering in the names other than Allah. Even so, if anyone is forced in a helpless situation, intending neither disobedience nor transgression, you will find your Lord Forgiving, Merciful
For those who are Jews, We forbade every animal with undivided hoofs and the fat of oxen and sheep except what is attached to their backs or their intestines or is mixed with their bones. This was the punishment We had inflicted for their wilful disobedience. What We said is true
Now if they disbelieve you, say: "Your Lord is the owner of boundless Mercy; but His scourge cannot be averted from criminal people
In response to this the pagans will promptly say: "If Allah wanted, neither we nor our forefathers would have been pagans, or we could have made anything unlawful." That is how their ancestors rejected the truth in the past until they tasted of Our punishment. If they say so, then ask them: "Do you have any evidence that you can put before us? The fact of the matter is, you believe in nothing but conjecture and follow nothing but falsehood
Say: "In contrast to your position, Allah’s argument is conclusive; if it had been His will He could indeed have guided you all
Say: "Bring your witnesses to prove that Allah did forbid so and so." Even if they so testify, do not testify with them, nor yield to the wishes of those who deny Our revelations, disbelieve in the hereafter, and set up others as equals with their Lord
O Muhammad, say: "Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden to you: not to commit shirk with Him, to be kind to your parents, not to kill your children making the excuse of inability to support them - We provide sustenance for you and for them not to commit shameful deeds whether open or secret, not to kill any soul forbidden by Allah except for the requirements of justice. These are the things which He enjoined you so that you may learn wisdom
Furthermore, not to go near the property of an orphan except in the best way (to improve it), until he attains maturity. Give full measure and just weight - We never charge a soul with more than it can bear. Whenever you speak, be just, even if it affects your own relatives, and fulfill your covenant with Allah. These are the things which He has enjoined on you so that you may be mindful
He has also said: Verily this is My way, the Right Way; therefore follow it and do not follow other ways, for they will lead you away from Him. This is what He enjoined on you so that you may guard yourselves against evil
Moreover, He said, We gave Moses the Book to complete Our favor on those who would do good to others; it contained details of all things, and was a guide and a mercy, so that they should believe in the ultimate meeting with their Lord
We have revealed this Book, similar to the Book given to Moses, as a blessing; therefore, follow it and adopt a Godfearing attitude so that you may receive mercy
Lest you say: "The Book was revealed only to two parties before us and we were unaware of what they read
or lest you say: "If the Book had been revealed to us, we could have followed its guidance better than them," a veritable sign has now come to you from your Lord as a guidance and mercy. Who then is more unjust than the one who denies the revelations of Allah and turns away from them? Very soon those who turn away from Our revelations will face dreadful punishment for their aversion
Are they waiting for the angels or your Lord to come down to them or are they waiting to be given a certain sign of your Lord! On the Day when that certain sign of your Lord appears, the belief will not profit that soul which did not believe before, or who, while professing to believe did not do good deeds. Say to them: "Wait if you will; we too are waiting
Surely those who divide the religion into sects and identify themselves as a sect, O Muhammad, you have nothing to do with them. Their case will be called to account by Allah Himself, He will inform them as to what they did
Whoever does one good deed, he will be given credit for ten similar good deeds, and whoever does one bad deed will be punished for only one, and no one will be treated unjustly
O Muhammad, tell them: "As for me, surely my Lord has guided me to the Right Way, the ever true Deen, the faith of Abraham the upright and he was not of the pagans
Also declare: "Surely my Salah, my devotion, my life, and my death are all for Allah the Lord of the Worlds
He has no peer; thus am I commanded and I am the first of the Muslims
Say: "Should I seek another Lord besides Allah when He is the Lord of everything?" Every soul will reap the fruits of its own deeds; no bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another. Ultimately you will return to your Lord, and He will resolve for you your disputes
He is the One Who has made you the inheritors of the earth and raised some of you in ranks over others so that He may test you in what He has given you. Surely your Lord is swift in retribution; yet He is also very Forgiving, Merciful
Alif L'am M'im Suad
This Book is revealed to you; let there be no hesitation in your heart about it so that you may thereby warn the unbelievers and remind the believers
Say: "O people, follow what has been brought down to you from your Lord and do not follow other patrons besides Him." Yet little do they take admonition
How many towns have We destroyed for their sins? Our scourge took them all of a sudden at night or while they were taking their afternoon rest
and when our scourge fell upon them, their only cry was: "We have indeed been wrongdoers
On the Day of Judgment We shall question those to whom Messengers were sent and We shall also question the Messengers about Our message and its response
Then We shall tell their whole story as an eye witness for We were never absent at any time or from any place
On that Day, the scale of justice shall be established. Those whose scale of good deeds will be heavy, they are the ones who will attain felicity
and those whose scale is light, they shall find themselves in loss for they had done injustice to Our revelations
We are the One Who established you on earth, and provided you means of your sustenance therein: yet little it is that you pay thanks
Indeed We created you, then We fashioned you, then We asked the angels: "Prostrate yourselves before Adam." They all prostrated accordingly except Iblees (Satan) who did not join those who prostrated
Allah said: "What prevented you from prostrating when I commanded you?" He replied: "I am better than he; you created me from fire and him from clay
Allah said: "Get down from here. You have no right to brag here of your superiority. Get out, henceforth you are of the petty ones
Satan requested: "Give me respite till the Day of Resurrection
Allah said: "The respite you requested is hereby granted
Satan declared: "Since You let me deviate, now I will lie in ambush for mankind on Your Right Way
I Will come upon them from the front, from the rear, from the right, and from the left, and You will not find most of them to be grateful
Allah said: "Get out from here, you despicable outcast; I will certainly fill hell with you and all of them who follow you
Allah said: "O Adam! Dwell with your wife in paradise and eat any fruit you please; but never approach this tree or you shall both become wrongdoers
But Satan tempted them so that he might reveal to them the private parts of their bodies which they had never seen before. He told them: "Your Lord has forbidden you to approach this tree only to prevent you from becoming angels or immortals
And he swore to them both: "I am your sincere adviser
Thus he cunningly seduced them, and when they ate from the tree, their shame became visible to them and they began to cover themselves with the leaves of the garden. Then their Lord called out to them: "Did I not forbid you to approach that tree, and did not I warn you that Satan was your open enemy
They both replied: "Our Lord! We have wronged our souls. If You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers
Allah said: "Go down, some of you are the enemy of others. The Earth will be your dwelling-place and your means of livelihood for a fixed term
He further said: "Therein you shall live and therein you shall die, and therefrom you shall be raised to life
O children of Adam! We have sent down to you clothing to cover your nakedness and as an adornment, however, the best clothing is the clothing of piety. This is one of Allah’s revelations so that the people may learn a lesson
O children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you in the same manner as he seduced your parents out of paradise through stripping them of their clothing in order to expose their nakedness. He and his tribe watch you from where you cannot see them. We have permitted the Satans to be the guardians over the unbelievers
Whenever they commit a shameful deed, they say: "We found our forefathers doing this and Allah Himself has commanded us to do so." Tell them: "Nay! Allah never commands what is shameful. Do you attribute to Allah something about which you have no knowledge
O Muhammad, say to them: "My Lord has commanded justice and that you set your faces in the right direction at the time of every prayer and call on Him with true devotion. You shall return to Him as He created you in the beginning
To one group He has guided while the other group deserved to be left in error due to their own choice; for they took the Satans for their protectors instead of Allah, yet they think that they are guided
O Children of Adam! Put on your adornment (proper and decent dress) when you attend your Masjid at the time of every prayer. Eat and drink, but do not be extravagant; surely He does not love the extravagant
O Muhammad, ask them: "Who has forbidden you to wear decent clothes or to eat the good food which Allah has provided for His devotees?" Say: "All these things are for the enjoyment of the believers in the life of this world though shared by others; but these shall be exclusively theirs on the Day of Resurrection. Thus do We make Our revelations clear for those who understand
Say: "My Lord has forbidden all indecencies whether open or secret, sin and rebellion against justice, committing shirk with Allah for which He has granted no sanction, and saying things about Allah of which you have no knowledge
For every nation there is a fixed term, when their term expires, it can neither be delayed for a moment nor can it be made to come early
O children of Adam! Whenever there come to you Messengers from among you and recite to you My revelations, those who will become righteous and mend their ways will have nothing to fear or to regret
but those who deny Our revelations and treat them with arrogance, shall be the inmates of hellfire to live therein forever
Who can be more unjust than the one who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His revelations? Such people will have their destined portion from the Book (what was written for them to receive during their life on earth); until when Our messengers (angels of death) arrive to take away their souls, they will ask: "Where are those gods whom you used to invoke besides Allah?" They will reply: "They have forsaken us" and they will bear witness against themselves (admit) that they were indeed kuffar (unbelievers)
Allah will say: "Enter the fire and join the nations of Jinns and men who have gone before you." As each nation will enter hell, it will curse its preceding sister till all are gathered there, the last of them will say about the first one: "Our Lord! These have led us astray; therefore, give them double punishment of the fire." He will answer: "There will be double for all, although you may not know because of being predecessor or successor in sin and aggression
Then the first will say to the last: "If we were to blame, you too, were no better than us; now taste the punishment of your misdeeds
Surely, the gates of the Heaven will not be opened for those who deny Our revelations and treat them with arrogance; their admission into paradise will be as impossible as the passing of a camel through the eye of a needle. That is how We shall reward the criminals
Hell shall be their bed and flames shall be their covering. That is how We shall reward the wrongdoers
As for those who believe and do good deeds - We never burden a soul with more than it can bear - they are worthy of Paradise, wherein they will live forever
We shall remove whatever ill-feeling they may have in their hearts against one another. Rivers will be flowing beneath them; and they will say: "Praise be to Allah Who guided us this way, we would have never found the Right Way if Allah had not guided us. The Messengers of our Lord have surely preached us the truth." At that time they will hear the announcement: "This is paradise, which you have inherited because of your good deeds
The residents of paradise will call out to the inmates of the hellfire: "We have indeed found out the promises of our Lord to be true. Have you, too, found the promise of your Lord to be true?" "Yes," they will answer, and a herald will proclaim among them, "the curse of Allah be upon those wrongdoers
who hindered other people from the Way of Allah and sought to make it crooked, and who did not believe in the hereafter
Between the two, there shall be a veil, and on the A‘raf (heights) there will be people who will recognize them by their features. They will call out to the residents of Paradise: "Peace be upon you!" They will not have yet entered it, though they will have the hope
When their eyes shall turn towards the inmates of the hellfire they will say: "Our Lord! Do not cast us among these wrongdoers
The people of the A'raf (heights) will call to certain men (famous personalities from among the inmates of Hell) whom they will recognize by their features and say: "Have you found out that neither your riches nor your arrogant pride have availed you
Are the residents of paradise not the same people about whom you swore that Allah will never bestow His mercy on them?" Today the same people are being welcomed with the words, "Enter paradise, you have nothing to fear or to regret
Then the inmates of the fire will cry out to the residents of paradise: "Give us some water or some of the food which Allah has provided you." They will reply: "Allah has prohibited both of these things to the unbelievers
who took their religion to be mere amusement and play and were deceived by their earthly life." Allah will say: "Today We will forget them as they forgot the meeting of this Day; and mocked at Our revelations
For We have certainly brought them a Book which provides clear details based on knowledge and which is a guidance and blessing for the true believers
Now are these people waiting for anything other than the Day of Fulfillment (Day of Judgment)? When the Day of Fulfillment will come, those who have disregarded it, will say: "Indeed the Messengers of our Lord had come with the truth. Are there any intercessors now, who could intercede on our behalf? Or could we be sent back so that we would not do as we have done before." In fact they would have lost their souls and the things they had invented will leave them in the lurch
Surely your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six Yõme (time periods) and is firmly established on the throne of authority. He makes the night cover the day and the day follow the night automatically. He created the sun, the moon and the stars, and made them subservient to His will. Take note: His is the creation, and His is the command. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds
Call on your Lord with humility and in private; for He does not love the transgressors
Do not create mischief in the land after it has been set in order. Pray to Him with fear and hope. Surely the mercy of Allah is always close to those who do good to others
He is the One Who sends the winds bearing good news of His blessings, so when they lift up heavy clouds, We drive them along to a dead countryside and make the rain fall upon it and bring forth all kinds of fruits from the same dead land. Likewise We will raise the dead to life; this example is given so that you may learn a lesson from this observation
The good soil yields rich produce by the permission of Allah and barren soil yields nothing but poor produce. Thus do We explain Our revelations over and over again for those who pay thanks
Indeed We selected Noah for the guidance of his people, and he said: "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god but Him. If you do not listen to what I say, I fear for you the punishment of a Mighty Day
The chiefs of his nation said: "Surely we see that you are in evident error
He replied: "O my people! I am not in error; on the contrary, I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I am appointed to deliver the message of my Lord and give you friendly advice for I know from Allah something that you do not know
Do you wonder that there has come to you a message from your Lord through a man from among yourselves to warn you, so that you may fear Allah in order to receive His mercy
But they denied him, as a result We saved him and all who were with him in the ark, and drowned those who denied Our revelations. Surely they were a blind nation
For the people of ‘Ad We selected their brother Hud, who said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no god but Him. Will you not fear Him
The chiefs of his nation who denied his message said: "We can see that you are crazy and we think that you are lying
He replied: "O my people! I am not crazy, on the contrary I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
I am conveying the message of my Lord to you, and I am an honest adviser to you
Do you wonder that a reminder from your Lord has come to you through one of your own men to warn you? Remember that He made you successors after the people of Noah and gave you a tall stature as compared to other people. Therefore, remember the favors that you have received from Allah, so that you may prosper
They replied: "Have you come to us with the demand that we should worship Allah Alone and give up those whom our forefathers used to worship? Well, bring us what you are threatening us with if what you say is true
Hud said: "You have already incurred the blight and wrath of your Lord. Would you dispute with me about mere names which you and your forefathers have invented, and for which Allah has revealed no sanction? If so then wait for the decision of Allah, I too will wait with you
We saved him and his companions by Our mercy and We cut off the roots of (annihilated) those who denied Our revelations and did not become believers
For the people of Thamud We selected their brother Saleh, who said: "O my people! Worship Allah; you have no other god but Him. Now a clear proof has come to you from your Lord; here is Allah's she-camel as a sign for you, therefore leave her alone to pasture on Allah’s land and do not touch her with bad intentions, lest you incur a painful punishment
Remember how you were made the heirs of ‘Ad and settled in the land, capable of building mansions in the valleys and carving out homes in the mountains. Therefore, remember the favors of Allah and do not spread mischief in the land
The arrogant leaders from his nation asked the oppressed among them who have believed: "Do you really believe that Saleh is a Messenger from his Lord?" They replied: "We do indeed believe in the revelation with which he has been sent
The arrogant, who considered themselves superior, said: "We deny all that you believe in
Then they hamstrung the she-camel, defied the commandment of their Lord and challenged Saleh saying: "Bring down the scourge you have threatened us with, if you truly are one of the Messengers
Thereupon an earthquake overtook them and they became lifeless bodies in their homes with their faces down
Saleh left them saying: "O my people! I did indeed convey to you the message of my Lord and gave you good advice but you did not love the good advisers
We also selected Lot, who said to his people: "Will you do such indecent acts as no one else in the world has committed before you
You satisfy your lust with men (homosexual) instead of women. Indeed you are a nation who has transgressed beyond bounds
His people had no answer but to say: "Drive them out of your town, they pose to be very pious
So We saved him and his family except his wife, who was of those who lagged behind
We let loose rain of brimstone and every one of them was killed; see what was the outcome for such criminals
For Madyan We selected their brother Shu‘aib, who said: "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no other god but Him. A clear guidance has come to you from your Lord. Give just measure and weight, do not undersell others in their goods, and do not create mischief in the land after it has been set in order; this is better for you if you are true believers
Do not sit in ambush on every road to threaten people and hinder from the Way of Allah those who believe in Him, seeking to make His Way crooked. Remember how He multiplied you when you were a few in number and see what was the end of the mischief-makers of prior nations
If there are some among you who believe in the message with which I have been sent and others who disbelieve it, then be patient until Allah judges between us, for He is the best of all judges
The arrogant proud leaders of his nation said: "O Shu‘aib! We shall certainly drive you and your fellow believers out of our town or you will have to return back to our national ways." He replied: "What! Will you make us turn back against our will
We shall indeed invent a lie against Allah if we return to your ways after Allah has rescued us therefrom. It is not possible for us to turn back unless Allah, our Lord, want us to. Our Lord has vast knowledge of everything. We put our trust in Allah." Then they prayed: "Our Lord! Decide between us and our nation with truth, for you are the best to decide
The leaders who disbelieved from among his nation said: "If you follow Shu`aib, you shall indeed be losers
Thereupon an earthquake overtook them and they became lifeless bodies in their homes with their faces down
Those who called Shu`aib a liar were as though they never lived therein; those who called Shu`aib a liar were the actual losers
Shu`aib left them saying: "O my people! I did indeed convey to you the messages of my Lord and I did give you good advice; how shall I then be sorry for the nation that refuses to believe
Whenever We sent a Prophet to a town We afflicted its people with adversity and misfortunes so that they might humble themselves
Then We changed their adversity into good fortune till they became very affluent and said: "Our forefathers also had their adversity and affluence." Behold! We took them by surprise while they did not even notice it
Had the residents of the towns believed and feared Allah, We would have showered upon them riches from the heavens and the earth, but they disbelieved; so We seized them for their misdeeds
Do the people of these towns now feel secure from Our punishment coming to them by night while they might be fast asleep
Or do the people of these towns feel secure from Our punishment coming to them in broad daylight while they are playing around
Do these people feel secure against the plan of Allah? In fact, only those people feel secure from the plan of Allah who are doomed to destruction
Is it not a guiding lesson to those who inherit the earth after its former occupants, that if We please, We can punish them for their sins and seal their hearts so they would not hear
Those towns whose stories We related to you, can serve as examples. Certainly their Messengers came to them with clear signs, but they persisted in their unbelief and would not believe what they had denied before. That’s why Allah sealed the hearts of those unbelievers
We did not find most of them true to their commitments, rather We found that most of them were transgressors
Then after them, We sent Moses with Our revelations to Pharoah (Pharaoh) and his chiefs but they too treated Our revelations unjustly, so see what was the end of those mischief-makers
Moses said: "O Pharoah! I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
It is not befitting for me to say anything about Allah except the Truth. I have come to you from your Lord with clear signs of appointment, therefore, send the children of Israel with me
Pharoah asked: "If you have come with a sign then produce it, if what you say is true
So Moses threw down his staff and all of a sudden it became a real serpent
Then he drew out his hand from his pocket and it became shining white to all the beholders
The chiefs of Pharoah’s nation said: "He indeed is a skilled sorcerer
who intends to drive you out from your land." Pharoah asked: "So what do you propose
They said: "Put him and his brother off for a while; and send the collectors to all the cities
and summon every skillful sorcerer to you
The sorcerers came to Pharoah and said: "We must certainly have some suitable reward if we prevail
Yes, he answered. "Not only reward but more: you shall certainly become my favored friends
Then they asked Moses: "Will you cast, or should we be the first ones to cast
Moses said: "You cast." So when they cast, they bewitched the eyes of the people and terrified them by a display of a mighty sorcery
We inspired Moses to cast his staff. No sooner did he cast his staff than it became a serpent and began to swallow up the creation of their sorcery
Thus the truth prevailed and all that they did collapsed
Pharoah and his people were defeated and put to humiliation
and the sorcerers, since they were professionals and knew that it was not sorcery, fell down in prostration
saying: "we believe in the Lord of the worlds
the Lord of Moses and Haroon
Pharoah said: "How dare you believe in Him without my permission? In fact this was a plot which you all had planned to drive the people out of their city, but soon you will know its consequences
I will have your hands and your feet cut off on opposite sides and then crucify you all
They answered: "We will surely return to our Lord
Look at your verdict, you want to take revenge simply because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came before us! O Lord! Give us patience and cause us die as Muslims
The chiefs of Pharoah’s (Pharaoh's) nation asked him: "Will you leave Moses and his nation free to commit mischief in the land and to forsake you and your gods?" He said: "We will put their sons to death and spare their daughters; we have irresistible power over them
Moses said to his people: "Seek help from Allah and be patient. The land belongs to Allah. He gives it as a heritage to those of His devotees whom He pleases. You should know that final success is for the righteous
They said: "We were oppressed before you came to us and since you have come to us." He replied: "It is quite possible that your Lord may destroy your enemy and make you vicegerent in the land; then He will see how you act
We afflicted Pharoah’s people with several years of famine and shortages of fruit so that they might come to their senses
But whenever they had good times they said "It is our due," and whenever evil befell them, they ascribed that bad luck to Moses and those with him. Behold! In fact their misfortune was in the hands of Allah; yet most of them do not know
They said to Moses: "No matter what sign you may bring us to put your magic spell, we are not going to believe you
So We plagued them with storms, locusts, lice, frogs and blood: clear cut signs, yet they persisted in their arrogance, for they were a criminal nation
Every time the plague befell them, they said: "O Moses! Pray for us to your Lord as He has made the promise with you, if you help remove the plague from us, we shall truly believe in you and send the Children of Israel with you
But every time We removed the plague from them and the appointed time for the release of the Children of Israel came, lo! They broke their promise
Therefore, We inflicted retribution on them and drowned them in the sea, for they denied Our signs and became heedless of them
Thus We made that nation which was oppressed, the inheritors of the eastern and western lands which We had blessed. That’s how the fair promise of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel because they had endured with patience; and We levelled to the ground the great works and fine buildings which Pharoah and his nation had erected with such pride
We made the Children of Israel cross the (Red) sea. On their way they came across a people who were worshipping their idols. They said: "O Moses fashion for us an Ilah (a god for worship) like the gods of these people." He replied: "You are indeed very ignorant people
don’t you realize, what these people are following is doomed to destruction and their deeds are in vain
He further said: "Should I seek for you a god for worship other than Allah: when it is He who has exalted you above all the worlds
and while Allah says, "Remember that We rescued you from people of Pharaoh, who subjected you to cruel torment, putting your sons to death and sparing your women and in that condition of slavery there was a great trial from your Lord
We summoned Moses to the mount of Tur for thirty nights and added ten more to complete the term of forty nights for communion with his Lord. (Before leaving) Moses asked his brother Haroon (Aaron): "You will be in my place among my people, set a good example and do not follow the way of mischief-makers
When Moses came to Our appointed place and his Lord spoke to him, he asked: "O my Lord! Give me power of sight to see You." He answered: "You cannot see Me. Look at the mountain; if it remains firm in its place then soon you might be able to see Me". When his Lord manifested His glory on the mountain, it turned into small pieces of fine dust and Moses fell down unconscious. When Moses recovered he said: "Glory be to You! Accept my repentance and I am the first of the believers
Allah said: "O Moses! I have chosen you from among mankind to deliver My message and to have conversation with Me: so take what I give you and be thankful
We inscribed for him upon tablets all kind of instructions and details of every thing, concerning all branches of life, and said: "Observe these with firmness and enjoin your people to follow them according to the best of their abilities. Soon I shall show you the homes of the transgressors
I will turn away from My signs the eyes of those who are unjustly arrogant in the land, so that even if they see each and every sign they will not believe in it. If they see the Right Way before them they will not follow it; but if they see a crooked way they will follow it; this is because they denied Our revelations and were heedless of them
Those who deny Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, their deeds are null. Should they be rewarded except for what they have done
In his absence the nation of Moses made an image of a calf for worship from their jewelry which produced a mooing sound. Did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor give them the guidance? Yet they took it for worship and became wrongdoers
When they felt ashamed about what they had done and realized that they had gone astray, they said: "If our Lord does not have mercy on us and pardon us, we shall become losers
When Moses came back to his people, he was extremely angry and sorrowful, and he said: "What an evil thing you have done in my place in my absence! Have you tried to hasten the retribution of your Lord?" He put down the Holy Tablets and seized his brother by the hair of his head and dragged him closer. Haroon (Aaron) cried: "O son of my mother! The people overpowered me and almost killed me; do not make my enemies happy over me and do not count me among the wrongdoers
At this Moses said: "O Lord! Forgive me and my brother! And admit us to Your mercy, for You are the Most Merciful of all
Those who worshipped the calf have indeed incurred the wrath of their Lord and disgrace in this life; thus do We recompense those who invent falsehoods
As for those who do evil deeds, then repent and become true believers thereafter, your Lord is most surely the Forgiving, Merciful
When Moses’s anger calmed down he took up the Holy Tablets in whose writing there was guidance and mercy for those that fear their Lord
Moses chose seventy men from his nation to accompany him to Our place of meeting. On their way when they were seized by a violent earthquake, he prayed: "O my Lord! Had it been Your will, You could have destroyed them long ago, and myself too. Would You destroy us for the offense committed by some fools among us? That trial was ordained by You, to confound whom You willed and to guide whom You pleased. You are our Guardian, therefore, forgive us and have mercy on us; for You are the best of all forgivers
O Allah ordain for us what is good in this life and in the Hereafter, surely we have turned to You." He replied: "I will inflict My punishment upon whom I please; yet My mercy encompasses everything. I will ordain special mercy for those who do righteous deeds, pay Zakah and believe in Our revelations
Now, special mercy is assigned to those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet (Muhammad) - whom they shall find described in the Torah and the Gospel. Who enjoins them what is good and forbids what is evil; makes pure things Halal (lawful) for them and impure things Haram (unlawful); relieves them from their heavy burdens and from the yokes that were around their necks. Therefore, those who believe in him, honor him, help him, and follow the Light which is sent down with him, will be the ones who will be successful in this life and the hereafter
O Muhammad, say: "O mankind! I am the Messenger of Allah towards all of you from He to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. There is no deity but Him. He brings to life and causes to die. Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet (Muhammad) who believes in Allah and His Word. Follow him so that you may be rightly guided
In the nation of Moses there were some who guided others with the truth and thereby established justice
We divided them into twelve tribes, as nations; and when his thirsty people asked him for water, We revealed to Moses: "Strike the rock with your staff." Thereupon twelve springs gushed out from the rock, each tribe was specified its drinking place. We caused the clouds to cast shadow over them and sent down to them manna and salva for their food, saying: "Eat of the pure things We have provided for you," but they rebelled and by doing so they did not harm Us but they did injustice to their own souls
When it was said to them: "Reside in this town and eat therein whatever you please and say ‘Hittatun’ (forgive us) and enter the gate in a posture of humility; We will forgive you your sins and increase all the more the reward for such righteous people
But the wicked among them changed that word which was said to them, as a result We sent down a scourge upon them from heaven for their wrong doings
Ask them, about the town which was situated on the sea shore, what happened when they transgressed in the matter of Sabbath. On the day of their Sabbath the fish appeared before them on the surface of the water but on the days other than their Sabbath they never came near them; thus did We tempt them because they transgressed
Also remind them about the conversation among some of them, when some of them asked: "Why do you admonish a people whom Allah will destroy or sternly punish?" They replied: "To be able to offer an excuse before our Lord that we did discharge our duty, and also in the hope that they may refrain from His disobedience
However, when they disregarded the reminder, We delivered those who forbade evil and We overtook those who were wrongdoers with stern punishment because of their transgression
But when after that they persisted in their forbidden ways, We said to them: "Be detested apes
Also remind them when your Lord declared that He would raise against them others who would afflict them with grievous torment till the Day of Resurrection. Swift is the retribution of your Lord, yet He is also the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
We broke their unity as a nation and dispersed them into different communities all over the earth - some of them are righteous and others are the opposite - We tested them with both blessings and misfortunes so that they might turn to the Right Way
Then they were succeeded by an evil generation who inherited the Book; they indulged in the vanities of this nether life, saying: "We expect to be forgiven" assuming that they are favorites of Allah and somehow He will spare them. Yet if similar vanities come their way they would again seize them. Was not a covenant taken from them in the Book that they would not speak anything about Allah except the truth? And they have studied what is in the Book. Best for the righteous is the home of the hereafter, don’t you understand
As for those who strictly observe the Book and establish Salah, surely We never let the reward of such righteous people go waste
Remember when We suspended the mountain over them as though it was an umbrella and they feared it was going to fall on them and We said: "Hold firmly to the Book that We have given you and be mindful of what is in it, so that you may guard yourselves against evil
O Prophet, remind mankind about the incident when your Lord brought into existence the offspring from the loins of Adam and his descendants (virtually each single individual of mankind) and made them testify about themselves. Allah asked them: "Am I not your Lord?" They all replied: "Yes! We bear witness that You are." This We did, lest you mankind should say on the Day of Resurrection: "We were not aware of this fact that You are our Lord and that there will be a Day of Judgment
or lest you should say: "Our forefathers started the practice of shirk and we just followed, being their descendants. Will you then destroy us on account of following the sin committed by those wrongdoers
Thus do We spell out Our revelations so that you might return to the Right Way
Tell them the story of that person to whom We sent our revelations but he turned away from them, as a result Satan persuaded him until he become one of the misguided
Had it been Our will, We would have exalted him through those revelations; but he clung to this earthly life and followed his own desires. His similitude is that of a dog: if you chase him he lolls out his tongue and if you leave him alone he still lolls out his tongue. Such are those who deny Our revelations, tell them these parables, so that they might think over their behavior to Our revelations
Very bad is the example of those people who deny Our revelations and wrong their own souls
Only he whom Allah guides is rightly guided; and whom He confounds will become the losers
Certainly, We have destined many Jinns and human beings for hell; those are the ones who have hearts with which they do not understand, they have eyes with which they do not see, they have ears with which they do not hear. They are like animals - or even worse than them , because they are those who are heedless
Allah has the most excellent names (over ninety-nine attributes); call on Him by them ; and shun those people who use profanity in His Names, such people shall be requited for their misdeeds
Among those whom We have created, there are some people who guide others with the truth and establish justice therewith
Those who deny Our revelations, We draw them step by step closer to destruction in ways that they do not realize
and even though I grant them respite; My plan is surely effective
Has it never occurred to them that their companion is not a madman; he is merely a plain Warner
Have they not pondered over the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever Allah has created, and that maybe their hour of death has come closer? In what message after this would they then believe
None can guide those whom Allah confounds and leaves them blundering about in their rebellious transgression
They ask you about the Hour of Doom and when will it take place. Say: "Knowledge about it rests only with my Lord: He Himself will disclose it at the proper time. Heavy is its weight in the heavens and the earth. It will not come gradually but all of a sudden. They ask you as if you yourself were in search of it. Tell them: "The knowledge about it rests only with Allah though most people do not understand
Further tell them: "I have no power to acquire benefit or avert any harm from myself, only that happens which Allah wants. Had I possessed the knowledge of the unseen, I would have acquired many benefits to myself; and no harm would have touched me. I am no more than a Warner and bearer of good news for the true believers
He is the one who created you from a single being and from that being He created his mate, so that he might find comfort with her. When he covers her, she conceives a light burden and walks around with it. When it grows heavy they both pray to Allah their Lord saying: "If You will grant us a healthy child, we will be truly thankful
But when He gives them a healthy child, they both begin to associate partners with Him in what He has given them; but Allah is exalted far above the shirk they commit of associating other deities with Him as His partners
Do they associate with Him those deities who can create nothing but are themselves created
they have neither the ability to help them, nor can they help themselves
If you invite them to guidance they will not follow you. It will be all the same for you whether you call them or hold your peace
In fact those whom you call besides Allah are bondmen, like yourselves. Well call them, and let them answer you, if what you say is true
Have they feet to walk with? Have they hands to hold with? Have they eyes to see with? Have they ears to hear with? O Muhammad, say: "Call on your shoraka' (partners you have set up besides Allah) and collectively plot against me and give me no respite
My protector is Allah Who has revealed this Book and He is the protecting friend of the righteous
On the contrary, those whom you call besides Him have neither the ability to help you, nor can they help themselves
If you call them to guidance, they cannot even hear what you say, although it appears as if they are looking at you, they do not see
Show forgiveness, speak for justice and avoid the ignorant
If Satan tempts you, seek refuge with Allah; for He is the one Who is All Hearing, Knowing
Those who fear Allah, when they are tempted by Satan, they have but to remember Allah and they shall see the light (right course of action)
As for Satan’s brothers, they drag them deeper into error and never relax their efforts
When you, O Muhammad, do not bring them a revelation, they say: "Have you not yet invented?" Tell them: "I follow only what is revealed to me from my Lord. This Book contains veritable insight from your Lord, a guidance and blessing for the true believers
When the Qur’an is recited, listen to it with complete silence so that you may be shown mercy
Bring your Lord to remembrance deep in your soul with humility and in reverence without raising your voice, both in the mornings and in the evenings; and be not of those who are heedless
Surely those who are close to your Lord do not feel too proud to worship Him; they declare His glory and prostrate themselves before Him
They ask you about booty (spoils of war). Tell them: "The Booty belongs to Allah and His Messenger: so fear Allah, end your disputes, and correct the relations among yourselves: obey Allah and His Messenger if you are true believers
The true believers are those whose hearts tremble with fear, when the name of Allah is mentioned, and whose faith grows stronger as they listen to His revelations and they put their trust in their Lord
who establish Salah and spend in charity out of the sustenance which We have given them
They are the ones who are the true believers; they will have exalted ranks with their Lord, forgiveness for their sins, and honorable sustenance
Your Lord ordered you to leave your home to fight for justice, but some of the believers were reluctant
They argued with you about the truth which had been made clear, as if they were being driven to death with their eyes wide open
Remember, Allah promised you victory over one of the two enemy parties and you wished for the one which was unarmed but Allah intended to prove the truth to be true according to His words and to cut off the roots of the unbelievers
so that truth should come out as truth and falsehood should be proved as false, even though the criminals wished otherwise
When you prayed to your Lord for help, He answered: "I will assist you with one thousand angels, one after another
By this good news, Allah sought to comfort your heart, for victory comes only from Allah; surely Allah is Mighty, Wise
Remember (before the battle of Badr) when He caused drowsiness to overcome you as an assurance from Himself, and sent down water from the sky to cleanse you and to remove from you the uncleanliness caused by Satan, to strengthen your hearts and to steady your feet therewith
Then your Lord revealed His will to the angels: "I am with you, give courage to the believers. I will cast panic into the hearts of the unbelievers, therefore, smite their necks and beat every joint of their bodies
This is because they defied Allah and His Messenger. Whoever defies Allah and His Messenger should know that Allah is strict in retribution
that it is the reality, so taste it, and there will also be the torture of hellfire for the unbelievers
O believers! When you encounter the unbelievers in a battle, never turn your backs to them
and whoever turns his back to them on such an occasion - unless it be a strategy of war, or to join towards a detachment - shall incur the wrath of Allah and his abode shall be hell, and how awful shall be that dwelling
In fact, it was not you who killed them, but it was Allah Who killed them; it was not you who threw the handful of sand, but it was Allah Who threw it so that He might pass the believers successfully through this excellent trial; surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
This is His dealing with you: as for the unbelievers, Allah will surely frustrate their evil plots
O unbelievers! You wanted a decision; lo! The decision, in shape of the believers' victory, has come to you. Now if you desist, it will be better for you, and if you repeat your act of war against the believers, so shall We repeat the act of providing them assistance, and your forces, however large in number they may be, shall avail you nothing, for verily Allah is with the believers
O believers! Obey Allah and his Messenger and do not turn your back to him, now that you have heard all
Do not be like those who say: "We hear," but give no heed to what they hear
For the worst animals in the sight of Allah are those deaf and dumb people who do not use common sense
Had Allah perceived any virtue in them He would have indeed endowed them with hearing. Had he made them (those without virtue) hear, they would have turned away and refused to listen
O believers! Respond to the call of Allah and His Messenger, when He calls you to that which gives you life; and know that Allah stands between man and his heart, and that it is He in Whose presence you shall all be assembled
Guard yourselves against temptation. The wrongdoers among you are not the only ones who will be tempted; and know that Allah is strict in retribution
Call to mind how He gave you shelter when you were a few in number and were oppressed in the land, ever fearing lest the enemy would kidnap you. He made you strong with His help and provided you a safe asylum and gave you pure things for sustenance so that you may give thanks
O believers! Do not betray the trust of Allah and His Messenger, nor violate your trusts knowingly
You should know that your wealth and your children are, in fact, a test for you, and that Allah is He with Whom is your mighty reward
O believers! If you fear Allah He will grant you a criterion (to judge between right and wrong), do away with your sins and forgive you. Allah is the Lord of Mighty Grace
Remember, how the unbelievers plotted against you. They sought to take you captive or kill you or exile you. They planned - and Allah also planned - Allah is the best planner of all
Whenever Our revelations are recited to them they say: "Well, we have heard this. If we wanted we could fabricate the like. These are nothing but the tales of the ancients
Also remember how they said: "O Allah! If this is indeed the truth from You, then rain down stones on us from the sky or inflict some dreadful scourge to punish us
But Allah would not punish them while you were present in their midst. Nor does Allah punish people while they are asking His forgiveness
But now there is no reason why Allah should not punish them when they are blocking others from the Masjid-al-Haram (Ka'bah), whereas they are not its lawful guardians. In fact, its only guardians are those who fear Allah, even though most of them do not understand
Their prayer at the House of Allah is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands: whose only answer can be, "Taste the punishment because of your denying the truth
Surely the unbelievers spend their wealth in blocking the way of Allah and so will they continue to spend; but in the end these very efforts will become the cause of their regrets; at length they will be defeated, and in the hereafter these unbelievers will be gathered together and driven to hell
in order that Allah may separate the filthy from the pure. He will heap the filthy one upon another, altogether, and then cast them into hell. They are the ones who will be the losers
O Prophet, tell the unbelievers that if they desist from unbelief, their past shall be forgiven; but if they persist in sin, let them reflect upon the fate of their forefathers
O believers, fight them until there is no more mischief and the Deen of Allah (way of life prescribed by Allah) is established completely; but if they do stop from mischief, then surely Allah is observant of all their actions
If they give no heed, then you should know that Allah is your protector. He is the best to protect and the best to help
Know that one-fifth of the booty (spoils of war) is for Allah, His Messenger, close relatives of the Messenger, orphans, the needy and the wayfarer, if you do believe in Allah and in what We revealed to Our servant on the day of distinction (between right and wrong), the day when two armies met in combat. Allah has power over everything
Remember when you were on this side of the valley and they on the farther side, and the caravan was on lower ground than you both. If you had made a mutual appointment to fight, you would have certainly failed; but Allah sought to accomplish what He has ordained, that those who were destined to perish might die by clear proof and those who were destined to live might survive by clear proof. Surely, Allah is He Who hears all and knows all
Also remember that Allah made them appear in your dream as few in number; if He had shown them to you as many in number, you would surely have been discouraged and you would have disputed in your decision. But Allah saved you; surely He knows the very secrets of the hearts
And remember when you met them in the encounter, He showed them to you as few in number in your eyes and He made you appear as a few in number in their eyes so that Allah might accomplish what He had ordained: for ultimately all affairs return to Allah for decision
O believers! When you encounter an enemy in a combat, be firm and frequently remember Allah so that you may be successful
Obey Allah and His Messenger and do not argue with one another, lest you lose courage and weaken your strength. Show patience, surely Allah is on the side of the patient
Do not be like those who started from their homes recklessly in order to be seen by everybody and debar others from the Way of Allah. Allah encompasses all their actions
Remember when Satan made their actions seem attractive to them, and said: "No one from mankind can overcome you today, for I will be at hand to help you." Yet when the two armies came within sight of each other he turned upon his heels saying: " I am done with you, for I can see what you cannot. I fear Allah, for Allah is severe in punishment
At that time the hypocrites and all those who had malice in their hearts were saying: "Their religion has deceived them." But you should know that anyone who puts his trust in Allah will find Allah Mighty, Wise
If you could only see the angels when they were taking away the souls of the killed unbelievers! They were smiting their faces and their backs saying: "Taste the torment of the conflagration
This is the punishment for what your hands have sent forth, for Allah is never unjust to His servants
This was the same that happened to the people of Pharaoh and to those that had gone before them. They also rejected the revelations of Allah and Allah seized them for their sins. Surely Allah is Mighty and severe in punishment
That is because Allah has never changed the blessings which He has bestowed on a people until they themselves changed the condition of their souls; verily Allah hears all and knows all
This same principle was applied to the people of Pharoah and those who have gone before them, they rejected the revelations of their Lord so We destroyed them for their sins, and We drowned the people of Pharoah; they were all wrongdoers
The worst of animals in the sight of Allah are those who reject the truth and do not become believers
Those who make treaties with you and time after time violate their treaties, and have no fear of Allah
If you encounter them in combat, make them a fearsome example for others who would follow them so that they all may learn a lesson
If you fear treachery from any of your allies, you may fairly retaliate by breaking off the treaty with them (through properly notifying them to that effect), for Allah does not love the treacherous
Let not the unbelievers think that they have won the game; surely they can never frustrate the believers
Muster against them all the military strength and cavalry that you can afford so that you may strike terror into the hearts of your enemy and the enemy of Allah, and others besides them who are unknown to you but known to Allah. Remember that whatever you will spend in the cause of Allah, shall be paid back to you in full and you shall not be treated unjustly
If the enemy is inclined towards peace, do make peace with them, and put your trust in Allah. He is the One Who hears all , knows all
Should they intend to deceive you, verily Allah is All- Sufficient for you. He is the One Who has strengthened you and the believers with His help
through putting affection in their hearts. If you had spent all that is in the earth, you could not have so united their hearts; but Allah has united them. He is Mighty, Wise
O Prophet! Allah is all-sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you
O Prophet! Rouse the believers to prepare for combat. If there are twenty steadfast among you, they shall vanquish two hundred: if there are one hundred they shall overcome one thousand of the unbelievers, for they are a people who lack understanding
For now Allah is lightening your burden, because He knows that there are still some weak individuals among you, so if there are one hundred steadfast among you, they shall vanquish two hundred and if there be one thousand, they will overcome two thousand with the leave of Allah, for Allah is with those who are steadfast
It is not fit for a Prophet that he should take prisoners of war until he has thoroughly subdued the land. Do you, O followers of Muhammad, desire the temporal goods of this world, while Allah desires for you the hereafter? Allah is Mighty, Wise
Had there not been a previous sanction from Allah to take ransom, you should have been sternly punished for what you have taken
Very well, enjoy the booty which you have taken, for it is lawful and pure, but in the future fear Allah. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O Prophet! Tell the captives in your custody: "If Allah finds goodness in your hearts He will give you even better than what has been taken from you, as well as forgive you. Allah Is Forgiving, Merciful
But if they have treacherous designs against you, O Prophet, they have already shown treason against Allah. That is why He made them your captives. Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise
Those who believed (embraced Islam), migrated and made Jihad (exerted their utmost struggle) with their wealth and their persons in the cause of Allah; as well as those who gave them asylum and help, are indeed the protecting friends of one another. As to those who believed (embraced Islam) but did not emigrate (to Dar-ul- Islam, the Islamic State), you are under no obligation to protect them until they emigrate; yet it is your obligation to help them in the matters of faith if they ask for your help, except against a people with whom you have a treaty. Allah is observant of all your actions
The unbelievers are protectors of one of another. If you fail to do likewise, there will be disorder in the land and great corruption
Those who believed (embraced Islam), migrated and made Jihad (exerted their utmost struggle) in the cause of Allah, and those who gave them asylum and help - they are the true believers. They shall have forgiveness and honorable provisions
Those who believed (embraced Islam) afterwards, migrated and joined you in Jihad - they too are your brothers, although according to the Book of Allah the blood relatives have greater rights on one other. Indeed Allah knows everything
A declaration of immunity from Allah and His Messenger is hereby made to those of the pagans with whom you have made a treaty
You have four months to go around in the land unmolested; but you should know that you cannot frustrate the will of Allah, and that Allah will humiliate the unbelievers
This is a public proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to the people on the day of the Great Hajj (Pilgrimage) that Allah and His Messenger do hereby dissolve treaty obligations with the pagans. Therefore, if you repent, it will be better for you but if you turn away, then you should know that you cannot frustrate the Will of Allah. O Prophet, proclaim a painful punishment to those who are unbelievers
Except (this proclamation does not apply to) those pagans who honored their treaties with you in every detail and aided none against you. So fulfill your treaties with them to the end of their term; for Allah loves the righteous
When the forbidden months (10,11,12 & 1 of the Islamic calendar) are over, then fight the pagans wherever you find them, seize them, besiege them, and lie in ambush for them in every stratagem of war, but if they repent, establish Salah and pay Zakah, then let them go their way: surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
If anyone from the pagans ask you for asylum, grant it to him so that he may hear the Word of Allah, and then escort him to his place of safety: this should be done because these people do not know the truth
How can there be a treaty with the pagans on the part of Allah and His Messenger except for those with whom you ratified a treaty at the Masjid-al-Haram? So long as they honor it, you also honor: for Allah loves the righteous
How can you trust them? If they prevail against you, they respect neither treaty nor ties of relationship. They just flatter you with their tongues, but their hearts reject you, and most of them are transgressors
They have sold the revelations of Allah for paltry worldly gain and they have hindered others from His way; indeed evil are the deeds that they have done
They neither honor the ties of relationship nor observe the obligations of treaties with the believers; it is they who are the transgressors
However, if they repent, establish Salah and pay Zakah, then they shall be your brethren in Deen (faith and way of life based on Divine guidance): thus do We spell out Our revelations for people of understanding
But if they violate their treaty once they have sworn it and insult your Deen, then fight with the ringleaders of the unbelief - for their oaths are nothing to them - so that they may be stopped
Will you not fight against those people who have broken their oaths, conspired to expel the Messenger and were the first to attack you? Do you fear them? Nay, it is Allah Who is more deserving of your fear, if you are true believers
Fight them; Allah will punish them by your hands and humiliate them. He will grant you victory over them and soothe the hearts of a believing people
He will take away all rancor from their hearts. Allah shows mercy to whom He pleases, and Allah is All-Knowledgeable, All-Wise
Do you think that you will be left alone (without trial)? While Allah has not yet demonstrated which of you had exerted your utmost struggle (in the path of Allah) and did not take any intimate friends other than Allah, His Messenger and the believers? Allah is well aware of all your actions
It is not for the pagans to maintain the mosques of Allah while they bear witness against themselves about their unbelief. It is they whose deeds are in vain and in the hellfire shall they live forever
The mosques of Allah should be maintained by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, establish Salah (prayers), and pay Zakah (poor due) and fear none except Allah. It is they who are expected to follow the true guidance
Have you made those who provide water to the pilgrims and maintain the Masjid-al- Haram equal to those who believe in Allah, the Last Day and make Jihad? They are not equal in the sight of Allah, and Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
Those who believe, leave their homes (migrate), and make Jihad with their wealth and persons in the cause of Allah, have higher rank in the sight of Allah. It is they who will be truly successful
Their Lord gives them good news of His mercy, His good pleasure, and paradise with everlasting bliss
They will live therein forever. Surely it is Allah with Whom is the mighty reward
O believers! Do not take your fathers and your brothers as your friends if they prefer Kufr (unbelief) over Iman (belief); for those who turn away from this commandment shall be considered wrongdoers
O Prophet, tell them: If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your spouses, your relatives, the wealth that you have acquired, the business in which you fear a loss, and the homes which you like are dearer to you than Allah, His Messenger, and making Jihad (struggle) in His Way, then wait until Allah brings about His decision. Allah does not guide the transgressors
Allah has indeed helped you in many battlefields and (recently) on the day of Hunain: when you were proud of your great numbers (the Muslim army was 12,000 strong and the unbelievers were only 4,000), but the numbers availed you nothing. The earth, with all its vastness, seemed to close in upon you, and you turned your backs and fled
But Allah sent down His sakeenah (peace and tranquility) upon His Messenger and the believers and sent down to your aid those forces which you could not see, and punished the unbelievers. Thus was the recompense for the unbelievers
Then after that, you also witnessed that Allah guided to repent some of them whom He wanted, for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O believers! Know that pagans are unclean; therefore, do not let them come near the Masjid-al-Haram after this year's pilgrimage. If you fear poverty, soon Allah - if He so wills - will enrich you out of His bounty. Allah is All-Knowledgeable, All-Wise
Fight those people of the Book (Jews and Christians) who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day, do not refrain from what has been prohibited by Allah and His Messenger and do not embrace the religion of truth (Al-Islam), until they pay Jizya (protection tax) with their own hands and feel themselves subdued
The Jews say: "Uzair (Azra) is the son of Allah," and the Christians say: " Messiah (Christ) is the son of Allah." That is what they say with their mouths, imitating the sayings of the former unbelievers. May Allah destroy them! How perverted they are
They (Jews and Christians) have taken their rabbis and priests to be their Lords beside Allah and so they did with Messiah (Jesus), the son of Mary, although they were commanded to worship none but One Ilah (Allah); besides Whom there is none worthy of worship. Exalted be He above those whom they associate with Him
They desire to extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths but Allah seeks to perfect His light even though the disbelievers may dislike it
It is He Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and true Deen (faith) to make it prevail over all other deens (faiths) even though the pagans may hate it
O believers! Indeed most of the rabbis and priests misappropriate the wealth of people and hinder them from the way of Allah. To those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in the way of Allah, proclaim a painful punishment
The Day will surely come when their treasure will be heated up in the fire of hell, and their foreheads, sides and backs branded with it. They will be told: "This is the treasure which you hoarded. Now taste what you were hoarding
The number of months ordained by Allah is twelve in the Book of Allah since the day He created the heavens and the earth. Of these, four are sacred; that is the established principle of Deen. Therefore, do not wrong yourselves by violating them. But you may fight against the pagans in all these months if they fight against you in all of them. Know that Allah is with the righteous
Transposing a prohibited month is only an addition to unbelief, thereby the disbelievers are misguided. They make a certain month lawful one year and in another year they make the same a forbidden month, so that they make up for the months which Allah has sanctified, thus making lawful what Allah has forbidden. Their evil actions seem pleasing to them. Allah does not guide the disbelieving people
O believers! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to march forth in the way of Allah, you cling to the earth? Do you prefer the life of this world to the life of the hereafter? If it is so, then you should know that the comforts of this life are little compared to the life of the hereafter
If you do not march forth, He will inflict on you a painful punishment and replace you with other people, and you cannot harm Him at all, for Allah has power over everything
If you do not help the Prophet, it does not matter: Allah did help him when the unbelievers drove him out of his town, the second of the two, while the two were in the cave and (the enemy came to the opening of the cave) he said to his companion (Abu Bakr, later the first of the rightly- guided caliphs), "Do not worry, Allah is with us." So Allah sent down his serenity on him and strengthened him with forces which you can not see, thus, He made the word of the unbelievers lowest, while words of Allah remain supreme. Allah is All- Mighty, All-Wise
March forth whether you are equipped lightly or heavily and make Jihad in the way of Allah with your wealth and your persons. That is best for you if you understand
As for the hypocrites, if the gain would have been immediate and the journey short, they would have certainly accompanied you, but the long journey (in Tabuk expedition) was too hard for them. To justify their not accompanying you, they would even swear by Allah, "If we were able, we would certainly have marched with you." By doing so, they are destroying their own souls, for Allah knows that they are liars
Allah forgives you! But why did you (O Muhammad) give them leave to stay behind? (You yourself should have not given them leave) so that it would have become clear which of them spoke the truth and which of them invented false excuses
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day will never ask you for exemption from fighting with their wealth and their persons. Allah is aware of those who are righteous
Only those people ask for exemption who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are filled with doubt, and are wavering because of their doubts
If they had intended to march forth, they would certainly have made some preparation for it; but Allah did not like their going forth; so He made them lag behind and they were told "stay behind with those who stay behind
Had they gone with you they would have added nothing but mischief, and they would have made efforts to create disorder among your ranks, and there would have been some among you who would have listened to them. Allah knows the wrongdoers
Indeed they had plotted sedition before and created disturbance to make you unsuccessful until the truth came through and the decree of Allah prevailed, even though they disliked it
Among them there is someone (Jad-bin-Qais) who said: "Grant me exemption and do not expose me to temptation (of Roman women’s beauty)." Have they not fallen into temptation (of telling lies, double dealings and hypocrisy) already? Surely hell has encircled these disbelievers
If you gain success, it grieves them, but if you face a setback, they say "We had taken our precautionary measures," and turn away, rejoicing
O Prophet, tell them: "Nothing will happen to us except what Allah has ordained for us; He is our protector;" and in Allah let the believers put their trust
Further tell them: "Can you expect for us anything other than two excellent things (victory or martyrdom)? But we are waiting for Allah to afflict you with punishment either from Himself or by our hands. So wait if you will; we too are waiting
Say: "Whether you give willingly or with reluctance, it will not be accepted from you; for you are the people who are transgressors
The reasons which prevent their contributions from being accepted are: that they disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger, that they come to offer Salah but reluctantly, and that they offer contributions but unwillingly
Let neither their wealth nor their children dazzle you: in reality Allah intends to punish them with these things in this life and that their souls may depart while they are still unbelievers
They swear by Allah that they are indeed believers like you; yet they are not of you; in fact, they are afraid to appear to you in their true colors
If they could find a place of refuge or a cave, or any hiding-place, they would certainly run to it with an obstinate rush
There are some among them who criticize you (O Muhammad) concerning the distribution of sadaqat. If they are given from it they are pleased, and if they are not given from it, lo! They are full of rage
It would have been better for them, if they had only been pleased with what Allah and His Messenger had given them and said: "Allah is all-sufficient to us! Soon Allah will give us of His bounty, and so will His Messenger. Indeed to Allah do we turn our hopes
In fact the sadaqat (Zakah) collection is for the poor, the helpless, those employed to administer the funds, those whose hearts need to be won over to the truth, ransoming the captives, helping the destitute, in the Way of Allah and for the wayfarer. That is a duty enjoined by Allah; and Allah is All-Knowledgeable, Wise
There are some people among them who molest the Prophet saying: "He is one who believes everything that he hears." Say: "It is good for you that he listens to what is best for you; he believes in Allah, has faith in the believers, and is a blessing for those of you who are true believers." As for those who molest the Messenger, will have a painful punishment
They swear to you by Allah in order to please you. But it is more fitting that they should please Allah and His Messenger if they are true believers
Don’t they know that anyone who opposes Allah and His Messenger shall live forever in the fire of hell? That surely is the worst humiliation
The hypocrites are afraid lest a Surah should be sent down about them revealing to the Muslims what is in their hearts. Say: "Mock if you will, Allah will surely bring to light all that you fear
If you ask them, "what were you talking about?" They will promptly say: "We were only jesting and having fun." Say: "What, then! Were you mocking at Allah, His revelations and His Messenger
Make no excuses now: you have rejected faith after your belief; even if We may pardon some of you who were not serious in participating, We will punish others amongst you, because they are criminals
The hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, they are all alike. They enjoin what is evil, forbid what is just, and withhold their hands from doing good. They have forgotten Allah; so He has forgotten them. In fact the hypocrites are transgressors
Allah has promised the hypocrite men, the hypocrite women, and the unbelievers the fire of hell to live therein forever, a sufficient recompense. Allah has cursed them and they shall have a lasting punishment
Your behavior is just like those who have gone before you. They were mightier than you in power and more flourishing in wealth and children. They enjoyed their portion of this worldly life; thus have you enjoyed your portion as did those before you; and you have entered into vain discourses as they did. Consequently their deeds were fruitless in this world and in the Hereafter, and they are the ones who are the losers
Have they not heard the news of those who have gone before them? The people of Noah, Ad and Thamud; the people of Abraham, the men of Madyan and the cities which were overthrown. Their Messengers came to them with clear warnings; but they did not listen, Allah did not wrong them, but they wronged their own souls
The true believers, both men and women, are protectors of one another. They enjoin what is just and forbid what is evil; they establish Salah, pay Zakah, and obey Allah and His Messenger. It is they on whom Allah will have His mercy; surely Allah is Mighty, Wise
Allah has promised to the believers, both men and women, gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever, and they will have beautiful mansions in these gardens of everlasting bliss. Best of all, they will have the good pleasure of Allah. Now that is the highest achievement
O Prophet! Make Jihad against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be firm against them. Hell shall be their home; and it is the worst of all homes
They swear by Allah that they said nothing when in fact they uttered the words of unbelief and they committed Kufr after accepting Islam. They meditated a plot which they were unable to carry out. They had no reason to be revengeful, except that Allah and His Messenger had enriched them through His bounty. Therefore, if they repent it will indeed be better for them; but if they turn back (do not repent) Allah will punish them with a painful punishment in this life and in the Hereafter, and they shall have none on earth to protect or help them
There are some among them who made a covenant with Allah saying: "If He bestows on us His bounty, we will spend in charity and become truly of the righteous
But when He did bestow of His bounty they became stingy, turned back from their covenant and became evasive
He put hypocrisy into their hearts to last till the Day wherein they shall meet Him as a consequence of their breach of covenant with Allah and the lies they told
Are they not aware that Allah knows their secret thoughts and their secret counsels, and that Allah knows fully well all that is hidden
As for those that taunt the believers who give freely and ridicule those who find nothing to give except the fruits of their labor; Allah will throw back their ridicule on them and they shall have a painful punishment
O Prophet! It is the same, whether you ask forgiveness for them or not; even if you ask for their forgiveness seventy times, Allah is not going to forgive them: because they have disbelieved Allah and His Messenger. Allah does not guide those who are transgressors
Those who remained behind (did not join the Tabuk expedition) were delighted to sit inactive behind Allah’s Messenger, and they hated to make Jihad with their goods and their persons in the cause of Allah. They said to each other "Do not go forth in the heat." Say to them: "The fire of hell is much more severe in heat." If only they could understand
Let them laugh a little; much will they weep as a recompense for what they have earned
From now on, if Allah brings you among them and any of them ask your permission to go forth for Jihad, say: "You shall never be allowed to go forth with me nor fight an enemy in my company. You chose to sit inactive on the first occasion, therefore you shall now stay with those who stay behind
You shall never offer funeral prayer for any of them who dies, nor shall you attend their burial, for they have denied Allah and His Messenger and died while they were transgressors
Let neither their wealth nor their children dazzle you. Through these Allah wants to punish them in this world and let their souls depart while they are still disbelievers
Whenever a Surah is revealed, saying: " Believe in Allah and make Jihad along with His Messenger," capable people among them ask you for exemption, saying: "Please leave us with those who are to stay at home
They preferred to be with those who remain behind, as a result, a seal was set upon their hearts so that they do not understand
But the Messenger and those who believe with him, make Jihad with their wealth and their persons. They are the ones who will have all the goodness, and they are the ones who will be successful
Allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever: that is the greatest achievement
Some from among the desert Arabs also came with their excuses, begging exemption to stay behind; thus, those who lied to Allah and His Messenger sat inactive. Soon a painful punishment shall seize those of them who disbelieved
There is no blame on the disabled, the sick, and those lacking the means, to stay behind so long as they are sincere to Allah and His Messenger. There is no way (blame) against those righteous people. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Likewise, there is no blame on those who came to you and requested the conveyance to the battlefront and you said: "I am unable to provide you the conveyance," and they returned with their eyes streaming with tears; they were filled with sorrow that they had no resources of going forth to the battlefield at their own expense
The way (blame) is only against those who begged exemption although they are rich. They preferred to be with those who remained behind. Allah has set a seal upon their hearts; so they do not know what they missed
They will apologize to you with all sorts of excuses when you return to them. Say: "Present no excuses: we shall not believe you: Allah has already revealed to us the whole truth about you. Now Allah and His Messenger will keep a watch over your conduct: in the end you will return to Him Who knows what is hidden and what is open, and He will tell you all that you have been doing
They will swear to you by Allah when you return to them so that you may leave them alone. So leave them alone: they are filth. Hell shall be their abode, a punishment for their misdeeds
They will swear to you in order to please you, but even if you be pleased with them (accept their excuses), Allah will never be pleased with these transgressors
The Arabs of the desert are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy, and are least inclined to acknowledge the limits that Allah has revealed to his Messenger. Allah is All- Knowledgeable, All-Wise
Some of the desert Arabs look upon whatever they spend in the way of Allah as a penalty and wait for some misfortune to befall you. May misfortune befall them! Allah hears all and knows all
But some of the desert Arabs believe in Allah and the Last Day, and look on what they spend in the way of Allah as a means of bringing them close to Allah and to the prayers of the Messenger. Indeed, closer they shall be brought: soon Allah will admit them to His mercy. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
As for the first pioneers who accepted Islam from the Muhajir (immigrants) and Ansar (supporters in Medina) and those who follow them in good deeds, Allah is well pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. He has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they shall live forever: that is the mighty achievement
Some of the desert Arabs around you are hypocrites, and so are some of the residents of Medina, who are fanatical in their hypocrisy. You do not know them, but We know them. Soon We shall give them double punishment: then they shall be turned to the most severe chastisement
There are some who have confessed their sins: they have mixed records of good and bad deeds. It is quite possible that Allah may turn to them in mercy, for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Take sadaqat (this commanded sadaqat means - Zakat-ul-Mall) from their wealth, so that they may thereby be cleansed and purified, and pray for them; for your prayer will give them comfort. Allah hears all and knows all
Do they not know that Allah accepts repentance from His servants and takes their sadaqat (charity), and surely Allah is the One Who is the Accepter of Repentance, the Merciful
Tell them: "Do as you will. Allah, His Messenger and the believers will now keep a watch over your conduct; then you shall be brought to His court Who knows the hidden and the open, and He will inform you of all that you have done
There are yet others whose case is held in suspense for the decision of Allah. He will either punish them or turn to them in mercy; and Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise
There are others who built a Masjid for mischievous motives (Masjid-e-Zirar), to spread disbelief and to disunite the believers, and an outpost for one (Abu ‘Amir) who had made war against Allah and His Messenger before. They will indeed swear that their intentions are nothing but good; but Allah declares that they are absolute liars
You should never stand to offer Salah in it. Certainly the Masjid founded on piety from the very first day is more deserving that you should stand to offer Salah in it; for in it there are men who love to be purified; and Allah loves those who purify themselves
Who is a better person; he who lays the foundation of his building on piety to Allah and His good pleasure, or he who lays the foundation of his building on an undermined bank that will tumble down with him into the fire of Hell? Allah does not guide such wrongdoers
The foundation of those who so build is never free from suspicion and shakiness in their hearts until their hearts are cut to pieces. Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise
Indeed Allah has purchased from the believers their persons and their wealth and in return has promised them paradise; they fight in the cause of Allah and slay and are slain. This is a true promise which is binding on Him mentioned in Torah, the Gospel and the Qur’an; and who is more true in fulfilling his promise than Allah? Rejoice, therefore, in the bargain which you have made, and that is a mighty achievement
Those that turn to Allah in repentance, serve Him, praise Him, move about in the land for His sake, make Rakuh (bow down in prayer) and Sajud (prostrate themselves in prayer), enjoin what is good and forbid what is evil, and observe the limits (permissions and prohibitions) set by Allah (they are the ones who make such a bargain with Allah). O Prophet, proclaim the good news to such believers
It is not proper for the Prophet and those who believe that they should beg forgiveness for the pagans, even though they be their relatives, after it has been explained to them that they are the inmates of hellfire
Abraham prayed for his father’s forgiveness only to fulfill a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of Allah he disassociated himself from him. The fact is that Abraham was tenderhearted, forbearing
It is not the way of Allah to confound people after He has guided them, until He makes clear to them what they should guard against; surely Allah has the knowledge of everything
Surely it is Allah to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes to die. You have none besides Allah to protect or to help
Allah forgave the Prophet and those Muhajir and the Ansar who stood by him in the time of distress, when some were on the point of losing heart. He turned to them in mercy. Surely to them He is Most Kind, Most Merciful
He also turned in mercy to the three, the decision of whose case was deferred. So despondent were they that the earth, with all its vastness, and their own souls, seemed to close in upon them. They knew for certain that there was no refuge from Allah except in Him. Then He turned to them in mercy so that they could repent. Surely Allah is the One Who is Oft- Returning, the Merciful
O believers! Have fear of Allah and be with those who are truthful in word and deed
It is not proper for the people of Medina and the beduin Arabs of the neighborhood to forsake the Messenger of Allah or to jeopardize his life so as to safeguard their own: because they do not suffer any thirst or hunger or any ordeal for the sake of Allah, or take any step which may provoke the unbelievers, or receive any injury from an enemy, but shall be written down as a good deed to their account; for Allah does not waste the reward of the righteous
Likewise, they do not spend anything for the cause of Allah, be it small or large, or cut across a valley in Jihad, but is written down to their credit; so that Allah may reward them based on the best of their deeds
It is not proper that the believers should go forth all together. Therefore, why not a squadron from each division stay behind so that they may obtain the understanding of Deen (Al-Islam), and admonish the people when they return to them so that they may refrain from un-Islamic conduct
O believers! Fight the unbelievers who hem you in, to let them know how strong you are; you should know that Allah is on the side of the Godfearing
Whenever a Surah is revealed, some of them ask: "Whose faith from among you has increased by this?" Certainly the faith of the believers is increased and they do rejoice
As for those whose hearts contain malice, it will add filth to their existing filth, and they will die while they are still disbelievers
Do they not see that they are tested every year once or twice? Yet they neither repent nor learn a lesson from this
Whenever a Surah is revealed they look at each other as if to ask, "Is anyone watching?" Then they silently slip away. Allah has slipped their hearts (from the guidance), for they are a people who do not want to understand
Now, there has come to you a Messenger from among yourselves, the one who grieves at your loss and who is excessively anxious for your success in both worlds, and who is compassionate and merciful towards the believers
Now, if they turn away from you, (O Prophet) say: "Allah is all-sufficient for me. There is no god but Him. In Him I have put my trust. He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne
Alif L'am Ra. These are the verses of the Book of Wisdom
Does it seem strange to the people that We revealed Our will to a man from among themselves, saying: "Warn mankind and give the good news to the Believers that they are on sound footing with their Lord?" The disbelievers say: "This man is indeed an obvious magician
The fact is that your Lord is the same Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six days and is firmly established on the Throne of authority, and is directing the affairs of the universe. None can intercede for you, except the one who receives His permission. This is Allah your Lord, so worship Him: will you not receive admonition
To Him you shall all return. Allah’s promise is true. He is the One Who originates the process of Creation and repeats it (will bring it back to life) so that He may justly reward those who believed in Him and did righteous deeds. As for those who disbelieved, they shall have boiling fluids to drink and shall undergo a painful punishment because they rejected the truth
He is the One Who gave the sun its brightness and the moon its light, established her phases that you may learn to compute the years and other such counts (days, weeks, months). Allah created them only to manifest the truth. He has spelled out His revelations for people who want to understand
Indeed in the alternation of the night and the day and what Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for those who are Godfearing
As for those who do not hope to meet Us on the Day of Judgement, being well pleased and satisfied with this worldly life and those who give no heed to Our revelations
they shall have the Fire as their abode because of what they had earned (erroneous creed and wrong conduct)
It is also a fact that those who believe sincerely in the truth which is revealed in this Book and do good deeds, their Lord will guide them because of their faith and rivers will flow beneath their feet in the gardens of bliss
Their slogan therein will be: "Glory to You O Allah!" And their greetings therein will be "Peace be upon you!" And their closing remarks will be: "All praises are for Allah Alone, the Lord of the Worlds
If Allah were to hasten the punishment for their evil as they hasten in asking good of this world, then the respite given to the people would have been terminated, but this is not Our way. We leave those people alone who do not entertain the hope of meeting Us, to blunder about in their rebellion
Whenever affliction touches a man, he prays to Us, whether lying down on his side, sitting, or standing on his feet. But as soon as We relieve his affliction he walks away as if he had never prayed to Us for removing that affliction which touched him! Thus the foul deeds which they do are made fair-seeming to the transgressors
We have destroyed generations before your time when they adopted unjust attitudes: their Messengers came to them with clear signs but they would not believe! Thus, do We requite the criminals
Then, We made you their successors in the land so that We may observe how you would conduct yourselves
When Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who entertain no hope of meeting Us say to you: "Bring us a Qur’an different than this or make some changes in it." O Muhammad, tell them: "It is not possible for me to change it myself. I follow only what is revealed to me. Indeed, I cannot disobey my Lord, for I fear the punishment of a Mighty Day
Say: "If Allah wanted otherwise, I would have not recited this (Qur’an) to you, nor would have made you aware of it. Indeed, a whole lifetime I lived among you before its revelation. Why do you not use your common-sense
Who can be more unjust than the one who himself forges a lie, then ascribes it to Allah or falsifies His real Revelations? Indeed, such criminals can never prosper
They worship other deities besides Allah, who can neither harm them nor benefit them, and they say: "These are our intercessors with Allah." O Muhammad, say to them: "Are you informing Allah of what He knows to exist neither in the heavens nor on the earth? Glory to Him! He is far above from having the partners they ascribe to Him
Mankind was once just one nation; later on they became divided through inventing different creeds. If your Lord had not already given His word ( specified time for the life of mankind on Earth), the matters in which they differ would have certainly been decided
In regards to their saying: "Why has not a sign been sent down to him (Muhammad) from his Lord?" Tell them: " Allah Alone has the knowledge of the unseen. Wait if you will: I too shall wait with you
When We show mercy to mankind after some calamity had afflicted them, they begin to plot against Our revelations! Tell them: "Allah is more swift in plotting than you; indeed Our angels are recording all the plots you make
He is the One Who enables you to travel through the land and by the sea; until when you are on board a ship, as the ship sails with a favorable wind and they feel happy about it; but when there comes a stormy wind and the waves reach them from all sides and they think they are being overwhelmed: then they pray to Allah with their sincere devotion, saying, "If You deliver us from this, we shall become your true thankful devotees
Yet, when He does deliver them, behold! The same people become unjustly rebellious in the land. O mankind! Your rebellion is against your own souls ( you may enjoy) the transitory pleasure of this world - in the end you have to return to Us, then We shall inform you of what you have done
The example of this worldly life (which you love so much that you have even become neglectful of Our signs) is like the water which We send down from the sky; it mingles with the soil and produces vegetation which becomes the food for men and animals. Then, at the very time when the crops are ripened and the land looks attractive, the people to whom it belongs think that they are able to cultivate it, and there comes Our scourge upon it, by night or in broad day, and We mow it down thoroughly as if nothing existed there yesterday! Thus do We spell out Our signs for those who are thoughtful
Allah invites you to the Home of Peace and guides whom He pleases to the Right Way
Those who do good deeds shall have a good reward and even more than they deserve! Neither blackness nor disgrace shall cover their faces. They will be the inhabitants of paradise; they will live therein forever
As for those who have done evil deeds, they will be rewarded with like evil: disgrace will cover them - they shall have none to protect them from Allah - as if their faces have been covered with patches of the dense darkness of night. They will become the inmates of the Fire; they will live therein forever
On the Day when We shall gather them all together, We shall say to those who committed shirk (associated other deities with Us): "Stay where you are, you and those whom you set as partners with Us." We will separate them from one another, then the shoraka' (partners they had set up with Us) will say: "It was not us that you worshipped
Allah is an all-sufficient witness between you and us, (even if you worshipped us) we were quite unaware of your worship
Thereupon, every soul shall know what it had sent forth, as they will be brought in the Court of Allah, their true Patron, and their invented falsehoods will leave them in the lurch
Ask them: "Who provides your sustenance from the heaven and from the earth? Who has control over hearing and sight? Who brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living? Who regulates the universe?" They will soon reply: "Allah." Say: "Why do you not then fear Him for your going against the truth
The same Allah is your real Lord: What is left after the truth except falsehood? How then can you turn away
Thus has the Word of your Lord proved true in regards to the transgressors that they do not believe
Ask them: "Can any of your shoraka' (the deities you worship besides Allah) create anything and then repeat its process?" If they do not answer, then tell them: "Well, Allah creates and then repeats the process. Then how is that you are so misled
Again ask them: "Is there any of your shoraka' who can guide you to the truth?" If they do not answer, then tell them: "Well, Allah can guide you to the truth. Then who is more worthy to be followed: He that can guide to the truth, or he that cannot and is himself in need of guidance? What is the matter with you? What kind of judgement do you make
The fact is that most of them follow nothing but mere conjecture and conjecture is in no way a substitute for the truth. Surely Allah is well aware of all that they do
This Qur’an is not such as could be produced by anyone other than Allah; in fact it is the confirmation of prior revelations (Psalms, Torah, and Gospel) and fully explains the Holy Book (prior scriptures); there is no doubt in this fact that it is (revealed) from the Lord of the Worlds
Do they say: "He (the Prophet) has forged it?" Tell them: "If what you say be true; then produce one Surah like this, you may even call to your aid anyone you want other than Allah
Nay! They do not believe that which they cannot grasp, for they have not yet seen its prophecy fulfilled. The same way those who passed before them disbelieved. But see what was the end of the wrongdoers
Of these people there are some who will believe in it and some will not: and your Lord best knows the troublemakers
If they do not believe you, say: "I am responsible for my actions and you are for yours! You are not accountable for my actions, nor I am responsible for what you do
There are some among them who pretend to hear what you say: but can you make the deaf listen to you, incapable as they are of understanding
Then there are some among them who pretend to look at you: but can you show the way to the blind, bereft as they are of sight
The fact is that Allah does not do injustice to mankind in any way: but men are unjust to their own souls
On that Day when He will gather them all together, it will appear to them as if they had not stayed in this world but an hour of a day to get to know each other. At that time they will realize that: in fact the losers are those who denied the meeting with Allah and were not rightly guided
Whether We show you in your lifetime some consequences of what We have promised them, or cause you to die before that, in any case they will have to return to Us: moreover Allah is watching all their actions
Every nation was sent a Messenger. Once their Messenger came, judgement was passed between them with all fairness and they were not wronged in the least
They ask: "When will this promise be fulfilled, tell us if what you say be true
Say: "I have no control over any harm or benefit to myself, except what Allah wills. For every nation there is a deadline: when their deadline comes, it can neither be delayed for even a moment, nor it can be advanced
Say: "Have you ever considered that if His scourge fall upon you by night or by day you can do nothing to avert it? What then is there that the criminals wish to hasten
Would you believe it when it actually overtakes you? Then you would beg it to be removed although it had been your own wish to hurry it on
Then it will be said to the wrongdoers: "Taste the everlasting punishment! Should you not be rewarded according to your deeds
They ask you: "Is what you say really true?" Tell them: "Yes! By my Lord, it is absolutely true! And you will not be able to avert it
If every person that has done injustice possessed all that the earth contains, he would be willing to offer it all in ransom to redeem himself if he could. They will regret in their hearts when they see the punishment of Hell. The decision between them will be made with justice and no wrong will be done to them
Be aware! All that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. Be aware! The promise of Allah is true, yet most of them do not know
He is the One Who gives life and causes death, and to Him you shall all return
O mankind! There has come to you an instruction from your Lord, a cure for whatever (disease) is in your hearts, a guidance and a blessing for the true believers
Say: "It is the grace and mercy of Allah (that He has sent this Qur’an), so let the people rejoice over it, for it is better than (the worldly riches) they are collecting
O Prophet, ask them: "Have you ever considered that out of the sustenance which Allah has given you, you yourselves have made some things Halal (lawful) and others Haram (unlawful)? Ask them: "Did Allah permit you to do so, or do you ascribe a false thing to Allah
What treatment do they think those people will get, who ascribe false things to Allah, on the Day of Resurrection? Indeed Allah is full of grace to mankind, but most of them are not grateful
No matter what affairs you may be engaged in, what portion from the Qur’an you may be reciting and whatever deeds you may be doing, We are a Witnesses thereof when you are deeply occupied with it: for there is not even an iota of anything in the earth or in the heaven that is hidden from your Lord, neither anything smaller than that nor larger, but is recorded in a Glorious Book
Be aware! The friend of Allah has nothing to fear or to regret
Those who believe and (constantly) guard against evil
for them there is good news in this life and in the hereafter - Allah’s Words do not change - this is indeed the mighty achievement
O Prophet, let not their remarks grieve you: surely all honor belongs to Allah: He hears all and knows all
Be aware! Indeed whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth belongs to Allah. Those who invoke other deities besides Allah follow nothing but conjectures and preach nothing but falsehood
He is the One Who has made the night for you to rest therein and the day so that you can see. Indeed, there are signs in this for those who listen to His message
They (Jews and Christians) say: "Allah has begotten a son!" Glory be to Him! He is self-sufficient! His is all that is in the Heavens and in the Earth! Have you any proof for what you say? Would you ascribe to Allah something about which you have no knowledge
O Prophet, tell them: "Those who ascribe false things to Allah will never prosper
Well, they may have a little enjoyment in this world, but eventually they have to return to Us and then We will make them taste the severest punishment for their unbelief
Quote to them the story of Noah when he said to his people: "O my people! If it offends you that I should live among you and preach to you the revelations of Allah, then you should know that I have put my trust in Allah. Go ahead and muster all your shoraka' (deities you worship) and come up with your united decision. Plan it well so that you may not have any doubt about its being foolproof. Then execute it against me and give me no respite
If you have turned away from my message, I did not lose any thing, for I did not ask any reward from you for my services: my reward is only with Allah, I have been commanded to become a Muslim
But they disbelieved him. As a result, We saved him and those of them who were with him in the Ark and We made them successors in the Earth and drowned those who rejected Our revelations. You see what was the end of those who were warned but did not believe
Then after him We sent Messengers to their descendants. They came to them with clear signs but they would not believe what they had rejected before. Thus, do We set seals upon the hearts of those who (intentionally) exceed the limits
Then later on We sent Moses and Haroon (Aaron) to Pharoah (Pharaoh) and his chiefs with Our signs. But they showed arrogance, for they were a guilty nation
When the truth did come to them from Us they said: "This is indeed sheer magic
Moses replied: "Is this what you say of the Truth when it has come to you? Is this a magic? Magicians do not prosper
They said: "Have you come to turn us away from the faith of our forefathers in order that you two (Moses and Haroon) may become the leaders in the land? We will never believe in you
Pharoah said: "Bring me every skillful magician
When the magicians came, Moses said to them: "Throw what you wish to throw
So when they had thrown, Moses said: "The magic that you have brought, Allah will surely prove it wrong: for Allah does not promote the work of mischief makers
By His Words Allah vindicates the truth, much as the criminals may dislike it
None but a few youth from his own people believed in Moses, because of the fear of Pharoah (Pharaoh) and his chiefs, lest they should persecute them; and certainly Pharoah was mighty in the land and the one who did not hesitate to transgress any limit
Moses said: "O my people! If you sincerely believe in Allah, then put your trust in Him, if you are really Muslims
They replied: "In Allah do we put our trust. Our Lord! Do not let us suffer at the hands of unjust people
and deliver us through Your mercy, from the nation of unbelievers
We revealed Our will to Moses and his brother, saying: "Take your people to dwell in Egypt, and make your houses as your Qiblah (places of worship) and establish Salah and give good news to the believers
Moses prayed: "Our Lord! You have indeed bestowed on Pharoah and his chiefs splendor and wealth in this worldly life. Our Lord, have you done this so that they may mislead people from Your way? Our Lord, destroy their wealth and harden their hearts, so that they may not believe until they see the painful punishment
Allah replied: "Your prayer shall be answered! So remain steadfast and do not follow the path of those who have no knowledge
We led the Children of Israel across the sea. Pharoah and his hosts pursued them with wickedness and oppression, until when drowning, he cried out: "I believe that there is no god but Him in Whom the Children of Israel believe and I have become one of the Muslims
In response it was said to him: "Now you believe! But a little while before you were disobedient and one of the mischief-makers
We shall save your body this day, so that you may become a sign for the succeeding generations; indeed many among mankind are heedless of Our signs
We settled the Children of Israel in a respectable dwelling place and provided them with the good things of life. They did not cause dissension until after knowledge had come to them. Surely your Lord will judge between them in those matters in which they caused dissension on the Day of Resurrection
If you are in doubt regarding what We have revealed to you, ask those who have been reading the Book before you. In fact, the truth has indeed come to you from your Lord: therefore, do not be of those who doubt
and do not join those who deny the revelations of Allah; otherwise you will become one of the losers
In fact, those against whom the Word of your Lord has proved true will not believe
even if every sign should come to them, until they themselves see the painful punishment
Was there any town which seeing the scourge, believed, and their belief profited them except the people of Jonah? When they believed, We removed from them the disgraceful scourge and allowed them to enjoy their worldly life for a while
If it had been the will of your Lord that all the people of the world should be believers, all the people of the earth would have believed! Would you then compel mankind against their will to believe
It is not possible for anyone to believe except by the permission of Allah, and He throws filth on those who do not use their commonsense
Say: "Look at whatever exists in the heavens and the earth." Signs and warnings do not benefit those people who do not believe
Now are they waiting for evil days like the ones that befell the people who passed away before them? Say: "Wait if you will; I too will wait with you
When such a time comes, We rescue Our Messengers and those who believe - this is Our way; it is but right that We rescue the believers
Say: "O people! Doubt my Deen (religion) if you will, but never will I worship those that you worship besides Allah. I worship Allah, Who has the power to cause your death, and I am commanded to be one of the believers
I am further commanded: "Dedicate yourself to the Deen (religion) in all uprightness and be not of the pagans (who associate other gods with Allah)
You shall not pray to others than Allah who can neither benefit nor harm you, for if you do, you shall certainly become one of the wrongdoers
If Allah afflicts you with a calamity, none can remove it but He; and if He intends to bestow a favor, none can withhold His bounty. He bestows it on whomsoever of His servants He pleases; He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
O Muhammad, declare: "O mankind! The truth has come to you from your Lord! He that follows guidance (Right Way) follows it for his own good, and he that goes astray does so at his own risk; for I am not a custodian over you
O Prophet, follow what is revealed to you and be patient till Allah passes His judgement, for He is the best of all the Judges
Alif L'am R'a. This Book, whose verses are perfected and issued in detail by the One Who is All-Wise, All-Aware
teaches that you should worship none but Allah indeed I am a warner and bearer of good news from Him to you
You should seek forgiveness of your Lord and turn to Him in repentance; He will grant you good provisions untill an appointed term, and bestow His grace on everyone who has merit! But if you turn away, I fear for you the punishment of a Great Day
To Allah you shall all return and He has power over everything
Behold! They cover up their chests to conceal their thoughts from Him! Beware! Even when they cover themselves with their garments, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal, for He knows even the inmost secrets of the chests
There is no moving creature on Earth whose sustenance is not provided by Allah. He knows its living and its resting place, and all that is recorded in a Glorious Book
He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods - at the time when His Throne was resting on the water - so that He may test to find out which of you is the best in deeds. Now if you tell them:" You shall indeed be raised up after death," the unbelievers would certainly say: "This is nothing but sheer magic
And if We put off their punishment till an appointed time, they are sure to ask: "What is holding it back?" Beware! When the Day of that punishment comes, nothing will hold it back from them and they will be completely encircled by that which they are ridiculing
If We let man taste any mercy from Us, then withdraw it from him, he becomes despairing, ungrateful
But if We let him taste any favor after adversity has afflicted him, then he says: "All my sorrows are gone from me," and he becomes jubilantly arrogant
The exception is for those people who are steadfast and do good deeds; they are the ones who will have forgiveness and a great reward
O Prophet, be on your guard lest you omit to recite some things which are being revealed to you feeling distressed in your heart that they might say: "Why has no treasure been sent down to him, or why has no angel come with him?" You should know that you are nothing but a Warner! It is Allah Who is the Custodian of everything
Do they say: "He has made up the Qur’an himself." Say to them: "Make up ten Surahs like this and call to your aid whomsoever you can, including your gods whom you worship besides Allah, if what you say is true
But if those gods fail to answer you, then you should know that (they are false gods and that) this (Book) is revealed with the knowledge of Allah, and that there is no god but Him! Will you then become Muslims
Those who desire the life of this world and its splendors, they are given full reward of their deeds therein and shall not be diminished
They are the ones who will have nothing in the hereafter except Hellfire. There they shall come to know that their deeds were fruitless and their actions were worthless
Can they be like those who have clear revelations from their Lord and to whom a witness from Himself recites it, and they have the Book of Moses before them - a guidance and a blessing? Can such people deny the revelation of Al- Qur’an? No of course not, rather such people will believe in this, but those factions who do not believe shall have their promised place in the Hellfire. So, O Prophet, do not be in any doubt about it; it is the Truth from your Lord, even though most people do not believe so
Who can be more wrong than the one who forges a lie against Allah? Such people will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say: "These are the ones who lied against their Lord." Beware! The Curse of Allah is on those wrongdoers
who hinder others from the path of Allah and seek to make it crooked, and who deny the hereafter
These people cannot frustrate His plan in the land and there is none to protect them besides Allah. Their punishment shall be doubled, for they could neither hear others who speak the Truth nor see the Truth for themselves
They are the ones who have lost their own souls, and the fancies they invented have left them in the lurch
No doubt they will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter
As for those who believe and do good deeds and humble themselves before their Lord, they will be residents of paradise to live therein forever
The example of these two kinds of people is like two men, one of whom is blind and deaf, and the other who can see and hear. Are they equal when compared? Will you not then learn a lesson from this example
We sent Noah to his people. Noah said: "I have come to warn you plainly
not to worship anyone except Allah; otherwise I am afraid for you the punishment of a painful Day
In answer to this, the chiefs of the unbelievers among his people said: "We see you as no more than merely a human being like ourselves: and we see that no one has followed you except the meanest among us, whose judgement abilities are immature, and we find nothing in you which gives you superiority over us: in fact we think that you are a liar
He said: "O my people, look! If I am given clear proof from my Lord, and He has bestowed on me His grace, although it be hidden from you, can we compel you to accept it against your will
O my people! I do not ask you any wealth for this work, for none but Allah can reward me. I am not going to drive away those who believe; for they will surely meet their Lord. But I can see that you are acting out of ignorance
And O my people! Who will save me from Allah, if I drive them away? Don’t you understand this simple thing
I do not say that I possess the Treasures of Allah, nor do I say that I have knowledge of the unseen, nor do I claim to be an angel; nor do I say of those who are mean in your eyes, that Allah will not grant them any good - Allah knows best what is in their hearts -for if I utter any thing like this, then I will indeed become a wrongdoer
They said: "O Noah! You have argued with us and argued too much, now bring upon us the scourge with which you threaten us, if what you say is true
He replied: " Allah will surely bring it on you if He pleases and then you will not be able to escape from it
My counsel will not profit you, much as I desire to give you good counsel, if Allah wants to leave you astray; He is your Lord, and to Him you shall return
Do the unbelievers say "He (Muhammad) himself has forged all this?" Say to them: "If I have indeed forged it, then its sin is on me! And I am clear of the sins which you are committing for not believing it
And it was revealed to Noah: "None of your people will believe now, other than those who have already believed. So do not grieve at their evil deeds
Build an ark under Our supervision in accordance with Our revelation, and beware not to plead with Me on behalf of those who are wrongdoers: for they are all to be drowned in the flood
So he started to build the ark; and whenever the chiefs of his people passed by him they laughed at him. He said: "Laugh at us now if you will, soon the time is going to come when we too will laugh at you as you are laughing at us
Soon you will come to know who will be seized by a humiliating scourge, and who is afflicted with everlasting punishment
Finally when Our Command came and the water from Al-Tannur (a particular oven marked as a starting point to warn Noah in order to get him ready to board the ark) gushed forth! We said to Noah: "Take into the Ark a pair from every species, your family - except those against whom the Word has already gone forth - and the believers and those who believed with him were only a few
Thus he said: "Embark in it, in the name of Allah in whose hands is its sailing and its stopping; surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
As the ark floated with them on board over the mountainous waves and Noah called out to his son, who stood apart: "O my son! Embark with us and be not with the unbelievers
He replied: "I will take refuge on some mountain, which will save me from the flood." Noah said: "None shall be secure today from the judgement of Allah, except the one on whom He has mercy!" And thereupon a wave came between them and he (Noah’s son) became among one of those who drowned
Finally, Allah said: "O earth! Swallow up your water," and "O sky! Cease your rain." The floodwater abated and the judgement was carried out. The ark rested on Mount Al-Judi and it was said: "Gone are the wrongdoing people
Noah called out to his Lord saying: "O my Lord! My son is of my family, and surely Your promise is true and You are the most just of all Judges
Allah replied: "O Noah! In fact he is not of your family; for he is not of righteous conduct. So do not ask Me anything of which you have no knowledge! I admonish you, lest you become one of the ignorant
Noah said: "My Lord! I seek refuge in You for asking You that of which I have no knowledge; and unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I shall surely be lost
It was said: "O Noah! Disembark (from the ark) with Our peace and blessings on you and on the peoples who are with you. As for other people, We shall grant them the provisions of life for some time, and if they do not behave righteously, then they shall have a painful punishment from Us
O Muhammad, these are some of the facts from the unseen history which We have now revealed to you: neither you nor your people knew about it before. So have patience; surely the end is for the righteous
To the people of ‘Ad We sent their brother Hud. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god but Him; otherwise you are just making things up
O my people! I do not ask you any reward for my services; for none can reward me except my Creator. Will you not then use your common sense
And O my people! Seek forgiveness of your Lord and turn to Him in repentance. He will send you from the sky abundant rain and He will add strength to your strength. So do not turn away like criminals
They said: "O Hud! You have given us no clear proof. We are neither going to desert our gods just on your word, nor we are going to believe in you
We rather believe that perhaps some of our gods have afflicted you with evil." He said: "Allah is my witness and let you also be my witness that I am done with your shirk of worshipping other deities besides Him
So let all of you scheme against me if you will, and give me no respite
I have put my trust in Allah, Who is my Lord and your Lord. There is no living creature (in the Earth) whose destiny is not controlled by Him. Indeed straight is the Way of my Lord
Now, even if you turn away, I have at least conveyed the message with which I was sent to you. Since you have denied Him, my Lord will raise up some other people in your place, and you cannot harm Him in any way. Indeed my Lord is watching over everything
When Our judgement came to pass, We saved Hud and those who believed with him through a special grace from Us - We did save them from a horrifying scourge
Such were the people of 'Ad. They denied the revelations of their Lord, disobeyed His Messenger, and followed the command of every stubborn oppressor
They were followed by a curse in this world, and cursed they shall be on the Day of Resurrection. Beware! 'Ad denied their Lord. Beware! Gone are 'Ad, the people of Hud
To the Thamud people, We sent their brother Saleh. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god but Him. It is He Who created you from the earth and made it a dwelling place for you. So seek forgiveness from Him and turn to Him in repentance. Surely my Lord is very close, ready to answer
They said: "O Saleh! Till now you were the one in whom we had great expectations! Would you now forbid us the worship of what our forefathers worshipped? Indeed, we strongly doubt that to which you are calling us
He said: "O my people! Tell me, if I have a clear proof from my Lord and He has granted me mercy from Himself - who then will help me against Allah if I disobey Him? What would you add other than to make me lose even more
And O my people! This she-camel of Allah is a sign for you. Leave her to pasture on Allah’s earth and do not molest her lest a swift scourge should fall upon you
But, even after the warning, they hamstring her. So he said: "You have but three days to enjoy your homes, that is a promise which will not be repudiated
When Our Judgement came to pass, We saved Saleh and those who believed with him through a special grace from Us, from the disgrace of that Day. Indeed your Lord is All-Strong, All-Mighty
A terrible blast overtook the wrongdoers and by the morning they were laying with their faces down in their homes
as if they had never flourished there. Beware! Thamud denied their Lord. Gone are the people of Thamud
Our Messengers came to Abraham with good news. They said "Peace be upon you." He answered "Peace be upon you too," and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf
But when he saw their hands were not extended towards it, he felt uneasy with them and started to be afraid of them. They said: "Do not fear. We have been sent to the people of Lot
His wife, who was standing there, laughed when We gave her good news of Allah's giving her a son Isaac and after him a grandson Jacob
She said: "O wonder! (An expression to indicate surprise) Shall I bear a child now when I have become an old woman and my husband has become well advanced in age? This is indeed a strange thing
They said: "Do you wonder at Allah’s decree? May Allah’s mercy and His blessings be upon you, O residents of the household; for He is indeed worthy of all praise, full of all glory
When the fear of Abraham was gone as the good news (of his son and grand son) came to him, he began to plead with Us for the people of Lot
Indeed Abraham was forbearing, tenderhearted and devout
The angels said: "O Abraham! Leave this topic. The decree of your Lord has already been issued, now there must come to them a punishment that cannot be averted
When Our messengers, in the form of beautiful young men, came to Lot, he became upset about them, for he felt helpless to offer them protection against his nation’s many violent homosexual men. He said: "This is a critical day
No sooner did the guests come to him than his people, long addicted to evil practices, came rushing towards him. He said: "O my people! Here are my daughters - they are purer for you. Now, fear Allah and do not humiliate me by insulting my guests. Is there not even one good man among you
They said: "Well you know, we have no right to your daughters. You know fully well what we want
He said: "I wish I had power to suppress you or could find some powerful support
The messengers said: "O Lot! We are the messengers of your Lord. They will not be able to harm you. Now, take your family and get out of this town while yet a part of the night remains - and let none of you turn back - except your wife, who should be left behind. She will face the same fate as they. Their scheduled time of doom is the morning. Is not the morning very close
When Our Judgement came to pass, We turned the cities upside down and rained down on them brimstones of baked clay, layer upon layer
specially marked by your Lord. Such scourge is not far off from the wrongdoers
To the people of Median We sent their brother Shu’aib. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god but Him. Do not give short measure and weight. Although I see you in prosperity today, I fear for you the scourge of a Day that will encircle you
O my people! Give full measure and weight in all fairness. Do not defraud people of their goods and do not spread mischief in the land
What remains with Allah is better for you if you are true believers, and I am not set up as a guardian over you
They said: "Oh Shu’aib! Does your Salah (prayer) command you that we give up all those deities whom our forefathers worshipped or that we have no right of doing what we like with our own goods? For sure, you are the only gracious and righteous man left in the land
He said: "O my people! You see, if I have a clear sign from my Lord and He has given me good sustenance from Himself how can I, then, be a party to your evil and unlawful practices? I do not want to oppose you in what I am forbidding you. I desire nothing but to reform so far as I can manage. My success in this task depends entirely on the help of Allah; in Him do I trust and to Him do I turn for everything
O my people! Let not my dispute with you bring upon you the doom similar to that of the people of Noah or of Hud or of Saleh, nor are the people of Lot far off from you
seek forgiveness of your Lord and turn to Him in repentance; for my Lord is indeed Merciful, Affectionate
They said: "O Shu'aib! We do not comprehend much of what you say. In fact, we see that you are a powerless person among us. Were it not for your family, we certainly would have stoned you, for you are not strong enough to prevail against us
He said: "O my people! Do you regard my family to be more powerful than Allah, that you have disregarded Him totally as a thing cast behind your back? Surely my Lord encompasses all that you do
O my people! You keep on doing your way, and I shall keep up mine: soon you will find out who receives the disgraceful punishment and who is a liar! Wait if you will; I too am waiting with you
When Our judgement came to pass, We delivered Shu'aib and those who believed with him through Our special mercy. A mighty blast seized the wrongdoers and they lay dead with their faces down in their homes by the morning
as if they had never flourished there. Behold! Like Thamud, gone are the people of Median
We sent Moses with Our signs and clear authority
to Pharoah (Pharaoh) and his chiefs; but they followed the command of Pharoah, and the command of Pharoah was not right
He will be in front of his people on the Day of Resurrection, and will bring them down to Hell. How awful will be the place to which they will be brought
A curse followed them in this life, and a curse will follow them on the Day of Resurrection. What an evil reward for one to receive
These are the stories of the nations which We relate to you; of them some have survived and some have ceased to exist
We were not unjust to them, but they were unjust to themselves. The deities they invoked beside Allah did not avail them when the judgement of your Lord came to pass; they added nothing to their lot but perdition
Such is the scourge of your Lord when He seizes a sinful town; indeed, His seizure is terrible and painful
In fact, there is a sign in this for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter; that is a Day in which mankind will be gathered together and that will be a Day of Testimony
We do not delay it but to the appointed deadline
When the Day will come, no one shall dare to speak except with His permission. Of them, some will be damned and some will be blessed
Those who are damned shall be in the fire; in there, they will have only sighs and sobs
They will dwell therein as long as the heavens and the earth shall last, unless your Lord ordains otherwise; surely your Lord is the mighty doer of what He intends
As for those who are blessed, they shall be in paradise. They will dwell therein as long as the heavens and the earth shall last, unless your Lord ordain otherwise; an award which shall never be taken away
Therefore, have no doubt concerning the deities they worship, for they blindly imitate the worship of those deities whom their forefathers used to worship before them; and surely, We shall give them their share of punishment in full without any abatement
We certainly gave the Book to Moses, but differences arose about it; had not a Word gone forth from your Lord, the matter would have been decided between them regarding those differences. It is a fact that they are in suspicious doubt about this
and it is also a fact that your Lord will give them full measure for their deeds, for He is fully aware of what they do
Therefore, stand firm on the Right Way as you are commanded, together with those who have turned from unbelief to belief in Allah, and do not transgress; surely, He is watching all that you do
Do not be inclined to those who are unjust, lest you be seized by the fire; and you will not have any protector besides Allah, nor you shall be helped
Establish Salah ( prayers) at the two ends of the day and in the early part of the night. Indeed virtues remove evils. This is a reminder for the mindful
Be patient; for sure Allah does not let the reward of the righteous be wasted
Why were there not among the generations before you, good persons who could forbid the people from making mischief in the land, except a few of those whom We delivered from among them? The wrongdoers, however, pursued the worldly pleasure they were provided, and became confirmed criminals
It is not possible that your Lord would destroy the towns unjustly while their habitants were to mend their ways
If your Lord had so willed, He would have certainly made mankind one single nation but that is not what He wants, so they will continue to differ
except those on whom He has bestowed His mercy; and that very freedom of choice and action is the whole purpose of their creation. That is how the Word of your Lord, that He will fill Hell with jinns and human beings all together, will be fulfilled
All these stories of the prior Messengers that We relate to you (O Muhammad) are to strengthen your heart therewith; through these you have received the knowledge of reality and the believers have gotten admonition and a reminder
As for those who are unbelievers, say to them: "Do whatever you want, and so shall we
Wait if you will! Surely, we too shall wait
Allah Alone has the knowledge of what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and everything shall ultimately return to Him for decision; Therefore, worship Him and put your trust in Him, and your Lord is not unmindful of what you do
Alif L'am Ra. These are the verses of the Book that make things clear
We have revealed this Qur’an in the Arabic language so that you may understand
We relate to you the best of stories through this Qur’an by Our revelation to you (O Muhammad), though before this you were one of those who did not know
This is the narrative of that time, when Joseph said to his father: "O my father! In a dream I saw eleven stars, the sun and the moon - I saw them prostrate themselves before me
He replied: "My dear little son! Do not say any thing about this dream to your brothers, lest they plot an evil scheme against you; for Satan is an open enemy to human beings
It will happen, as you have seen in your dream, that you will be chosen by your Lord for His work. He will teach you how to interpret visions, and will perfect His favor upon you and the children of Jacob, as He perfected it upon your forefathers Abraham and Isaac before you. Surely your Lord is Knowledgeable, Wise
Indeed in the story of Joseph and his brothers, there are signs for inquirers
This is how the story begins: his step brothers held a meeting and said to one another: "This Joseph and his brother (Benjamin) are loved more by our father than us, even though we are a group of ten and can help him more than them. In fact, our father is clearly mistaken
Let us kill Joseph or throw him out to some far-off land so that the attention of our father turns exclusively towards us, after that, we may again become righteous people
At this one of them said: "Do not kill Joseph, but if you must, throw him into some dark well, so that he may be picked up by some passing by caravan
After this meeting, they asked their father: "O our father! Why is it that you do not trust us with Joseph, though we are his sincere well-wishers
Send him with us tomorrow, that he may play and enjoy himself. We shall take good care of him
Their father said: "I will be worried if you take him away, for I fear lest a wolf should eat him up while you are off your guard
They said: "If a wolf could eat him despite our number, then surely we would be worthless people
When after such persistence they were able to take him away, they resolved to throw him into a dark well. We revealed this (to Joseph) : "A time will come when you will admonish them about this act of theirs, now they do not perceive its consequences
At nightfall they return to their father, weeping
They said: "Father! We went off to compete in racing with one another, and left Joseph by our belongings, and a wolf ate him ! But you will not believe us even though we are telling the truth
As proof they brought his shirt stained with false blood. "No!" He cried, "Your souls have tempted you to evil. I need good patience! Allah Alone can help me bear the loss you are speaking of
On the other side, a caravan passed by, and sent a water carrier who let down his bucket into the well. Seeing Joseph in it, he shouted with joy: "Good news! I found a young boy." They concealed him like trade merchandise. But Allah knew what they did
They (brought him to Egypt and) sold him for a petty price, a few dirhams (silver coins), they had such a low estimation of him
The Egyptian who bought Joseph said to his wife: "Be kind to him. He may prove useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." Thus We established Joseph in the land and arranged to teach him the understanding of affairs. Allah has full power over His affairs, though most people do not know
When he reached maturity, We bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We reward the righteous
Now, the lady of the house (his master's wife) attempted to seduce him. She bolted the doors and said: "Come!" He replied: "May Allah protect me from this! My lord has provided me with good residence. Should I betray his trust? Such wrongdoers shall not prosper
She advanced toward him, and he would have advanced towards her had he not seen a sign from his Lord. Thus did We shield him from indecency and immodesty, for he was one of Our chosen, a sincere devotee
They both rushed to the door. In order to stop him she caught his shirt, and as a result she ripped his shirt from behind. At the door they met her husband. Seeing him she cried: "What punishment does someone who intended evil against your wife deserve except imprisonment or a painful chastisement
Joseph said: "It was she who attempted to seduce me." At this - one accusing the other - one member of her own family bore witness saying: "If his shirt is ripped from the front, then she is speaking the truth and he is lying
But if it is ripped from behind, then he is speaking the truth and she is lying
So when he (her husband) saw that Joseph's shirt was ripped from behind, he said to her: "It is one of the tricks of you women! Your trick was mighty indeed
O Joseph, say no more about this, and you (O my wife) seek forgiveness for your sins, for you were indeed the wrongdoer
The women of the city began to talk about this incident, saying: "The wife of Al-Aziz has seduced her young slave, for she has fallen madly in love with him. In fact, we see her in manifest error
When she heard about these remarks, she invited them and prepared for them a banquet, and gave each of them a knife. When they were engaged in cutting fruit, she asked Joseph to come out before them. When they saw him, they were so amazed that they cut their hands and exclaimed spontaneously: "Good Lord! He is no human being; he is but a noble angel
She said: "Well, this is he about whom you blamed me. No doubt I seduced him, but he escaped. If he doesn’t do what I say, he will certainly be thrown into prison and be disgraced
Joseph said: "O my Lord! I would rather go to prison than that to which they invite me; and unless You ward off their cunning snare from me, I may, in my youthful folly, feel inclined towards them and become one of the ignorant
Thereupon his Lord granted his prayer and warded off their cunning snare from him; surely He hears all and knows all
Still, even after all the evidence they had seen (of his innocence and the guilt of their women), they thought it proper to send him to prison for a while
MidEastWeb for Coexistence http:www.mideastweb.org 111 Two young men also entered the prison along with him. One day one of them said: "I saw in a dream that I was pressing wine." The other said: "I saw in a dream that I was carrying bread on my head, of which birds were eating." Tell us the interpretation of these dreams, for we see that you are a man of virtue
Joseph replied: "I will, with Allah’s permission, tell you the interpretation of these dreams before you are served the food you eat, this is part of the knowledge which my Lord has taught me. In fact, I have forsaken the faith of those people who do not believe in Allah and even deny the hereafter
I follow the faith of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. It is not fitting that we attribute any partners with Allah. It is the grace of Allah on us and on mankind (that He has not made us the servants of anyone else other than Himself), yet most of the people are not grateful
O my fellow inmates! Tell me what is better; many different lords or one Allah, the Irresistible
Those you serve besides Him are nothing but mere names which you and your forefathers have invented, for which Allah has revealed no sanction. The Command belongs to none but Allah, Who has ordained that you worship none but Him. That is the true faith, yet most of the people do not know
O my fellow inmates! (Here is the interpretation of your dreams), one of you will be released and serve wine to your lord (the king of Egypt); and the other will be crucified and the birds will eat from his head. That's how your cases will be decided concerning which you inquired (that is the answer to your question)
Then, to the one who he thought would be released, he said: "Mention me to your lord." But Satan made him forget to mention (Joseph) to his lord, so he remained in the prison a few more years
One day the king of Egypt said: "I saw seven fat cows in my dream which were eaten up by seven lean cows, likewise I saw seven green ears of corn and seven others that were dried up. O chiefs! Tell me the meaning of my dream if you can interpret the dreams
They replied: "Confused nightmares! We are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams
Thereupon one of the two inmates who was released remembered Joseph after all that time, and he said: "I will tell you its interpretation; just send me to Joseph in the prison
He came to Joseph in the prison and said: "O Joseph the truthful one! Tell us the meaning of the dream of seven fat cows which are eaten up by seven lean ones and of seven green ears of corn and seven others dried up: so that I may return to the people and let them know the meaning of this dream
He replied: "You will cultivate for seven consecutive years. During this time you should leave the corn you reap in the ear, except what may be sufficient for your food
Then, after that period, there will come upon you seven hard years which will eat away all that you had stored except a little which you may have specifically set aside
After that period will come a year of abundant rain, in which the people will squeeze the juice
The king said: "Bring this man to me." When the messenger came to Yusuf, he said "Go back to your lord and ask him about the case of the women who cut their hands. Indeed my Rabb has full knowledge of their snare
The king questioned those women, saying: "What do you say about the incident when you attempted to seduce Yusuf?" They replied: "God forbid! We Know of no evil on his part." The `Aziz’s wife said: "Now that the truth has come to light, it was I who attempted to seduce him. In fact he is absolutely truthful
Joseph said, "By this inquiry I meant to let him (Al-Aziz) know that I did not betray him in his absence, and that Allah does not let the snare of the treacherous succeed
Not that I am free from sin - man’s soul is prone to evil, except the one to whom my Lord has shown mercy, certainly my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
The king said: "Bring him to me; I will take him for my special service." When Joseph had a talk with the King, he said: "From now on, you have an honorable place with us, and you will enjoy our full confidence
Joseph said: "Place me over all the resources of the land. Certainly I know how to manage; I have the necessary knowledge
Thus We established Joseph in the land to live therein in any way he wished. We bestow Our mercy on whom We please and We do not let the reward of good people go to waste
Yet the reward in the hereafter will be even better for those who believe and are righteous
Several years later when the famine started and there was no food available outside of Egypt, Joseph’s brothers came to Egypt for food and entered his office. He recognized them but they did not recognize him
When he had given them their due provisions and they were about to leave, he said: "Bring your half brother to me next time. Do you not see that I give full measure and provide the best hospitality
But if you do not bring him, you shall have no grain, nor shall you even come near me again
They replied: "We shall certainly try our best to bring him from his father. This we will surely do
Joseph told his servants to put his brother's money into their saddlebags secretly so that they should know about it only when they reach their family, so that they might come back
When Joseph's brothers returned to their father, they said: "Father! Grain is henceforth denied us unless we take our stepbrother with us; please send our brother with us so that we may get our measure; we take full responsibility for his safety
He said: "Should I trust you with him as I once trusted you with his brother? Allah is the best protector and He is the Most Merciful of the mercygivers
When they opened their baggage, they discovered that their money had been returned to them. "Father!" They cried with joy, "What more can we ask for? Here is our money returned back to us. We will buy more food for our family, we will take good care of our brother and obtain an extra camel load of grain. This way, it will be easy to add another camel load of grain
Jacob replied: "I will never send him with you until you pledge in the name of Allah that you will surely bring him back to me unless you become helpless." And when they had given their pledge, he said: "Allah is the Witness over the pledge you made
Then he said; "My sons! Do not enter the capital city of Egypt through one gate, enter from the different gates. Not that I can avail you aught against Allah; this advice is just a precaution, because none can accurately judge except Allah. In Him do I put my trust and in Him let all the reliant put their trust
When avert the fear he had in his heart. Indeed he possessed the knowledge which We had given him, but most people do not know
When they entered to Joseph, he called his brother (Benjamin) alone to himself, and said: "In fact, I am your brother (Joseph), now you need not grieve at what they have been doing
While Joseph was arranging the loading of their provisions, he put the royal drinking cup into his brother’s pack. Later on a crier called out: "O people of the caravan! You must be thieves
They turned back and asked: "What have you lost
The royal servants said: "We have lost the King’s drinking cup. (The leader of the royal servants added) and the one who brings it, will be awarded a camel-load of corn, I guarantee it
Joseph’s brothers said: "By Allah! You should know, by our behavior during our stay here, that we did not come here to make mischief in the land and we are no thieves
The royal servants said: "What should be the punishment of the thief, if you are liars
They replied: "The punishment of he in whose pack you find the royal cup will be to make him your bondsman, that’s how we punish wrongdoers
After this Joseph first began to search the packs of his stepbrothers before the pack of his own brother (Benjamin). Finally he took it out of his brother’s pack. Thus We directed Joseph. He could not seize his brother under the King’s law; but Allah willed otherwise. We exalt in ranks whom We please, He is the One Whose knowledge is far greater than the knowledge of all others
At this accusation, his brothers remarked: "This is not strange if he has committed a theft for his brother also committed a theft before him." Hearing this, Joseph suppressed his feelings and did not reveal anything to them - he simply whispered to himself: "What a bad people you are! You are accusing me of something, the truth of which Allah knows best
They said: "O noble prince! He (Benjamin) has a very aged father who may not be able to survive without him, so please take one of us instead of him. We see that you are one of those who do good to others
Joseph replied: "God forbid that we should seize other than the one with whom we found our property: if we did so then indeed we would be unjust
When they lost their hope of moving Joseph, they went aside to confer in private. The eldest of them said: "You know that your father had taken a solemn pledge in the name of Allah, and you also know how you fell short of your duty with respect to Joseph. Therefore, I am not going to leave this land until my father gives me permission or Allah decides for me, and He is the best of all judges
Go back to your father and tell him, "father, your son committed theft. We did not see him stealing, we testify only to what we know. How could we guard against the unforeseen
You may enquire from the people of the city where we lodged and the caravan in which we travelled that we are indeed telling the truth
When they went back and told all this to their father, " No!" Cried their father, " Your souls have contrived a story for you. Well, I will bear this too with good patience. Maybe Allah will bring them all back to me; indeed He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise
He turned his face away from them, crying: "Alas for Joseph!" His eyes became white with grief, and he became sorely oppressed
They said: "By Allah! It appears that you will not cease to remember Joseph until you ruin your health or kill yourself
He said: "I complain of my distress and grief to Allah Alone and I know from Allah what you do not know
O my sons! Go and search for Joseph and his brother. Never give up hope of Allah’s mercy; in fact none despairs of Allah’s mercy except the unbelieving people
When they went back to Egypt and entered Joseph’s office, they said: "Noble prince! We and our family are in great distress, we have hardly any money, please give us full quota and also some charity. Surely Allah rewards the charitable
Hearing this, Joseph, who could contain himself no longer, replied: "Do you know what you did to Joseph and his brother while acting out of ignorance
This took them by surprise, and they cried: "What! Are you really Joseph?" He said: "Yes! I am Joseph and this is my brother. Allah has indeed been gracious to us. In fact as for the righteous and patient; Allah really does not let the reward of the righteous be wasted
They said: "By Allah! Certainly Allah has preferred you over us. We have indeed been guilty
Joseph said: "There is no blame on you today. May Allah forgive you! He is the most Merciful of those who show mercy
Go, take this shirt of mine and cast it over the face of my father, he will recover his sight. Then come back to me with all the members of your family
When the caravan started (from Egypt) their father (who was in Ken’an) said: "Certainly I feel the scent of Joseph, even though you may think I am out of my mind
The people, who heard him, said: "By Allah! You are still suffering from your old illusion
But when the bearer of the good news arrived, he cast the shirt of Joseph over his face and he regained his sight. Then he said: "Didn’t I tell you that I know from Allah what you do not know
They said: "Father! Pray for the forgiveness for our sins. We have indeed done wrong
He replied: "Soon I will ask my Lord for your forgiveness; surely He is the One who is the Forgiving, the Merciful
When they came to Joseph, he asked his parents to lodge with himself, and said: "Now enter the city. Allah willing, you will live here in peace
After entering the city he helped his parents to seats on the throne, and they all fell down in prostration before him. "This," said Joseph to his father, "is the interpretation of my dream which I dreamt long before. My Lord has really made it come true. It was His grace that He took me out of prison and brought you all here from the desert even though Satan had stirred up strife between me and my brothers. For sure my Lord fulfills His plan in mysterious ways. Surely He is the One Who is the Knowledgeable, the Wise
O Lord! You have indeed given me a kingdom and taught me the interpretation of dreams. O, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are my Protector in this world and in the hereafter, make me die as a Muslim and admit me among the righteous
O Muhammad, this story which We have revealed to you is a tale of the unseen; for you were not there with (the brothers of Joseph) when they collectively conspired and schemed against him
Yet strive as you may, most men are not going to become believers
even though You do not demand any recompense for this information. This Qur’an is nothing but a reminder for all the people of the worlds
There are many signs in the heavens and the earth which they pass by; yet they pay no attention to them
As a result most of them who believe in Allah also commit shirk
Do they feel secure that Allah’s scourge will not fall on them, or that the Hour of Doom will not come upon them suddenly while they do not suspect it
Tell them plainly: "This is my way. I invite you to Allah with sure knowledge which I and my followers possess. Glory be to Allah, and I am not one of the pagans
All the Messengers that We sent before you, O Muhammad, were human beings, to whom We sent Our Revelations after choosing them from the people of their town. Have these unbelievers not traveled through the land and seen what was the end of those who passed away before them? From their destiny you should know that the home of the hereafter is better for those who are righteous. Why don’t you understand
Respite was granted until the Messengers gave up hope of their people and realized that they were being treated as liars, Our help came to them and We delivered those whom We pleased; and Our scourge was not averted from the criminal people
There is a lesson in these stories of former people for the men of common sense. This story of Joseph revealed in the Qur’an is not an invented tale, but a confirmation of previous scriptures - a detailed exposition of all things, and is a guidance and blessing for the people who believe
Alif L'am M'im Ra. These are the Verses of the Book (Qur'an) which has been revealed to you, O Muhammad, from your Lord is the Truth, but most of the people do not believe in this
Allah is the One Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see, then firmly established Himself on the throne of authority and subjected the sun and the moon to His law - each one pursuing its course for an appointed time. He regulates all affairs. He has spelled out His revelations so that you may believe in meeting your Lord
He is the One Who spread out the earth and placed thereon mountains and rivers, created fruits of every kind in pairs, two and two, and makes the night cover the day. Certainly in these things there are signs for those who use their common sense
In the earth there are tracts side by side: gardens of grapes, cornfields and palm trees with single and double trunks - they are all watered with the same water, yet we make some of them excel others in taste. Surely in this, there are signs for people who use their common sense
Now, if there is anything that seems strange, then strange is their saying: "What! When we will become dust, could we then be raised to a new life again?" They are the people who have denied their Lord, they are the ones who will have yokes around their necks and they are the ones who will be the inmates of Hellfire to live therein forever
They ask you to hasten on the evil rather than the good, although there have been instances of exemplary punishments before them. In fact your Lord is the Lord of Forgiveness to the people, notwithstanding their wrongdoing; and it is also the fact that your Lord is stern in retribution
The unbelievers say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him (Muhammad) from his Lord?" You are nothing but a Warner and every nation was assigned a guide
Allah knows what every female bears in her womb. He is fully aware of what decrease or increase (miscarriage or a long wait) takes place in the womb. Everything has a due measure with Him
He has perfect knowledge of both the visible and the invisible. He is the Great, the Most High
It is the same to Him whether any of you speak in secret or aloud, whether anyone hides under the darkness of night or walks about in broad daylight
Each person has been assigned guardian angels before him and behind him, who watch him by the command of Allah. The fact is that Allah never changes the condition of a people until they intend to change it themselves. If Allah wants to afflict a people with misfortune, none can ward it off, nor they can find any protector besides Him
He is the One Who shows you lightning, which causes fear and hope, and brings up heavy clouds
The thunder declares His glory with His praises and so do the angels with awe. He sends thunderbolts and smites with them whomever He wants. Yet these unbelievers dispute concerning Allah; He is mighty in strength
Praying to Him Alone is the right thing. The other deities they pray to, besides Him, cannot answer their prayers. They are like a man who stretches forth his hands to the water and asks it to reach his mouth. It cannot reach his mouth this way; likewise the prayer of the unbelievers is nothing but a fruitless effort
Whatever is in the heavens and the earth do prostrate before Allah Alone willingly or unwillingly, and so do their shadows in the mornings and evenings
Ask them: "Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?" If they hesitate to respond, say: "Allah." Then ask them: "When this is the fact, why do you take other deities, besides Him, who do not control any benefit or harm even to themselves, as your protectors?" Say: "Are the blind and the seeing equal? Or can darkness and light be equal?" If that is not so, then, have their shoraka' (other deities they worship) created any thing like His creation which has made the matter of creation doubtful for them? Say: "Allah Alone is the Creator of everything and He is the One, the Irresistible
He sends down water from the skies and each channel starts flowing according to its measure, and then the torrent bears a swelling foam - like the scum which appears from metal which are melted in the furnace for making ornaments and utensils. By such examples Allah depicts truth and falsehood. As for the scum, it is thrown away, being worthless, but that which is useful for the mankind remains behind on the earth. In this way Allah cites examples to make His message clear
There is an excellent reward for those who respond to the call of their Lord. As for those who do not respond to Him - even if they had all that is in the earth, and as much besides, to offer as a ransom in order to save themselves from punishment, it would be of no use. They are the ones who will have terrible reckoning; their abode will be hell - what an evil resting place
How can the one who knows that which has been revealed to you from your Rabb is the Truth, be like the one who is blind to this fact? Only those who use their common sense benefit from this reminder
They are the ones who fulfill their covenant with Allah and do not break their pledge
and they are the ones who join together what Allah has commanded to be joined, who fear their Rabb and are afraid of a terrible reckoning
also thery are the ones who are patient, seek the pleasure of their Rabb, establish Salah, spend secretly and openly out of the sustenance which We have provided for them, and repel evil with good - they are the ones for whom there is the home of the hereafter
the Paradise of perpetual bliss: they will enter into it along with their righteous forefathers, their spouses and their descendants. The angels will come to welcome them from every side
saying: "Peace be upon you for all that you steadfastly endured in the world. Now! How excellent will be the home of the hereafter
As for those who break their covenant with Allah after confirming it and cut asunder what Allah has commanded to be joined and create mischief in the land, they are the ones on whom there shall be a curse and they are the ones who will have a terrible home
Allah grants abundantly His provisions to whom He will and sparingly to whom He pleases. The unbelievers rejoice in the life of this world; but brief indeed is the comfort of this worldly life as compared to the life of the hereafter
The unbelievers say: “Why has no sign been sent down to him (Muhammad) from his Rabb?” Say: “In fact Allah lets him go astray who wants, and guides to Himself those who turn to Him
such are the ones who have believed and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of Allah. Beware! It is the remembrance of Allah which provides tranquility to the hearts
As for those who believe and do good deeds, for them there will be prosperity and a beautiful place of final return
O Muhammad! We have sent you among a nation before whom other nations have passed away, so that you may recite to them Our revelations which We have sent down to you; yet they are rejecting the Compassionate (Allah). Say: “He is my Rabb! There is no god but Him. In Him I have put my trust and to Him shall I return
Even if there were a Qur’an that could move mountains, cleft the earth asunder or make the dead speak (do you think the result would have been different?) Surely all things are subject to Allah’s command. Have not yet the believers been satisfied that if Allah wanted, He would have certainly guided the whole of mankind? As for the unbelievers, the disaster will not cease to afflict them every now and then or to crouch at their very doorsteps because of their misdeeds, until the promise of Allah is fulfilled; surely Allah will not fail His promise
Rasools have been mocked before you (O Muhammad), but I always gave respite to the unbelievers and finally I seized them, so see how terrible was My requital
What! Are they so audacious that they ascribe partners to Allah, Who watches minutely over each and every soul and knows all that it does? O Prophet ask them: If Allah Himself has set them up as His partners, then tell me their names! Do you mean to inform Him of something new that He Himself does not know on this earth, or do you merely utter empty words?” Nay! Indeed their foul devices seem fair to the unbelievers, for they have been debarred from the Right Way; and there is none to guide those whom Allah has let go astray
They shall be punished in the life of this world, still more grievous is the punishment of the hereafter, and there is none to protect them from Allah
As for the paradise which the righteous have been promised, it is like this: rivers flow beneath it; eternal are its fruits, and eternal are its shades; such is the reward of the righteous. But the reward of unbelievers is the fire
O Prophet, some of those to whom We have given the Book rejoice at what is revealed to you, while there are some factions who deny a part of it. Tell them: “I am commanded to worship Allah and to associate none with Him. To Him I invite you and to Him I shall return
With these instructions, We have revealed this commandment in the Arabic language. Now, if you follow their vain desires after real knowledge has come to you, there will be none to save you or protect you against the wrath of Allah
We have sent forth other Rasools before you and given them wives and children and it was never in the power of a Rasool to show any miracle without the sanction of Allah. For each period there was a Book
Allah abrogates and confirms what He pleases - with Him is the Master Copy of the Book
O Muhammad! Whether We let you see, within your lifetime, a part of what We threaten them with or cause you to die before We smite them, your mission is only to deliver the Message and it is for Us to take accountability
Do they not see that We are gradually reducing the land in their control through curtailing its borders? When Allah commands, there is none to reverse His command and He is swift in taking accountability
Those unbelievers who have passed before them also devised plots; but Allah is the Master of all planning. He knows the actions of every soul. Soon the unbelievers will come to know who will get the home of paradise in the hereafter
And those who have disbelieved say, "You are not a messenger." Say, [O Muhammad], "Sufficient is Allah as Witness between me and you, and [the witness of] whoever has knowledge of the Scripture
Alif L'am Ra. O Muhammad! This is a Book which We have revealed to you so that you may bring mankind out of utter darkness (ways of ignorance) to the light, by the leave of their Lord, to the Way of the Mighty, the Praiseworthy (Allah)
the One to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Woe to the unbelievers, for they will be sternly punished
They are the ones who love the life of this world more than the hereafter, who debar others from the Way of Allah and seek to make it crooked: they have gone far astray into error
We have not sent any Messenger except that he speaks the language of his own people, so that he could explain to them clearly. Then Allah leaves in error whom He will and guides whom He pleases: He is the Mighty, the Wise
We sent Moses with Our signs, saying: "Lead your people out of utter darkness into light, and remind them to learn lessons from the Days of Allah (Divine history)." Surely there are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful person
Recall! When Moses said to his people: "Remember Allah’s favor to you when He delivered you from the people of Pharoah (Pharaoh), who subjected you to cruel afflictions, putting your sons to death and sparing your females, and in this there was a tremendous trial from your Lord
Remember that your Lord had forewarned: "If you are grateful, I will bestow abundance upon you, but if you are ungrateful (then you should know that) My punishment will be terrible indeed
Moses said: "If you and all the dwellers of the earth become thankless, you should know that He does not stand in need of any of you, surely Allah is the Self-sufficient, Praiseworthy
Have you not heard the information of those who passed away before you, the people of Noah, `Ad and Thamud, and those who came after them? Allah Alone knows them. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs; but they bit their hands with their mouths and said: "Certainly we reject the Message with which you have been sent and certainly we strongly doubt the faith to which you invite us
Their Messengers responded: "Are you doubting the existence of Allah, Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth? He is the One Who invites you so that He may forgive your sins and give you respite till your appointed term." They said: "You are nothing but a human like us! You only wish to turn us away from the worship of those deities whom our forefathers used to worship. Bring us some clear sign
Their Messengers said to them: "It is true that we are human like yourselves, but Allah bestows His grace of appointing a Messenger on such of His servants as He pleases. It is not in our power to bring you any sign except by Allah’s permission, and in Allah let the believers put their trust
What reason do we have not to put our trust in Allah, when He has already guided us to the ways of our lives? We shall certainly endure your persecution patiently, and those who want to put their trust, should put their trust in Allah
Finally the unbelievers said to their Messengers: "Return to our religion or we will expel you from our land." But their Lord revealed His will to them: "We shall destroy the wrongdoers
and give you the land to dwell in after they are gone! This is the reward for the ones who dread My eminence and fear My threats
The Messengers called for judgement, (and when the judgement was passed) every tyrant opposer of the Truth was disappointed
Hell is next for him wherein he will be given festering water to drink
he will sip, but never will be able to swallow. Death will surround him from all sides, yet he will not die; beyond that there will be horrible punishment
The parable of the deeds of those who deny their Lord is that their deeds are like ashes which the wind scatters on a stormy day; they will gain nothing from their deeds, and this is to stray far away from the goal of getting back to Paradise
Do you not see that Allah has based the creation of the heavens and the earth on Truth? That He can destroy you if He wills and bring into being a new creation
That is not at all difficult for Allah
When all people appear before Allah, those who were weak in the world will say to those who thought themselves mighty: "We were your followers. Now! Can you do anything to relieve us from the punishment of Allah?" They will reply: "Had Allah given us guidance, we would have guided you. Now it makes no difference whether we panic or bear it with patience, for there is no escape for us
Once the matter has been decided, Satan will say: "In fact, the promises which Allah made to you were all true; I too made some promises to you but failed to keep any of them. However, I had no power over you. I just invited you, and you accepted my invitation. Now! Do not blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor you can help me. I reject what you did before, that you associated me with Allah. Certainly such wrongdoers will have painful punishment
Those who believe and do good deeds will be admitted to Paradise, beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever with the permission of their Lord, and their greetings therein will be: "Peace
Do you not see how Allah gave the example of comparing a good word with a good tree, whose roots are firm and its branches are in the sky
It yields its fruits in every season by Allah’s leave. Allah cites these examples for men so that they may learn a lesson from them
But the example of an evil word is that of an evil tree which is torn out from the earth and has no stability
With firm words, Allah makes the believers steadfast in the life of this world and in the hereafter; but Allah lets the wrongdoers go astray. Allah does what He pleases
Have you not seen those people who have responded to the favors of Allah with ingratitude and drive their people into the House of Perdition
Which is hell! Wherein they shall burn, an evil place to live
They set up equals with Allah to faces will be covered with flames
Allah will requite each soul according to its deeds; surely Allah is swift in taking the account
This is a proclamation for mankind: let them take warning therefrom; let them know that He is the One and Only - worthy of worship - and let the men of understanding learn a lesson
The sun and the moon are also assigned for your benefit, which steadfastly pursue their courses, to cause the night and the day for your benefit
He has given you all that you could ask for and if you want to count the favors of Allah, you will never be able to count them. In fact, man is unjust, thankless
Remember when Ibrahim (Abraham) said: "My Rabb! Make this city a city of peace and save me and my sons from the worship of idols
O Rabb! They have indeed led many people astray (and they might led my descendants astray as well). Therefore, only those who follow my ways belong to me and I leave those to You who disobey me; surely You are Forgiving, Merciful
Our Rabb! I have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley near Your Sacred House. Our Rabb! I have done this in the hope that they would establish Salah, therefore, turn the hearts of the people toward them and provide them with fruits so that they may give thanks
Our Rabb! Certainly You know what we conceal and what we reveal. In fact, nothing in the earth or in heaven is hidden from Allah
Praise be to Allah who has given me Isma`il (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac) in my old age. Indeed my Rabb hears all prayers
O Rabb! Make me and my descendants establish Salah. Our Rabb! Accept my prayer
Our Rabb! Forgive me and my parents and all believers on the Day when the accountability will take place
Never think that Allah is unaware of what these unjust people are doing. He is only deferring their case to that Day when their eyes will be fixedly open
they will be running in terror with their heads uplifted, staring but seeing nothing and their hearts utterly vacant
O Muhammad forewarn mankind of the Day when Our punishment will overtake them; when the wrongdoers will say: "Our Rabb! Give us a little more respite: we will answer Your call and follow the Rasools!" But it will be said to them, "Are you not the same people who once swore that you would never suffer a decline
When you lived among those people who had wronged their souls, it was explained to you how We dealt with them and We even described for you their examples
They hatched their plots but their plots were well within the sight of Allah, even though these were such which could move mountains
Never think that Allah will break the promise which He made to His Rasools: surely Allah is Mighty in power, the Lord of Retribution
Warn them of the Day when the earth will be changed to a different earth and the heavens as well, and all of them will stand before Allah, the One, the Irresistible
and on that Day you will see the criminals bound together in chains
their garments will be made of tar and their faces will be covered with flames
Allah will requite each soul according to its deeds; surely Allah is swift in taking the account
This is a proclamation for mankind: let them take warning therefrom; let them know that He is the One and Only - worthy of worship - and let the men of understanding learn a lesson
Alif L'am Ra. These are the verses of the Divine Book, the Glorious Qur’an which makes the things clear
The Day will come when the unbelievers will wish that they were Muslims
Leave them alone to eat and enjoy themselves and be deluded by false hopes, for soon they will find out the Truth
Never did We destroy a town whose term of life was not ordained beforehand
No people can forestall their doom, nor can they postpone it
They say: "O you to whom the reminder (The Qur'an) is being revealed! You are surely insane
Why don’t you bring us the angels, if you are of the truthful ones
O Muhammad, tell them: "We do not send down the angels except for just cause (to execute Our scourge), and when they come, people are not given respite
Surely We have revealed this reminder (The Qur'an); and We will surely preserve it Ourself
Certainly We sent Messengers before you among the early nations
but whenever a Messenger came to them, they mocked him
Thus do We let doubt creep into the hearts of the criminals
that they do not believe in it (The Qur'an), despite the examples of the people who passed before them
Even if we had opened a gate in Heaven and they ascend through it and keep on ascending
still they would have said, 'Our eyes have been dazzled; rather we have been bewitched
It is We who have decked the heavens with constellations and made them fair- seeming for the beholders
and We have guarded them from every accursed Satan
Any Satan that steals a hearing, there follows him a fiery comet
We have spread out the earth and set mountains upon it; and caused to grow every suitable thing therein
and We provided therein means of sustenance for you and many other creatures to whom you do not provide
There is nothing which is not in Our inexhaustible treasure and sent down in appropriate measure
We send the fertilizing winds and send down water from the sky for you to drink; it is not you who hold the storage of this wealth
Certainly it is We who give life and cause to die, and We are the inheritors of all
Certainly We have full knowledge of those who have gone before you and certainly We know those who will come later
Surely your Lord will gather them together; surely He is Wise, Knowledgeable
We created man from sounding clay, black mud moulded into shape
while before him We had created Jinn from smokeless fire
Remember when your Lord said to the angels: "I am about to create a man from sounding clay, black mud moulded into shape
when I complete his moulding and breath into him of My spirit, kneel down and prostrate before him
Accordingly the angels prostrated altogether
except Iblees (The Satan); he refused to join those who prostrated
Allah asked: "O Iblees! What is the matter with you that you did not join those who prostrated
He replied: "It does not behoove me to prostrate myself to this man whom You have created from sounding clay, black mud moulded into shape
Allah said: "Get out of here, you are accursed
The curse will remain on you till the Day of Judgement
At this Iblees requested: "Lord! Give me respite till the Day of Resurrection
Allah said: "All right! You are given the respite
till the Day of appointed time
Iblees said: "Lord! Since You let me go astray, I will make evil fair-seeming to them on earth and I will seduce them all
except those of them who are Your sincere devotees
Allah said: "This course of action is all right with Me
you will not have any authority over My devotees except those misguided ones who follow you
They will be all destined for Hell
which has seven gates, each gate will be assigned to a separate group from among them
The righteous will be in the midst of the gardens and fountains of paradise
and it will be said to them: "Enter into these in peace and security
We shall remove all hatred from their hearts -they will become like brothers and sit on couches face to face
No fatigue will touch them in there, nor will they ever be asked to leave
O Prophet! Tell My devotees that I am indeed the Forgiving, the Merciful
but at the same time My punishment is also the most painful punishment
Tell them about the guests of Abraham
They entered upon them and said: "Peace be upon you!" But he replied: "Surely we are afraid of you
They answered: "Do not be afraid of us! We have come to you with good news of a son endowed with knowledge
He said: "Are you giving me the good news of a son when I have become old? What kind of good news you are giving
They replied: "We are giving you true good news; you should not be of those who despair
He said: "Who would despair of the mercy of his Lord except one who goes astray
Then he asked: "On what expedition you have been sent, O emissaries of Allah
They replied: "We have been sent to punish a criminal nation
with the exception of Lot’s (Lot's) family; we will certainly rescue them all
except his wife, who, Allah says, has been destined to remain with those who will stay behind
So when the emissaries came to the family of Lot
he said: " You appear to be strangers
They said: "We have come to you with that concerning which these people had doubts
We have come to you with the Truth of Allah’s decree and we are telling you the truth
You should, therefore, depart with your family during the last hours of the night and you yourself should follow them at their rear; let no one of you look back, keep on going where you are commanded to go
We informed him about this decree of Ours that the roots of the sinners of his city would be cut off by the morning
The people of the town came rejoicing to the house of Lot when they heard the news of those two young male visitors
Lot said: "They are my guests, so do not disgrace me
Have fear of Allah and do not put me to shame
They said: "Have we not forbidden you to plead for the rest of the world
He said: "Here are my daughters, if you must act
By your life, O Prophet Muhammad, they were madly blundering in their intoxication of lust
So the mighty blast overtook them at sunrise
Thus We turned the town upside down and rained down on them brimstones of baked clay
Surely there are major lessons in this for those who investigate
and this smitten town still lies right on the permanent highway on which the unbelievers travel during their business trips
Indeed there is a sign in this for the true believers
The people of Al- Aikah (the nation of Prophet Shu’aib) were also wrongdoers
So We inflicted retribution on them. The ruined towns of these two nations are lying on an open road
The people of Hijr also denied their Messenger
We gave them Our signs, but they ignored them
They hewed their homes in the mountains for safety
But the mighty blast seized them one morning, and all their labor of building their homes through carving the rocks did not avail them
We have not created the Heavens and the Earth, and all that lies between them but to manifest the Truth
The Hour of Doom is sure to come, so overlook their misbehavior in a gracious manner
Surely your Lord is the All-Knowing Creator
We have given you the Seven Verses that are worthy of recitation over and over again (Surah Al-Fatiha) and the Glorious Qur'an
Do not look at the worldly wealth which We have given to different people among them, nor grieve at their condition. Leave them alone, attend to the believers in kindness
and tell the unbelievers: "Surely I am only a plain Warner
This warning is like the warning which We sent down to the schismatics
the one who divided their Qur’an into separate parts, believing in some and denying others
So by your Lord! We will question them all
about their doings
Therefore, proclaim publicly what you are commanded and turn away from the pagans
Surely We Ourself will suffice you against the scoffers
those who place other deities alongside Allah, will soon come to know their folly
We know that your heart is distressed by what they say against you
The cure of your heart’s distress is that you should celebrate the praises of your Lord and be of those who prostrate themselves before Him
and worship your Lord until there comes to you which is certain (death)
Allah’s commandment has come, so do not seek to hurry it on. Glory be to Him and Exalted be He above the shirk (associating other gods with Allah) that they practice
He sends down His angels with inspiration of His Command to whom He pleases of His servants, saying: "Warn the people that there is no one else worthy of worship except Me, therefore fear Me
He has created the heavens and the earth to manifest the Truth; Exalted be He above the shirk that they practice
He created man from a drop of semen, yet he is an open contender
He created cattle, which provide you clothing, food, and other benefits
How pleasant they look to you when you bring them home in the evening and drive them to pasture in the morning
They carry your heavy loads to far-off towns that you could not otherwise reach without painful toil; indeed your Lord is Kind and Merciful
He has also created horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride and put on show, and He has created other things which are beyond your knowledge
It is up to Allah to show the Right Way, when there exist some crooked ways. If Allah wanted He could have guided you all
It is He Who sends down water from the sky, which provides drinking water for you and brings forth fodder to pasture your cattle
With it He grows for you crops, olives, date-palms, grapes, and every kind of fruit: surely there is a great sign in this for those who think
He has subjected to your service the night and the day, the sun and the moon: and likewise the stars also serve you by His command: surely there are signs in this for people who use their common sense
In the Earth He has created things of different colors: surely there is a sign in this for those who want to learn a lesson
It is He Who has subjected the sea to your service, that you may eat fresh meat therefrom and that you may bring out of it ornaments to wear; and you see that ships plough their course through it. He has done all this so that you may seek His bounty and so that you may pay thanks to Him
He has set mountains on the earth - lest it should move away with you. He also made rivers and roads so that you may find your way
and likewise made landmarks and the stars for your guidance
Is then, He, Who has created all this, like one who cannot create? Why don’t you understand
If you want to count the favors of Allah, you will never be able to number them; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
and Allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal
Those whom they invoke besides Allah have created nothing, but are themselves created
They are dead, not living; they do not even know when they will be raised to life again
Your God is One God; as for those who do not believe in the hereafter, they have faithless hearts and are puffed up with arrogance
Allah surely knows what they conceal and what they reveal; certainly He does not love the arrogant
When they are asked: "What is it, that your Lord has revealed?" They say: "Fictitious stories of the ancients
Let them bear their own burden in full and that of those whom they have misled in their ignorance. Alas! Evil is the responsibility they are taking
Those before them also plotted against the Truth, but Allah shook their edifice through its foundation, and its roof caved in on them; and the torment came at them from where they did not even suspect
Then on the Day of Judgment He will humiliate them and say: "Where are those deities you associated with Me concerning whom you used to dispute with the true believers?" Those who have been given knowledge will say: "Today there will be shame and sorrow for the unbelievers
those whom the angels cause to die while they were still engaged in doing injustice to their own souls. At the time of death they offer submission, saying: "We were not doing anything wrong." The angels will reply: "O Yea! How dare you deny! Certainly Allah is aware of what you were doing
Now go ahead and enter the gates of Hell, there you will abide forever." In fact, very awful will be the abode of the arrogant
On the other hand when the righteous people are asked: " What is it that your Lord has revealed?" They say: "That which is the best." Good is the reward for such righteous people in this world and the home of the hereafter will be even better. How splendid will be the home for the righteous
Gardens of Eden will they enter, beneath which rivers flow, having therein all that they wish to have. Thus shall Allah reward the righteous
such pious people the angels cause to die, saying: "Peace be upon you! Enter the paradise because of the good deeds you have done
Are these unbelievers waiting for the angels to come down to take their lives or the commandment of your Lord to come to pass for their doom? So did those who went before them. It was not Allah who was unjust to them, but they were unjust to themselves
At the end, the evil results of their deeds overtook them, and the very scourge at which they mocked, hemmed them in
The pagans say: "If Allah wanted, neither we nor our forefathers would have worshipped any one else but Him, nor made anything unlawful without His will." Such excuses were put forward also by those who went before them. Yet Messengers have no more responsibility than to convey the Message clearly
No doubt We raised in every nation a Messenger, saying: "Serve Allah and keep away from Taghut (Satanic forces)." After that, Allah guided some of them while deviation proved true against the others. So travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who denied Our Message
No matter how eager you may be for their guidance, you should know that Allah does not guide those whom He let go astray and such people will have no helpers
They solemnly swear their strongest oaths by Allah: "Allah will never raise the dead to life." Why not? It is a promise which He has made binding on Himself, though most among mankind may not know it
It will be fulfilled so that He may manifest to them the Truth about which they differ, and so that the rejecters of Truth may know that they were indeed liars
As for its possibility, when We intend to do anything which We want, We need only say, "Be," and it is
For those who migrated for the sake of Allah after persecution, We will certainly provide them a good abode in this life and the reward of the hereafter will be much greater, if they but knew what a happy end awaits
those who bear ills with patience and put their trust in their Lord
The Messengers We sent before you, O Muhammad, and to whom We revealed Our Message, were also human beings. You (O people of Mecca), may ask those who have the Reminder (The people of the Book), if you don’t know this fact yourself
We sent those Messengers with clear signs and scriptures; and now We have sent down the reminder to you (O Muhammad), so that you may explain clearly to mankind as to what was sent to them so that they may think about it
Do those who plot evil deeds feel secure that Allah will not cave in the earth beneath them or that the scourge will not come to them from directions that they did not suspect
Or that He may not seize them in the course of their journey leaving no way for their escape
Or that He may seize them after alerting them about the danger? Yet your Lord is Beneficent, Merciful
Do they not see how every object that Allah has created casts its shadow right and left, prostrating itself to Allah in all humility
To Allah prostrate all the creatures of the heavens and the earth, including the angels; and they are not arrogant
they fear their Lord Who is above them, and they do whatever they are commanded to do
Allah has commanded: "You shall not worship two gods: there exists only One God, I am the One Whom you should fear
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth and His Deen (laws or ways of life) is followed in the universe - would you then fear any one other than Allah
Whatever blessings you enjoy are from Allah, and when touched by distress, He is the One to Whom you cry for help
Yet no sooner does He relieve you from the distress than some of you begin to associate others with Him
as if to show their ingratitude for the favors that We bestow on them! Enjoy yourselves; soon you will come to know the consequences
They set aside a portion of what We have provided them with, for those deities about whom they know nothing. By Allah! You shall most certainly be questioned about the lies you fabricate
They ascribe daughters to Allah - Glory be to Him! But for themselves, they would like to have what they desire (sons)
Whenever the news of a female child is announced to any one of them, his face darkens and he chokes with inward gloom
He hides himself from his people because of the bad news he has heard, asking himself whether he should retain her with disgrace or bury her in the dust. Beware! Evil is the Judgment they make about Allah
Those who do not believe in the hereafter set an evil example, while Allah applies the highest example, for He is the Mighty, the Wise
If Allah were to punish mankind for its wrongdoing, He would not leave even an animal around the wrongdoers, but He gives them respite for an appointed time. But when their appointed time comes, they can neither stay behind for a moment nor can they go before it
They attribute to Allah what they themselves hate. Their tongues mouth the lie that they will have a good reward. Let there be no doubt: the only thing they will have is hell, and they will be sent ahead of the others
By Allah! We sent Messengers before you (O Muhammad) to other nations; but Satan made their deeds seem fair to them so they did not believe, he is their patron today, and they shall have a painful punishment
We have revealed to you the Book (The Qur'an) so that you may clearly explain to them the reality of those things in which they differ - it is a guidance and blessing for those people who believe
Allah sends down water from the sky, and with it gives life to the land after it has been dead (this Qur'an is being sent to serve the same purpose). Surely in this example there is a sign for those who listen
Surely there is a lesson for you in cattle. We give you to drink of what is in their bellies, between bowels and blood - pure milk - pleasant for those who drink it
Likewise in the fruits of the date-palm and the grapes, from which you derive intoxicants and wholesome food, certainly there is a sign for those people who use their common sense
Behold! Your Lord inspired the bees to build their hives in the mountains, in the trees, and in anything which men may build for beekeeping
and feed on every kind of fruit and follow the smooth ways of your Lord. From its belly comes forth a syrup of different colors, which contains a healing for mankind. Certainly in this there is a sign for those who think
Allah is the One Who created you, then He causes you to die; there are some amongst you whose lives are prolonged to an abject old age so that they know nothing after having known much. In fact Allah is the All-Knowing, Almighty
Allah has made some of you excel in sustenance over the others; those who are so favored, do not give away their sustenance to their slaves so as to make them their equals. How can you think that Allah will allow other deities to be His equals? Would they refuse to acknowledge the favors of Allah
It is Allah Who has made for you mates from your own species and He is the One Who gives you sons and grandsons through those wives, and provides for you good things to eat: will they then, after knowing all that, believe that falsehood and disbelieve Allah’s favors
They worship those deities other than Allah, who neither provide them anything for sustenance from the heavens or the earth, nor have any power to do so
Therefore, compare none with Allah. Surely Allah knows and you do not know
Allah gives you another example of two men: one of them is a slave, the property of the other, and has no power over anything; and the other man is one on whom We have bestowed Our bounty, from which he freely spends secretly and openly. Ask them: "Are those two men equal?" Praise be to Allah - most of them do not understand this simple thing
Well! Allah gives you another example of two men: one of them is dumb and has no ability to do anything - a burden on his master whenever he sends him on an errand, he does nothing useful. Can he be equal to the one who executes orders properly and follows the directions in a Right Way
Allah Alone has knowledge of the unseen things of the Heavens and the Earth. As for the taking place of the Hour of Judgment, it will be like a twinkling of an eye or even quicker: surely Allah has power over everything
Allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when you knew nothing, and He gave you hearing, sight and intelligence so that you may give thanks to Him
Do they not see the birds, that wing their flight in the air towards the sky? Who holds them up but Allah? Surely in this there are signs for the true believers
Allah has made your homes the place for your rest, and animal skins for tents like houses so that you may find them light when you travel and easy to pitch when you stop; while from their wool, fur, and hair He provides you household items and articles of convenience for your prescribed term of life
Allah has provided you shades from the sun out of what He has created. He has granted you resorts in the mountains, has granted you garments to protect yourselves from heat; and coats of armor to protect you during your wars. Thus He completes his favors to you, so that you may become Muslims
If they still give no heed to you O Muhammad, you need not worry, for your duty is only to convey the message clearly
They recognize the favors of Allah, yet they deny them; most of them are ungrateful disbelievers
Do they realize what will happen on that Day when We shall call a witness from every nation? Then the unbelievers will neither be allowed to put forward any excuse nor will they receive any favor
When the wrongdoers face the punishment, it will neither be lightened for them nor will they be granted a delay
When the pagans see their deities whom they associated with Allah, they will say: "Our Lord! Here are our ‘associate gods’ whom we used to invoke besides You." At this their deities will toss their statement back at them saying: "You are liars
They shall tender their submission to Allah that Day: and the gods of their own inventions will leave them in the lurch
As for those who disbelieve and debar others from the Way of Allah, We shall punish them all the more for their misdeeds
O Muhammad, warn them about that Day when We shall call a witness from every nation to testify against it, and We shall call you O Muhammad to testify against your people: that is why We have sent down to you this Book (The Qur'an) to explain everything - a guide, a blessing and good news for Muslims
Allah commands doing justice, doing good to others, and giving to near relatives, and He forbids indecency, wickedness, and rebellion: He admonishes you so that you may take heed
Fulfill the covenant of Allah when you have pledged to do so, and do not break your oaths after you have sworn them; for swearing in His name you have made Allah your surety; surely Allah has knowledge of all your actions
Do not behave like that woman who had spun her yarn strongly and then had herself broken it into pieces; nor take your oaths for mutual deceit so that one people may take undue advantage over the other, for Allah puts you to trial by these oaths; and on the Day of Judgment He will certainly reveal to you the truth about which you differed
If Allah wanted, He could have made you all one nation, but He lets go astray whom He wants and guides whom He pleases: but most certainly you will be questioned about all your actions
O believers! Do not take oaths to deceive each other, lest your foot slip after being firmly fixed upon guidance; and taste the evil consequences for debarring others from the Way of Allah and incur a mighty punishment
Do not sell the covenant of Allah for a petty price. Certainly Allah’s reward is far better than all your gain, if you but knew it
Whatever is with you is transitory and what is with Allah is everlasting. We will certainly reward those who are patient according to the noblest of their deeds
Whoever does righteous deeds, whether male or female, provided he is a believer, We shall surely grant him a new life, a life that is good, and We will certainly reward such people according to the noblest of their deeds in the hereafter
When you recite The Qur'an, seek Allah’s protection from the accursed Satan
surely he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
His authority is only over those who befriend him and commit shirk by his temptation
When We substitute one verse in favor of another to elaborate with different examples - and Allah knows best what He reveals in stages - they say: "You are but a forger." The fact is that most of them do not understand
Say, "The Holy Spirit (Gabriel) has brought it down piecemeal intact from your Lord to strengthen the faith of the believers, and to give guidance and good news to the Muslims
We know very well what they say about you, O Muhammad: "A certain man teaches him." But the man they allude to speaks a foreign language while this (The Qur'an) is in eloquent Arabic
In fact, Allah does not show guidance to those who do not believe in His revelations and they will have a painful punishment
Surely those who do not believe in the revelations of Allah, are the ones who forge the falsehood and they are the ones who are liars
Anyone who is forced to deny faith after its acceptance, while his heart remains loyal to the faith, shall be absolved; but any who denies faith willingly after its acceptance and opens his breast to unbelief, shall incur the wrath of Allah and shall be sternly punished
This is because such people love the life of this world more than the hereafter, and that Allah does not guide those who knowingly reject faith
Such are those whose hearts, ears and eyes are sealed by Allah; and they are the ones who are heedless
There is no doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers
On the other hand, Allah is most surely forgiving and compassionate towards those who had to leave their homes after being persecuted because of their faith, struggled hard and remained steadfastly patient
On the Day of Judgment every soul will come pleading for itself and every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly
Allah gives you an example of a town which was enjoying security and peace, receiving its provisions in abundance from every quarter, but it became ungrateful to the favors of Allah. As a result, Allah made its residents taste the consequences of their doings, through inflicting upon them misfortunes of hunger and fear
A Messenger was sent to them from among themselves, but they denied him; so the punishment overtook them because they were wrongdoers
So eat of the good and lawful things which Allah has provided for you; and be grateful to Allah for His favors, if you are sincere in His worship
He has only forbidden you to eat carrion (meat of a dead body), blood, pork, and that over which any name other than Allah's has been invoked. But if one is forced by necessity, intending neither to break the Divine Law nor to transgress limits, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
You shall not falsely declare with your tongues: "This is lawful, and that is forbidden," in order to ascribe false things to Allah, for those who forge lies against Allah will never prosper
Brief is their enjoyment of this life, and they shall have a painful punishment
To the Jews, We prohibited those things which We have already mentioned to you, and it was not We Who imposed the hardships on them but they imposed those hardships on themselves
Yet your Lord is forgiving and merciful towards those who do something wrong through ignorance, but later repent and mend their ways
In fact Abraham was a nation in himself, an upright man obedient to Allah, and he was not of the pagans
He was always grateful for the favors of Allah, Who chose him and guided him to the Right Way
We gave him a good life in this world, and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous
And now We have revealed to you Our will, saying: "Follow the faith of Abraham the upright, he was not of the pagans
As for the Sabbath, it was ordained for those who differed about its observance. Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment about that over which they differ
Call people to the Way of your Lord with wisdom and best advice, and reason with them, if you have to, in the most courteous manner: for your Lord knows best who strays from His Way and He knows best who is rightly guided
If you have to retaliate, let your retaliation be commensurate with the wrong which was done to you; but if you endure with patience, the best reward indeed is for those who endure with patience
Be patient - for your patience is not but with the help of Allah - do not grieve over them and do not distress yourself because of their plots
for Allah is with those who fear Him and adopt the righteous attitude
Glory be to Him Who took His devotee (Muhammad) one night from Masjid-al-Haram (in Mecca) to Masjid-al-Aqsa, whose vicinity We have blessed, so that We may show him some of Our signs: surely He is the One Who is the Hearer, the Observer
We gave Moses the Book and made it a guide for the Children of Israel, saying: "Do not take any other protector besides Me
You are the descendents of those whom We carried in the Ark with Noah, and he was indeed a grateful devotee
Besides this We forewarned the Children of Israel in their Holy Book that you will do mischief in the land twice through becoming arrogant transgressors and each time you will be punished
When the promise for the first of the two fore warnings came to be fulfilled, We sent against you Our servants (the Assyrians) who gave you a terrible warfare: so they rampaged through your homes to carry out the punishment of which you were forewarned
Then after this, We afforded you an opportunity to overpower them and helped you with wealth and sons and granted you more manpower
If you did good, it was to your own benefit; but if you did evil, it proved to be bad for your own selves. Then, when the promise for your second forewarning came to be fulfilled, We sent another army (the Romans) to disfigure your faces and to enter your Temple as the former had entered it before, and they utterly destroyed all that they laid their hands on
Now your Lord may again be merciful to you; but if you repeat the same behavior, We will repeat the punishment, and in the hereafter, We have made hell a prison for such unbelievers
Surely this Qur’an guides to the Way which is perfectly straight and gives the good news to the believers who do good that they shall have a magnificent reward
and at the same time it gives warnings to those who do not believe in the hereafter, that We have prepared for them a painful punishment
Yet man prays for evil as fervently as he ought to pray for good, and mankind is ever hasty
We have made the night and the day as two signs. We enshrouded the night with darkness and gave light to the day, to enable you to seek the bounty of your Lord, and that you may compute the years and count the numbers. Thus, We have set forth all things in detail
We have fastened the fate of every man to his own neck, and on the Day of Judgment We shall bring out for him a book spread wide open
saying: "Here is your book of deeds: read it. Today you yourself are sufficient to take your own account
He that seeks guidance, shall be guided to his own advantage, but he that goes astray does so to his own loss. No bearer shall bear the burden of another on the Day of Judgment. And during your worldly life, We do not inflict punishment until We send forth a Messenger to make truth distinct from falsehood
Whenever We have intended to destroy a town, it was because We sent Our commandments to its people who were leading easy lives but they showed disobedience; as a result Our Judgment was passed, and We razed that city to the ground
How many generations have We destroyed since Noah’s time? Sufficient is your Lord to note and see the sins of His servants
He that desires the transitory things of this life, We readily grant him such things as We please to whomsoever We want, then We condemn him to hell, where he will burn, disgraced and rejected
He that desires the life of the hereafter and strives for it as best as he can provided he is a Believer, the endeavor of every such person will be accepted
We bestowed on all - these as well those - out of the bounties of your Lord; the bounties of your Lord are not confined
See how We have exalted some over others, and certainly the hereafter is more exalted and greater in excellence
Do not associate another deity with Allah, lest you sit back, condemned, forsaken
Your Lord has decreed to you that: You shall worship none but Him, and you shall be kind to your parents; if one or both of them live to their old age in your lifetime, you shall not say to them any word of contempt nor repel them and you shall address them in kind words
You shall lower to them your wings of humility and pray: "O Lord! Bestow on them Your blessings just as they cherished me when I was a little child
Your Lord knows best what is in your hearts. If you do good deeds, certainly He is most forgiving to those who turn to Him in repentance
You shall give to your relatives their due and to the needy and to the wayfarers. You shall not be a spendthrift
as spendthrifts are the brethren of Satan and Satan is ever ungrateful to His Lord
You shall speak courteously to needy persons if you are waiting for your Lord’s bounty and you lack the means to assist them
You shall neither tie your hands to your neck (be miserly) nor stretch them forth to their utmost reach (be prodigal), lest you sit back, blameworthy, destitute
Surely your Lord gives abundantly to whom He pleases and sparingly to whom He wills, for He is aware of the condition of His servants and observes them closely
You shall not kill your children for fear of want, for it is We Who provide sustenance for them as well as for you; surely killing them is a great blunder
You shall not commit adultery; surely it is a shameful deed and an evil way (opening the door to other evils)
You shall not kill anyone whom Allah has forbidden, except for just cause under the law. If anyone is killed unjustly, We have granted the right of retribution to his heir, but let him not carry his vengeance too far in killing the culprit through taking the law in his own hands, as he is supported by the law
You shall not go near the property of an orphan, except with the good intention of improving it, until he attains his maturity. You shall fulfill your pledges; surely you shall be held accountable for your pledges
You shall give full measure, when you measure, and weigh with even scale; this is the best way and will prove to be the best in the end
You shall not follow anyone blindly in those matters of which you have no knowledge, surely the use of your ears and the eyes and the heart - all of these, shall be questioned on the Day of Judgment
You shall not walk arrogantly on the earth, for you can neither rend the earth asunder nor attain the height of the mountains
All these and their evil aspects are hateful in the sight of your Lord
This is but a part of the wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you. Do not associate other deities as object of worship, lest you should be cast into hell, blameworthy rejected
What! Has your Lord preferred to give you sons and adopted angels as daughters for Himself? Certainly you are uttering a monstrous statement
We have explained things in various ways in this Qur’an so that they may receive admonition, yet it has only added to their aversion
Tell them: If there were other gods besides Him as the pagans say, they would have certainly tried to find a way to dethrone the Master of the Throne
Glory be to Him! He is far above the things that they say about Him
The seven heavens, the earth and all beings therein declare His glory. There is not a single thing but glorifies Him with His praise, but you do not understand their hymns of His glory. The fact is that He is very Forbearing, Forgiving
When you recite the Qur’an, We put a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter
We cast a veil upon their hearts and make them hard of hearing, so they do not comprehend it. When in the Qur’an you mention His Oneness, they turn their backs in disgust
We are quite aware what they really wish to hear when they listen to you, and what they say when they converse in private. These wrongdoers say to one another: "The man you follow is surely bewitched
See what sort of examples they make up about you! They have surely gone astray and cannot find the Right Way
They say: "What! When we are reduced to bones and dust, shall we really be raised up again into a new creation
Tell them: "(Yes, most certainly you shall be brought back to life), even if you be stones or iron
or even something harder than this that you may think of." Then they will ask: "Who will restore us?" Say: "The One Who created you the first time." Then they will shake their heads at you and ask: "Well, when will this be?" Say, "It may be quite soon
It will be on the Day when He will call you and you will raise up in response to it, with His praise, and you will think that you remained in the state of death but a little while
Tell My servants that they should speak only what is the best. Surely Satan stirs up trouble among them. The fact is that Satan is an open enemy to mankind
Your Lord is fully aware of your circumstances. He may be merciful to you if He wants, or He may punish you if He pleases. O Prophet, We have not sent you to be their guardian
Your Lord is fully aware of all that is in the heavens and in the earth. We have exalted some prophets above the others and gave Zaboor (the Psalms) to David
Say: "Pray if you will to those whom you assert besides Him; they have neither the power to relieve you from any distress nor to change it
Those to whom they pray, themselves seek the means of access to their Lord - trying as to who can be more near - they hope for His Mercy and fear His punishment, for the punishment of your Lord is terrible indeed
There is not a town but We shall destroy it before the Day of Resurrection or punish it with a severe punishment; this fact has been recorded in the Eternal Record
We refrain from sending signs (miracles) only because the men of former generations treated them as false. For example, We sent the she-camel to the people of Thamud - a manifest sign - but they laid violent hands on her. We send the signs only by way of warning, and if people reject the sign after receiving it, they are doomed
Remember, O Muhammad! We told you that your Lord encompasses mankind. We have made the Vision which We showed you, and the cursed tree of Zaqqum which is mentioned in the Qur’an, a test for these people of Mecca. We are giving them warning to be fearful but it only increases their inordinate transgression
Recall the occasion when We said to the angels: "Prostrate yourselves before Adam." They all prostrated except Iblees (Satan), who replied: "Should I prostrate to the one whom You have created from clay
Then he asked: "Tell me, is this the one whom You have honored above me? If You give me respite till the Day of Resurrection, I will certainly uproot all but a few of his descendants
Allah said: "Go away! Hell is your reward, and the reward of those who follow you, an ample reward it shall be
You may try to allure whomsoever you can with your seductive voice, muster against them all your cavalry and infantry, be their partner in their riches and their children, and promise them what you will - the promises of Satan are nothing but deception
as for My servants, you shall have no authority over them. Your Lord is sufficient as their Guardian
Your Lord is the One Who drives your ships across the ocean, so that you may seek His bounty; indeed He is ever Merciful to you
Whenever any adversity strikes you at sea, all those to whom you pray besides Him forsake you except He; yet when He brings you safe to the land, you turn your backs upon Him. Indeed, man is ever ungrateful
Are you confident that He will not cave in the land beneath you, or let loose a deadly tornado upon you? Then you may not find anyone to protect you
Or, are you confident that when again you go back to sea He will not smite you with a violent tempest and drown you for your thanklessness? If that happens, then you will not find anyone who can question Us regarding this end of yours
It is Our favor that We have honored the children of Adam, blessed them with conveyances on land and sea, provided them with good and pure things and exalted them above many of Our creatures
Just imagine the scene of that Day when We shall call every community with their respective Imams (leaders): then those who will be given their ‘book of deeds’ in their right hand will read it with pleasure and they will not be wronged in the least
But those who have played blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter, rather worse than blind in finding the Way to Salvation
O Muhammad! These people have tried to entice you from Our revelations, hoping that you might fabricate something in Our name. Had you done that, they would have made you their friend
Had We not strengthened your faith, you might have made some compromise with them
In such a case We would have given you double punishment in this life and in the life hereafter. Then you would have found no helper against Our wrath
They almost scare you off the land, to expel you from it. If they do so, they will not be able to stay here much longer after you
This has always been Our Sunnah (course of action) with regards to those Messengers whom We sent before you, and you will find no change in Our Sunnah (course of action)
Establish Salah from the decline of the sun till the darkness of the night (Zuhr, Asr, Maghrib and Isha) and read at Fajr (dawn); for the reading at Fajr is witnessed (by the angels)
During a part of the night, pray Tahajjud, an additional prayer for you (O Muhammad), very soon your Lord may exalt you to ‘Maqam-e-Mahmood’ (a station of great glory)
During the prayer say: "Lord! Make my entrance, the entrance with truth and make my exit, the exit with truth and grant me a supporting authority from your presence
and declare, "The Truth has come and falsehood has vanished, for falsehood by its nature is bound to perish
We have revealed the Qur’an which is a healing and a mercy to the believers, while to the wrongdoers it adds nothing but loss
Man is a strange creature: when We bestow Our favors on man, he turns his back and drifts off to one side (instead of coming to Us) and whenever evil touches him, he gives himself up to despair
O Prophet say to them: "Everyone acts according to his own disposition; but only your Lord knows best who is on the Right Way
They put you questions about Ar-Ruh (the Spirit). Tell them: "The Spirit is at my Lord’s command and I am not given any knowledge of it but a little
If We want, We can definitely take away all that which We have revealed to you: then you will find none to help you in getting it back from Us
But your Lord has blessed you with this knowledge; surely His goodness to you has been great indeed
Declare: "Even if all human beings and Jinns combined their resources to produce the like of this Qur’an, they would never be able to compose the like thereof, even if they backed up each other as best as they could
In this Qur’an We have used different methods to make the people understand the Message, yet the majority of them persist in unbelief
They say: "We will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us
or until a garden of date-palms and grapes be created for you and you cause rivers to flow in it
or until you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have threatened us; or you bring Allah and the angels before us face to face
or a house made with gold comes into being for you; or you ascend to the sky - we shall not even believe in your ascendance until you bring down to us a book that we can read." O Muhammad, tell them: "Glory be to my Lord! Have I ever claimed to be anything more than a human Messenger
Nothing prevented people from belief when guidance came to them except the excuse: "What! Has Allah sent a man like us to be a Messenger
O Muhammad, tell them: "Had there been in the earth angels walking about as settlers, We would certainly have sent down to them an angel from heaven as a Messenger
Say: "Sufficient is Allah as a witness between me and you. He is the One Who is Aware and Observant of His servants
Those whom Allah guides are rightly guided; and those whom He lets go astray, shall find no protector besides Him. On the Day of Judgment We shall gather them all, prone on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf. Hell shall be their abode: whenever its flames die down, We will rekindle for them the fierceness of the fire
Thus shall they be rewarded: because they rejected Our revelations and said: "When we are reduced to bones and decayed particles, shall we really be raised to life in a new creation
Can they not see that Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth has power to create the people like them? He has set a deadline for their lives, there is no doubt about it: yet the wrongdoers refuse to do anything except deny
Say to them: "Even if you had all the treasures of my Lord’s blessings at your disposal, you would still hold them back for fear of spending. Man is ever so stingy
To Moses We gave nine clear signs. Ask the Children of Israel how, when he came to them and Pharoah told him: "O Moses! I think that you are bewitched
Moses replied: "You know it very well that no one except the Lord of the heavens and the earth has sent down these signs as eye-openers, and O Pharoah (Pharaoh), surely I think that you are doomed
So Pharoah resolved to remove Moses and the Israelites from the face of the earth, but We drowned him and all who were with him
Thereafter We said to the Children of Israel: "Settle down in the land and when the promise of the hereafter comes to be fulfilled, We shall assemble you all together
We have revealed the Qur’an in Truth, and with the Truth it has come down: and O Muhammad, We have sent you only to give good news to the believers and to warn the unbelievers
We have divided the Qur’an into sections so that you may recite to the people with deliberation, and We have sent it down in gradual revelations to suit particular occasions
Say: "Whether you believe in it or not, it is true that those who were endowed with knowledge before its revelation prostrate themselves when it is recited
and say, ‘Glory be to our Lord! Our Lord’s promise has been fulfilled
They fall down upon their faces, weeping as they listen, and this increases their reverence
O Prophet, say to them: "Whether you call Him Allah or call Him Rahman; it is all the same by whichever name you call Him because for Him are all the Finest names. Offer your Salah neither in too loud a voice nor in too low a voice but seek a middle course
and say: "Praise be to Allah, the One Who has begotten no son and Who has no partner in His Kingdom; nor is He helpless to need a protector, and glorify His greatness in the best possible way
Praise be to Allah Who has revealed the Book to His servant and did not make it complicated
It is straightforward so that He may warn about the terrible punishment for the unbelievers from Him and give good news to the believers who do good deeds that they shall have a goodly reward
which they will enjoy forever
Further to warn those who say "Allah has begotten a son
They have no knowledge about it, nor did their forefathers, this is a monstrous word that comes from their mouths. They speak nothing but a lie
O Muhammad! You probably will kill yourself in grief over them, if they do not believe in this Message (The Qur'an)
We have decked the earth with all kinds of ornaments to test the people and to see which of them do the best deeds
In the end We shall reduce all that is on it to a barren wasteland
Do you think that the Companions of the Cave and of Ar- Raqeem (this may refer to the name of their dog, or the tablet on which their names were inscribed or the mountain in which the cave is situated) were among Our wonderful signs
When those young men took refuge in the cave, they said "Our Lord! Have mercy on us from Yourself and guide us out of our ordeal
So We put upon their ears a cover (put them into a deep sleep) for a number of years in the cave
and then awakened them to find out which of the two parties (believers and nonbelievers who were arguing about the fact of life after death) could best tell the length of their stay
Now We tell you their real story. They were young men who believed in their Lord, and on them We had bestowed Our guidance
We put courage in their hearts when they stood up and declared: "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, we shall never appeal to any other deity except Him, for if we do, we shall be saying something improper
These people of ours have taken for worship other gods besides Him; if they are right, why do they not bring forth any convincing proof of their divinity? Who is more wicked than the one who invents a lie about Allah
Then in their mutual consultation they said: Now that we have withdrawn from them and denounced those deities whom they worship beside Allah, let us take refuge in some cave; our Lord will extend to us His mercy and facilitate us in disposing of our affairs
If you could look at them in the cave, it would appear to you that the rising sun declines to the right of their cavern, and as it sets, passes them on the left, while they lay in an open space in between. This is from the signs of Allah. He whom Allah guides is rightly guided; but he whom He lets go astray, you will find no guardian to lead him to the Right Way
If you could see them, you might have thought them awake, though they were asleep. We turned them about to their right and left sides, while their dog lay stretched out with his forepaws at the entrance. Had you looked at them you would have certainly turned your back and their sight would have made you flee in terror
In the same miraculous way We woke them up from sleep so that they could question one another. One of them asked: "How long have you been here?" The others answered: "Maybe we have been here for a day or part of a day." Finally they concluded: "Our Lord knows best how long we have stayed here. Anyhow let one of us go to the city with this silver coin, and let him find who has the purest food and bring us something to eat. Let him behave with caution and let him not disclose our whereabouts
For if they find you out, they will stone you to death, or force you back into their faith and in that case you will never attain felicity
Thus did We reveal their secret to the people so that they might know that the promise of Allah is true and that there is no doubt about the coming of the Hour of Judgment. (But what a pity that instead of considering the Hour of Judgment) they started arguing among themselves about the companions of the cave. Some said: "Erect an edifice over their remains." Their Lord is quite aware of them. Those who finally prevailed over their matter said: "Let us erect a place of worship over them
Now some will soon say: "They were three and their dog was the fourth." The others will guess: "They were five and their dog was the sixth," and there are still others who will say: "They were seven and their dog was the eighth." Say: "My Lord Alone knows their number. None but a few really know their correct number." Therefore, do not enter into discussion with them about their number except in a cursory way, nor ask anyone about the companions of the cave
Never say of anything "I will certainly do it tomorrow
without adding: "If Allah wills!" And if you forget to say this, then call your Lord to mind and say: "I hope that my Lord shall guide me and bring me ever closer than this to the Right Way
Some say they stayed in their cave three hundred years and some add another nine
O Prophet, say: "Allah knows best how long they stayed; He is the One Who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth; sharp is His sight and keen His hearing! They have no protector besides Him and He does not let anyone share in His command
O Prophet! Recite what has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord: no one is authorized to change His Words and if you dare to make any change, you will find no refuge to protect you from Him
Keep yourself content with those who call on their Lord morning and evening seeking His good pleasure; and let not your eyes turn away from them desiring the attraction of Worldly Life; nor obey the one whose heart We have permitted to neglect Our remembrance, who follows his own desires and goes to extremes in the conduct of his affairs
O Prophet proclaim: "This is the Truth from your Lord. Now let him who will, believe in it, and him who will, deny it." As for those who reject it, for such wrongdoers We have prepared a Fire whose flames will hem them in like the walls of a tent. When they cry for help, they will be showered with water as hot as molten brass, which will scald their faces. What a dreadful drink and what a horrible residence
As for those who believe and do good deeds, rest assured that We do not waste the reward of him who does a good work
They are the ones for whom there will be the Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow; they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold; they will wear green garments of fine silk and rich brocade and they will recline on soft couches. What an excellent reward and what a beautiful residence
O Prophet! Give them this parable. Once there were two men. To one of them We had given two gardens of grapevines surrounded with palm-trees and put between them land for cultivation
Both of those gardens yielded abundant produce and did not fail to yield its best. We had even caused a river to flow between the two gardens
He had abundant produce, he said to his companion while conversing with him: "I am richer than you and my clan is mightier than yours
When, having thus wronged his soul, he entered his garden and said: "I do not think that this garden will ever perish
Nor do I believe that the Hour of Judgment will ever come. Even if I am returned to my Lord, I will surely find even a better place than this
His companion replied while still conversing with him: "Do you disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust, from a drop of semen, and fashioned you into a perfect man
As for myself, Allah is the One Who is my Lord and I do not associate anyone with Him
When you entered your garden why did you not say: 'It is as Allah pleased; no one has power except Allah!' Though you see me poorer than yourself in wealth and children
yet my Lord may give me a garden better than yours, and may send down thunderbolts from sky upon your garden, turning it into a barren wasteland
Or its water may dry out and you may never be able to find it
It so happened that all his fruit produce was destroyed and the vines tumbled down upon their trellises, so he wrung his hands with grief for all that he had spent on it. He cried: "I wish I had not associated anyone with my Lord
He was so helpless that he could neither find anyone to help him besides Allah, nor could he himself avert that catastrophe
it was then that he realized that the real protection comes only from Allah. His is the best reward and His is the best requital
O Prophet! Give them the similitude of the life of this world. It is like the vegetation of the earth that flourishes with the rain from the sky, but afterwards the same vegetation turns into dry stubble which is blown away by the winds. Allah is the One Who has power over everything
Likewise, wealth and children are an attraction of this worldly life; yet honorable deeds that last forever are better rewarded by your Lord and hold for you a better hope of salvation
You should prepare for that Day when We will set the mountains in motion and you will see the earth as a barren waste; when We shall assemble mankind all together, leaving not even a single soul behind
They all will be brought before your Lord standing in rows and Allah will say: "Well! You see that you have returned to Us as We created you at first: even though you claimed that We had not fixed any time for the fulfillment of this promise of meeting with Us
Then the book of their deeds will be placed before them. At that time you will see the sinners in great terror because of what is recorded therein. They will say: "Woe to us! What kind of a book is this? It leaves out nothing small or large: all is noted down!" They will find all that they did recorded therein. Your Lord will not be unjust to anyone in the least
When We said to the angels: "Prostrate yourself before Adam," all prostrated themselves except Iblees (Satan), who was one of the Jinns and chose to disobey the command of his Lord. Would you then take him and his children as your protectors rather than Me, even though they are your enemies? What a bad substitute the wrongdoers have chosen
I did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation, nor do I take those who lead mankind astray as My supporters
On the Day of Judgment Allah will say to them: "Call on those whom you thought to be My partners." They will call them but will receive no answer; and We shall cause animosity between them
The criminals will see the fire and realize that they are going to fall into it; but will find no place to escape
We have given all kinds of examples in this Qur’an to make the people understand this Message, but man is exceedingly contentious
Nothing can prevent men from believing and seeking the forgiveness of their Lord now that Guidance has come to them, unless they are waiting for the fate of former peoples to overtake them or the scourge to be brought to them face to face
We send the Messengers only to proclaim good news and to give warnings but with false arguments the unbelievers seek to defeat the Truth, through mocking at My revelations and My warnings
Who is more unjust than the one who, when reminded of the revelations of his Lord, turns away from them and forgets what his own hands have done? In regards to such people, We have cast veils over their hearts, so they do not understand this Qur’an, and have become hard of hearing. Call them as you may towards the guidance, they will never be guided
Your Lord is Most Forgiving, the Lord of Mercy. Had it been His Will to seize them for their sins, He would have hastened their punishment, but for that there is an appointed time, after which they will not find any refuge
All those nations whom We destroyed for their wrongdoings were given respite and an appointed time for their destruction
Now tell them about the story of Khizr to whom Allah has given special knowledge. The Prophet Moses was asked to go to him and learn from him. When Moses set out to meet him at an appointed place, he said to his young servant: "I will not give up my journey until I reach the junction of the two rivers, even if I have to spend ages in travel
It so happened that when at last they reached the junction of the two rivers they forgot about the fish they were carrying, which made its way into the river, and disappeared
When they had passed on some distance, Moses asked his young servant: "Let us have our breakfast, really we are worn out with this travelling
He replied: "You know! I forgot to tell you about the fish, which made its way miraculously into the river, when we were resting beside that rock. It was Satan who made me forget to mention this incident to you
Moses said: "That is the place we were looking for," so they went back retracing their footsteps
There they found one of Our servants (Khizr) whom We had blessed with special favor from Ourselves and whom We had given special knowledge of Our own
Moses requested of him: "May I follow you so that you may teach me from that True Knowledge which you have been taught
He answered: "Surely you will not be able to bear with me
for how can you have patience about that which is beyond your knowledge
Moses said: "If Allah wills, you shall find me patient and I shall not disobey you in any way
He said: "If you want to follow me, then do not question me about anything until I tell you about it myself
So they set forth, but when they embarked in a boat to cross the river, Khizr made a hole in it. Moses cried out: "Did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers? You have done a weird thing
He said: "Didn’t I say that you would not manage to have patience with me
Moses said: "Pardon my forgetfulness, do not be angry with me on account of this mistake
So they journeyed on until they met a boy, and Khizr slew him. Moses said: "You have killed an innocent person though he had killed nobody. Surely you have done a horrible deed
Khizr said: "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me
Moses replied: "If ever I ask you about anything after this, you may not keep me in your company; for then I should deserve it because you will have an excuse in my case
They travelled on until they came to the people of a town. They asked them for some food, but they refused to receive them as their guests. There they found a wall on the point of falling down, so he restored it. Moses said: "If you wanted you could have demanded some payment for it
Khizr replied: "That's it, this is the parting between you and me. But first I will explain to you those acts of mine which you could not bear to watch with patience
As for the boat, it belonged to some poor fishermen who toiled on the river. I intended to damage it because in their rear there was a king who was seizing every boat by force
As for the youth, his parents are true believers, and we feared lest he would grieve them with his rebellion and unbelief
It was our wish that our Lord should grant them another in his place, a son more righteous and better in affection
As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city and beneath it their treasure was buried. Since their father was a righteous man, your Lord desired that these children should attain their maturity and take out their treasure. All this was done as a mercy from your Lord. What I did was not done by my own will. That is the interpretation of those actions which you could not bear to watch with patience
O Muhammad, they ask you about Zul-Qarnain. Say "I will recite to you some of his story
Indeed We established his power in the land and We gave him all kinds of ways and means
So one time he followed a certain expedition towards the West and he marched on
till he reached the end of the land and the start of an ocean, where the Sun was setting, he noted that it was setting in a mucky spring and found by it a people. We said: "O Zul-Qarnain! You have the option to either punish them or to show them kindness
He said: "Anyone Who will do wrong shall be punished; then will he return to his Lord and be sternly punished by Him
As for him who believes and does good deeds, he will have a good reward and will be assigned an easy task by our command
Then he set out on another expedition towards the East and marched on
till he came to the rising of the Sun, he noted it rising on a people for whom We had not provided any shelter from it (they were so backward that they did not even know how to make houses or tents for their living)
He left them as they were: We had full knowledge what priority was before him
Then he set out on another expedition and marched on
till he reached between two mountains where he found a people who could hardly understand his language
They requested: "O Zul-Qarnain! People of Gog and Magog ravage this land; should we pay you tribute in order for you to build a wall-barrier between us and them
Zul-Qarnain said: "That which my Lord has granted me is more than enough, just help me with worker-force and I will erect a fortified barrier between you and them
Bring me panels of iron." Finally when he had dammed up the space between the two mountains, he said: "Ply your bellows." They did so until the iron wall became red hot, then he said: "Bring me some molten brass to pour over it
This became such a barrier that Gog and Magog could not scale it or to dig through it
He said: "This is a blessing from my Lord. But you should know that when the promise of my Lord shall come to pass, He will level it to the ground, for the promise of my Lord is ever true
On that Day We shall let the people loose to surge like waves on one another. The trumpet will be blown and We shall assemble the mankind all together
We shall spread Hell out on display before the unbelievers
who had turned a blind eye to My admonition and a deaf ear to My warning
Do the unbelievers think that they can take my servants as protectors, to save themselves from Hell, instead of Me? Certainly We have prepared Hell for the entertainment of such unbelievers
O Muhammad tell them: "Should we tell you the worst kind of losers relating to their deeds
Those whose all efforts in this worldly life had gone astray from the Right Way, but all along they were under the delusion that they were doing good deeds
they are the ones who are disregarding the revelations of their Lord and the fact that they will meet Him for accountability of their deeds in the Hereafter, so their deeds will become null and will not carry any weight on the Day of Judgment
Thus the reward of such people will be Hell; because they had no faith and because they took My revelations and My Messengers as a joke
However, those who believe and do good deeds, they will be entertained with the Gardens of Paradise
to live therein for ever and they will never desire to go anywhere else
O Muhammad tell them: "If the ocean were ink with which to write the words of my Lord, the ocean would surely be consumed before the words of my Lord are finished, even if We brought similar quantity of ink to replenish it
O Muhammad, tell them: "I am but a human being like you; the revelation is sent to me to declare that your God is One God; therefore, whoever hopes to meet his Lord, let him do good deeds and join no other deity in the worship of his Lord
Kaf Ha' Ya' ‘Ayn Suad
This is a reminder of blessings that your Lord bestowed on His servant Zakariya
when he invoked his Lord in secret
saying: "O Lord! Surely my bones have weakened and the hair of my head glistens with grey, while I have never been disappointed in my prayer to You, O Lord
Surely, I fear about my relatives after me, for my wife is barren, grant me a heir by Your grace
who should inherit me and inherit the posterity of Jacob, and make him, O my Lord, a desirable person
We answered his prayer saying: "O Zakariya! Surely We give you the good news of a son, his name shall be John: a name that no one has had before him
He asked: "O Lord! How shall I have a son when my wife is barren and I have become impotent from old age
The answer came: "So shall it be. Your Lord says: ‘It shall not be a difficult task for Me, just as I created you before, when you were nothing at all
Zakariya said "O my Lord! Give me a Sign". He said: "Your sign is that for three nights you shall not be able to speak to the people even being sound in health
After this Zakariya came out of the shrine and asked his people, through sign language, to glorify Allah in the morning and in the evening
To John, when he became old enough, We said: " Hold firmly to the Book." We granted him wisdom, while he was yet a boy
and also granted him kindness and purity by Our grace, and he grew up a pious man
dutiful to his parents - he was neither arrogant nor disobedient
Peace be on him the day he was born, the day of his death and the Day he will be raised to life again
O Muhammad, relate to them the story of Mary in the Book (The Qur'an) when she withdrew from her family to a place in the East
She chose to be secluded from them. We sent to her Our angel and he appeared before her as a grown man
She said: "I seek Rahman’s (Allah’s) protection against you, leave me alone if you are Godfearing
He said: "Don’t be afraid, I am merely a messenger from your Lord to tell you about the gift of a holy son
She said: "How shall I bear a son, no man has ever touched me nor am I unchaste
The angel replied: "So shall it be -Your Lord says: `It is easy for Me. We wish to make him a Sign for mankind and a blessing from Us’ - and this matter has already been decreed
So she conceived the child and she retired with him to a remote place
The pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree. She cried in her anguish: "Ah! Would that I had died before this, and been long forgotten
An angel from beneath the palm-tree consoled her, saying: "Do not grieve! Your Lord has provided a brook at your feet
If you shake the trunk of this palm-tree, it will drop fresh ripe dates in your lap
So eat, drink and refresh yourself. If you see anyone, tell him: `I have vowed a fast to Rahman (Allah), so I will not speak to anyone today’
Carrying the baby, she came back to her people. They said: "O Mary! You have brought something hard to believe
O sister (a woman from the noble family) of Haroon! Your father was not a bad man nor your mother an unchaste woman
In response she merely pointed towards the baby. They said: "How can we talk to a babe in the cradle
Whereupon the baby spoke out: "I am indeed a servant of Allah. He has given me the Book and made me a Prophet
His blessing is with me wherever I go. He has commanded me to establish Salah and give Zakah as long as I shall live
He has exhorted me to honor my mother and has not made me domineering, hard to deal with
Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I shall die and the Day I shall be raised to life again
Such was Jesus the son of Mary, and this is the True statement about him concerning which they are in doubt
It is not befitting to the majesty of Allah that He Himself should beget a son! He is far above this; for when He decrees a matter He need only say: "Be" and it is
Jesus declared, Verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord: therefore serve Him. This is the Right Way
Inspite of this, the sects from among them are divided concerning Jesus. So woe to the disbelievers who shall be punished after witnessing this Truth on the Great Day of Judgement
They will be able to see and hear very clearly on that Day when they will appear before Us! But today these wrong doers, neither want to hear nor see the Truth and, are in manifest error
O Muhammad, forewarn them about the Day of intense regret when this matter will be decided, even though at present they are paying no heed and do not believe
Ultimately, all things will perish and it is We, Who will inherit the earth and all that is on it, and to Us shall they return
Relate to them the story of Abraham from the Book (The Qur'an), he was a truthful Prophet
Remember when he said to his father: "O my father! Why do you worship something that can neither hear nor see, nor yet profit you in any way
O my father! I have been given some knowledge which has not come to you, so follow me: I’ll guide you to the Right Way
O my father! Do not worship Satan: for Satan is disobedient to the Compassionate (Allah)
O my father! I fear that a punishment of the Beneficent may afflict you, and you may become a friend of the Satan
His father replied: "How dare you renounce my gods O Abraham? If you do not stop this folly, I will indeed stone you to death: so begone from my house this very moment
Abraham said: "Peace be upon you: I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness, surely He is ever Kind to me
I am leaving you and those whom you invoke besides Allah: I will call upon my Lord and I am sure my prayers to my Lord will not be ignored
So when he left them and the deities whom they worshipped besides Allah, We granted him descendants like Isaac and Jacob, and We made each of them a Prophet
We bestowed on them Our Mercy and We granted them the honor of being mentioned with true high respect
Relate to them the story of Moses in the Book; surely he was a chosen man and was a Messenger, a Prophet
We called him from the right side of Mount Tur and honored him to come closer for exclusive conversation
We made his brother Haroon a Prophet with Our blessing and assigned him as his assistant
Also relate to them the story of Ishmael in the Book; he was a man of his word and was a Messenger, a Prophet
He commanded his people to establish Salah and give Zakah, and was the one with whom his Lord was well pleased
Also relate to them the story of Idris in the Book; he was a Truthful man, a Prophet
whom We raised to a lofty place
These are some of the Prophets on whom Allah bestowed His favors from among the descendants of Adam and of those whom We carried in the Ark with Noah, and of the descendants of Abraham and Israel, and of those whom We guided and chose. Whenever the Revelations of the Compassionate (Allah) were recited to them, they fell to prostrate and weep
But the generations who succeeded them abandoned the Salah and started following their lusts; so they will soon face the consequences of their deviation
However, those who repent, become believers and do good deeds, will be admitted to Paradise and will not be wronged in the least
They will be granted the Gardens of Eden which the Merciful has promised to His servants, even though they have not seen them, and His promise shall be fulfilled
There they will hear no nonsense, but only the words of peace; and they will be provided their sustenance day and night
Such is the Paradise which We shall give as an inheritance to those of Our Servants who lead a pious life
The angel Gabriel who brought this revelation after a long interval said: "We do not descend from heaven except by the command of your Lord; to Him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and all that lies in between. Your Lord is never forgetful
He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and of all that lies in between, so worship Him, be steadfast in His worship. Do you know any other being with the qualities like Him
Man says: "What! Once I am dead, shall I be raised to life again
Does not man remember that We created him before out of nothing
By your Lord, We will call them to account in the company of all their Satans and set them on their knees around the Fire of Hell
then from every sect We will certainly drag out its stoutest rebels against the Compassionate (Allah)
Certainly We know best who deserves most to be burned therein
There is not a single one of you, who shall not pass over it, this absolute decree of your Lord is unavoidable
then We will deliver those who were pious and leave the wrongdoers therein humbled on their knees
When Our Clear Revelations are recited to them the unbelievers say to the believer: "Which one, of the two of us, have fine dwelling and better companions
Don’t they see, how many generations have We destroyed before them, who were far greater in riches and in splendor
Tell them: "Anyone who has gone astray, the Compassionate (Allah) prolongs his respite and extends an opportunity until they see about which they were warned; - be it a worldly scourge or the Hour of Doom - then they will realize whose is the worst dwelling and whose are the weak companions
In fact, Allah increases in guidance those who seek guidance; everlasting are only the good deeds, which are the best in the sight of your Lord to earn you a better reward and yield you the best fruit
Have you noticed the words of that person who rejects Our Revelations yet boasts: "I shall always be given wealth and children
Has he gained knowledge of the Unseen or has he been awarded a contract by the Compassionate (Allah)
By no means! We write down what he says and We will make his punishment long and terrible
We will inherit all that he boasts of, and he will come back to Us all alone leaving all these things behind
They have taken other deities for worship besides Allah, so that they should be a source of strength to them
By no means! Those very deities will renounce their worship and turn against them
Don’t you see that We have sent down to the unbelievers Satans who incite them against the Truth
Therefore be not in haste against them, their days are numbered
The Day will surely come when We will gather the righteous like honored guests before the Compassionate (Allah)
and drive the criminals to Hell like thirsty cattle are driven to water
None shall have the power to intercede except the one who may receive the sanction of the Compassionate (Allah)
Those who say: "The Compassionate (God) has begotten a son
certainly preach such a monstrous falsehood
that the very Heavens might crack, the earth might cleave asunder and the mountains might crumble to pieces
at their ascribing a son to the Compassionate (God)
It is not befitting to the Compassionate (God) that He should beget a son
There is none in the heavens and in the earth but must come to the Compassionate (Allah) in full submission
He has a comprehensive knowledge and has kept strict count of all His creatures
and every one of them will come to Him individually on the Day of Resurrection
Surely the Beneficent will bring about love for those who believe and do good deeds
We have made this Qur’an easy in your own language so that you may give good news to the righteous and warn the headstrong contentious folk
How many generations have We destroyed before them! Can you see any of them, or hear even a sound of them
Tua Ha
We have not sent down this Qur’an to put you to trouble
but as a reminder to those who fear Allah
This is a revelation from Him Who has created the earth and the lofty Heavens
the Beneficent (Allah) Who is firmly established on the throne of authority
to Him belongs whatever is in the Heavens and in the earth, and all that lies between them, and all that is beneath the soil
The One to Whom you need not speak aloud; for He knows what is said in secret and what is yet more hidden
He is Allah! There is no deity worthy of worship except Him! To Him belong the most beautiful Names
Have you heard the story of Moses
When he saw a fire, he said to his family: "Wait! I saw a fire. I may be able to bring some fire or find someone beside the fire to guide us towards the right direction
When he reached there, he was called: "O Moses
In fact, I am your Lord! Take off your shoes, you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa
I have chosen you, so listen to what I am about to reveal
It is Me, Allah; there is none worthy of worship except Me, so worship Me and establish Salah for My remembrance
The final Hour is sure to come, I choose to keep it hidden, so that every soul may be rewarded according to its efforts
Therefore, let not any, who does not believe in this fact and follow his own desires, turn your away, lest you should perish
O Moses what is in your right hand
Moses replied: "It is my staff; I lean on it, I beat down fodder with it for my flocks and I have also other uses for it
Allah said "Toss it down O Moses
So he tossed it down and saw that it became a snake active in motion
Allah said: "Catch it and don’t be afraid, We shall change it to its original shape
Now put your hand under your armpit, it shall become shining white without hurting you, this will be another Sign
These miracles are given to you, in order to show you some of Our Great Signs
Now go to Pharoah (Pharaoh) for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
Moses prayed: "O Lord! Open my heart
ease my task
and remove the impediment from my speech
so that people may understand what I say
and grant me a minister from my family
Haroon my brother
Grant me strength through him
and let him share my task
so that we may glorify You frequently
and mention You often
for You are the One Who has always been watching over us
Allah responded: "Your request is granted, O Moses
We had indeed bestowed a favor on you before
when We revealed Our will to your mother saying
Put your child into the chest and throw the chest into the river. The river will cast him on to the bank and he will be picked up by one who is an enemy to Me and an enemy to him.' I made you an object of love and so arranged things that you may be brought up under My supervision
Recall when your sister went to them and said: 'May I tell you of the one who can take care of this child?’ Thus did We return you back to your mother to comfort her eyes and that she might not grieve. Again when you killed a man, We saved you from great distress and We tested you through various trials. You stayed a number of years with the people of Median. Now you have come here per Our pre-ordainment, O Moses
I have molded you for My service
You and your brother should go with My Signs and do not neglect to mention Me
Go both of you to Pharoah, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
Speak to him in gentle words; perhaps he may take heed of the reminder or fear Our punishment
Moses and Haroon said: "Our Lord! We fear that he may behave towards us unjustly or may cross all bounds
Allah said: "Do not be afraid, I shall be with you both. I hear everything and see everything
So go to him and say 'Surely we both are Messengers of your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with us and oppress them no more. We have brought you a Sign from your Lord; may peace be upon him who follows the guidance
Indeed it has been revealed to us that the scourge will fall on those who deny this fact and turn away’
When Moses and Haroon went to Pharoah and delivered this message , he said: "Well, who is your Lord O Moses
Moses replied: "Our Lord is He Who has given a distinctive form to all creatures and then rightly guided them
Pharoah asked: "What do you say about the condition of previous generations
Moses replied: "That knowledge is with my Lord, duly recorded in a Book. He neither makes a mistake nor does He forget
He is the One Who has made the earth a cradle for you, traced the roads on it for you to walk on; and sends down water from the sky with which We produce pairs of various kinds of vegetation
eat from these yourselves and pasture your cattle. Surely there are Signs in it for those who use their brains
We have created you from the earth, into it We shall return you and from it We shall bring you back to life once again
We showed Pharoah all kinds of Our Signs, but he denied them and gave no heed
He said: "Have you come to drive us out of our land with your magic O Moses
Well, we will confront you with magic to match yours! Let us fix a day when both of us should meet, neither we nor you shall fail to keep it, in a place where both shall have even chances
Moses replied: "Let it be the Day of Festival and let the people be assembled before noon
Pharoah then withdrew, concerted his plan and came back
Moses addressed them saying: "Woe to you for this challenge! Do not forge a lie against Allah by calling it a magic, lest He destroy you by a scourge; for whosoever forges a lie will indeed be disappointed
Hearing this, they debated their case among themselves, whispering to one another
Finally they said: "These two (Moses and Haroon) are certainly expert magicians who intend to drive you out from your land with their magic and to do away with your best traditions
Therefore, muster up all devices and face them with a united front." Finally when the day of confrontation came, Pharoah said: " Whoever comes out victorious this day shall prevail
The magicians said: "O Moses! Will you throw down first or shall we
Moses replied: "Go ahead, throw down first." Suddenly it appeared to Moses as if their cords and staffs were moving about because of their magic
and Moses conceived fear within himself
We said: "Do not be afraid! You will surely come out on top
Throw that which is in your right hand. It will swallow up all that they have produced. What they have produced is nothing but a magician’s trick, and a magician can never succeed against a miracle no matter how skillful he may be
When the magicians saw the serpent of Moses swallowing all their display, being professionals they knew that it was not magic, so the magicians humbled themselves by prostrating and said: "We believe in the Lord of Haroon and Moses
Pharoah said: "How do you dare to believe in Him without my permission? This man must be your master, who taught you witchcraft. Well, I will cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides and crucify you on trunks of palm-trees; then you will know which one of us can give a more terrible and more lasting punishment
The magicians replied: "We can never prefer you, rather we prefer the miracle which we have witnessed and Him Who has created us. Therefore do whatever you will; you can only punish us in this worldly life
As for us, we have believed in our Lord so that He may forgive us our sins and the magic you have forced us to practice. Better is the ever lasting reward of Allah
Surely he who will come to his Lord as a sinner shall be consigned to Hell - wherein he shall neither die nor live
While he who will come to Him as a believer and has done good deeds shall have the highest ranks
Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever; such is the reward of those who purify themselves from evil
We sent Our revelation to Moses, saying: "Set forth with my servants at night and strike a dry path for them through the sea without fear of being overtaken by Pharoah and without any fear while passing through the sea
Pharoah followed them with his armies but the waters completely overwhelmed them and covered them up
Thus Pharoah misled his people instead of guiding them aright
O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, We fixed a time to grant you The Torah on the right side of Mount Tur and We sent down to you Manna (sweet dish) and Salva (quail meat)
saying: "Eat of the good things We have provided for your sustenance and do not transgress, lest you should incur My wrath, and whoever incurs My wrath, is surely bound to perish
but the one who repents, becomes a believer, does good deeds and follows the Right Way shall be forgiven
When Moses came to mount Tur, Allah said: "But, why have you come with such a haste ahead of your people, O Moses
He replied: "They are close behind me, I hastened to You O Lord so that You may be pleased
Allah said: "Well, listen! We tested your people after you and the Samiri (Samaritan) has led them astray
So Moses returned to his people in a state of anger and sorrow. He said: "O my people! Did your Lord not make a gracious promise to you? Did my absence seem too long to you? Or was it to incur the wrath of your Lord that you broke your promise with me
They replied: "We broke the promise through no fault of ours. We were made to carry the burden of the peoples' ornaments and throw them into the fire, thus Samiri suggested, who threw in something
and forged a calf in the shape of a body which produced the mooing sound. Then they cried out: 'This is your god and the god of Moses, but Moses forgot to mention it to you
What! Could they not see that it did not respond to them and that it could neither harm them nor help them
Haroon had already told them: "O my people! This is but a test for you; for verily your Lord is the Rahman (Allah): so follow me and do as I command you
They had replied: "We will not abandon its worship until Moses’s return
Then Moses addressed Haroon: " O Haroon! What prevented you from following me, when you saw them going astray?* Why did you disobey me
Haroon replied: "O son of my mother! Do not seize me by my beard nor pull the hair of my head, in fact I was afraid lest you might say: 'You have caused a division, through civil war, among the Children of Israel and did not respect what I said, ‘to keep peace’
Then Moses addressed Samiri: "Now what you have to say about this, O Samiri
He replied: "I saw what they did not see, so I took a handful of dust from the footprint of the Messenger (Angel Gabriel) and threw it into the casting of the calf: thus did my soul prompt me
Moses cursed him: "Get out of here! Now through out your life, you will say to other people: 'Touch me not’; and you will not escape your appointed doom. Behold this god to whom you had become a devoted worshipper: we will burn it and scatter its ashes into the sea
Then he addressed his people: "O my people! Your only God is Allah, other than Whom there is no god. His knowledge encompasses every thing
Then he addressed his people: "O my people! Your only God is Allah, other than Whom there is no god. His knowledge encompasses every thing
Thus do We relate to you, O Muhammad, some information of the past events; and indeed We have sent you this Reminder (The Qur’an) from Our Own Self
Those who reject it, shall bear a heavy burden on the Day of Resurrection
For ever shall they bear it, and it will be indeed a very evil burden to bear on the Day of Resurrection
The Day, when the Trumpet will be blown and We shall assemble all the sinners, their eyes will turn blue with terror
They shall murmur among themselves: "You hardly lived ten days on earth
We know fully well what they will say; the most careful estimator among them will say: "No, you stayed no longer than a day
They ask you as to what will happen to the mountains. Tell them: "My Lord will crush and scatter them like a fine dust
He will turn the earth into a plain leveled ground
wherein you will not see neither any curve nor crease
On that Day the people will follow the call of the Caller, no one will dare show any crookedness; their voices hushed before the Beneficent (Allah), and you shall hear nothing but the sound of the marching feet
On that Day, no intercession will avail except the one to whom the Beneficent (Allah) shall grant permission and would like to give him a hearing
He knows what is before them and what is behind them while they do not encompass any knowledge about Him
Their faces shall be humbled before the Ever-Living, the Ever-existent (Allah). The one who is carrying the burden of iniquity will be doomed
but the one who is a believer and does good deeds shall fear no tyranny or injustice
Thus have we sent down this Qur’an in Arabic and clearly proclaimed in it some of the warnings so that they may take heed or that it may serve as a reminder to them
High and exalted be Allah, the True King! Do not hasten to recite the Qur’an before its revelation is completely conveyed to you, and then say: "O Lord! Increase my knowledge
We had taken a covenant from Adam before, but he forgot. We did not find in him firm determination
When We said to the angels "Prostrate yourselves before Adam," they all prostrated themselves except Iblees (Satan), who refused
Then We said: "O Adam! This Satan is a real enemy to you and to your wife. Do not let him get you both out of Paradise and get you in trouble
Here in Paradise you shall go neither hungry nor naked
you shall neither suffer from thirst nor from the scorching heat
But Satan seduced him saying: "O Adam! Should I show you the Tree of Immortality and an everlasting kingdom
They both ended up eating the fruit of the forbidden tree. As a result their private parts became apparent to them and they both began to cover themselves with the leaves from the Garden. Thus did Adam disobey His Lord and go astray
Later on Adam repented and his Lord chose him, accepted his repentance and gave him guidance
saying: "Get down from here all of you (Adam, Eve and Iblees); you will remain enemies to one another, whenever there comes to you guidance from Me and whosoever will follow My guidance will neither go astray nor get into trouble
but the one who will turn away from My reminder shall live a meager life and We shall raise him back to life as a blind person on the Day of Resurrection
He will say: "O Lord! Why have you raised me up blind here, while I was clear-sighted before
Allah will say: "Just as Our revelation came to you and you played blind; so are you blind today
Thus do We reward the one who is a transgressor and does not believe in the revelations of his Lord. The punishment of the Hereafter is more terrible and more lasting
Have these people not learned a lesson, that We have destroyed before them many generations in whose ruins they walk through? Certainly in these ruins there are Signs for people of understanding
Had it not been already decreed by your Lord and a term for respite been appointed, they would have been punished
Therefore be patient with what they say. Glorify your Lord with His praise before sunrise and before sunset, glorify Him during the hours of the night as well as at the ends of the day, so that you may find satisfaction
Do not strain your eyes with envy regarding the worldly benefits We have bestowed on some among them, for with these We seek to test them, the lawful provision of your Lord is better and more lasting
Enjoin Salah on your people and be diligent in its observance. We demand nothing of you; instead We provide you sustenance. Blessed shall be the end of the Righteous
They say: "Why does he (Muhammad) not bring us a Sign from His Lord?" Has not a clear Sign (The Qur’an) come to them containing all the teachings of the former Scriptures
Had We destroyed them as punishment before its revelation, they would have said: "Our Lord! If only You had sent us a Messenger, we would certainly have followed Your revelations before being humiliated and disgraced
Say: "All are waiting: so wait if you will. Very soon you shall find out, who is following the Right Way and who has been rightly guided
The Day of Accountability for mankind is getting closer and closer, yet they are heedless and are turning away from the admonition
They listen with ridicule to each fresh warning that comes to them from their Lord and remain engaged in the sports
Their hearts are preoccupied with worldly affairs; these wrongdoers say to each other in private: "Is this man (Muhammad) not a human being like yourselves? Would you follow witchcraft with your eyes open
Tell them: "My Lord has knowledge of every word which is spoken in the heavens and the earth, and He hears all and knows all
Rather, some of them say, "this Qur’an is jumble of dreams!" Others say: "He has made it all up!" And yet others say: "He is a poet!" Let him bring to us a sign as did the former Messengers
The fact, however, is that even though We showed Signs to the prior people, not a single nation before them, which We destroyed, ever believed. Will they believe
The Messengers which We sent before you, O Muhammad, were also human to whom We sent revelation. If you, O objectors, do not know this, then ask the people of the reminder (Jews and Christians)
We did not give them bodies which could survive without food, nor were they immortal
Then We fulfilled Our promise with them: We saved them and those whom We pleased, and destroyed the transgressors
Now, O People, We have sent down to you a Book (The Qur’an) which deals with matters concerning yourselves; why don’t you understand
How many nations We have destroyed because of their iniquities and replaced them by other nations
When they felt that Our punishment was coming, they took to their heels and fled
They were told: "Do not run away. Return to your luxuries of life and to your homes, so that you may be asked questions
They replied: "Woe to us! Indeed we were wrongdoers
They kept on repeating that statement till We mowed them down, leaving no spark of life in them
Our creation of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them is not a game
Had We meant to make it a play ground, We would have done it by Ourself, without giving you discretion to do right and wrong, had We ever done so
Nay! We give falsehood a violent blow with the Truth to knock it out and behold! Falsehood vanishes away. Woe be to you, for all the false gods you have invented
To Him belongs all that exists in the heavens and in the earth; and the angels, who are in His very presence, are not too proud to serve Him, nor do they feel wearied of His service
They glorify Him night and day; and do not pause
Have the earthly deities, that they have taken for worship, the power to raise the dead
If there were other gods in the heavens or in the earth besides Allah, both the heavens and earth would have been in a state of disorder. Glory be to Allah, the Lord of the Throne, absolutely free is He from the falsehood that they attribute to Him
He is accountable to none about what He does, but they are accountable to Him
Even then, have they taken other deities for worship besides Him? Ask them: "Show us your proof: here is this reminder (Al-Qur’an) for the people of my time and it also contains the reminder of those before me." But most of them have no knowledge of Reality, and that is why they have turned away
The fact is that to every Messenger whom We sent before you, We revealed the same Message: "There is no god but Me, so worship Me Alone
In spite of receiving that message, they still say: "The Beneficent (Allah) has offspring!" Glory be to Him! The angels are but His honored servants
They do not precede Him in speaking and they act according to His commandment
He knows what is before them and what is behind them and they do not intercede except for the one whom He approves, and for fear of Him they tremble
If any of them were to say: "I am also a deity besides Him," We would send him to hell, thus shall We reward the wrongdoers
Have not the unbelievers ever considered that the skies and the earth were once one mass, then We split them asunder? And We have created every living thing from water. Will they still not believe
And We have planted mountains on earth lest it should tilt to one side with them (the weight of people) and We left between them open passages so that they may find the right direction
And We have made the sky a safe canopy: yet they are heedless to these signs
He is the One Who has created the night and the day and the sun and the moon: all (the celestial bodies) move swiftly in an orbit of their own
O Muhammad, We have not granted immortality to any human before you: so if you are to die, will these unbelievers live forever
Every soul is bound to have the taste of death. We are putting all of you to a test by passing you through bad and good conditions, and finally you shall return to Us
When the unbelievers see you they do not take you but for one to be scoffed at, saying: "Is this the one who talks against your gods?" And they themselves deny the mention of the Compassionate (Allah)
Man is a creature of haste (impatience). Soon I will show you My signs, therefore, you need not be impatient
They ask: "When will this promise be fulfilled if you are telling the truth
They would not have asked this question if only the unbelievers knew the Day when they will be able to protect neither their faces from the fire of hell nor their backs, nor will they be helped
Nay, it will come to them all of a sudden and overpower them so abruptly that they shall neither be able to avert it nor shall they get any respite
As for their scoffing, the Messengers before you were also scoffed at; but their scoffers were hemmed in by the very thing at which they used to scoff
Ask them, "Who is there to protect you by night and by day from the wrath of the Compassionate?" Yet they turn away from the admonition of their Lord
Do they have such gods who can defend them against Us? Their gods can neither help themselves nor can they protect themselves from Us
The fact is that We gave the good things of this life to them and their forefathers until they got used to these things because of their prolonged lives; can they not see how We gradually reduce the land which was in their control and curtail it from all sides? Do they still expect to be victorious against Us
Tell them, "I am warning you on the authority of Revelation," but the deaf choose not to listen the call when they are warned
Yet even if a breath from the Wrath of your Lord was to touch them, they will certainly say, "Woe to us! No doubt we were wrongdoers
On the Day of Judgement We shall set up scales of justice so that no one will be dealt with unjustly in any way; even if someone has an act as small as a grain of a mustard seed, We will bring it to account, and sufficient are We to settle the accounts
Certainly, We granted to Moses and Haroon (Aaron) the Criterion of right and wrong, a light and a reminder for those righteous people
who fear their Lord though they have not seen Him, and dread the Day of Judgment
And now We have revealed this blessed Reminder (The Qur’an). Will you then deny it
Even before that We blessed Abraham with rectitude, for We knew him well
Remember that occasion when Abraham asked his father and his people, "What are these images to which you are so devoted
They replied, "We found our forefathers worshipping them
He said "Then certainly both you and your forefathers have been in manifest error
They asked, "Have you brought us the Truth or are you one of the triflers
He replied, "Nay! Your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. It is He Who has created them; and I am of those who bear witness to this
By Allah! I will certainly plan against your idols when you turn and go away
So he broke them all in pieces, except the biggest of them, so that they might turn to it
(On their return when they saw the plight of their idols), some asked, "Who has done this to our gods? He must surely be a wicked person
Others replied, "We heard a youth, called Abraham, talking about them
They said, "Then bring him here before the eyes of the people, so that they may witness how severely he is punished
When Abraham came, they asked, "O Abraham, are you the one who has done this to our gods
He replied, "Surely someone has done it; the chief of them, that is! Ask them, if they can speak
Thereupon they turned to search their own consciences, and said to themselves, "Surely you yourselves are the wrongdoers
Confounded as they were, lowering their heads they said, "You know fully well that they cannot speak
At this Abraham said, "Do you then worship these deities, instead of Allah, who can neither benefit nor harm you
Shame on you and on those deities you worship besides Allah! Have you no sense at all
They cried, "Burn him alive and avenge your gods, if you want to take any action
When they threw him in the fire, We commanded, "O fire! Be cool and comfortable for Abraham
They sought to harm him, but We made them the big losers
We delivered him and his nephew Lot and directed them to the land which We have blessed for all the people of the world
We gave him a son Isaac and then a grandson Jacob; and We made each of them a righteous man
We made them leaders who guided other people by Our command and We sent them revelations to do good deeds, establish Salah and pay Zakah. To Us Alone did they serve
To Lot We gave wisdom and knowledge, and We delivered him from the town which practiced abominations - surely its inhabitants were very wicked transgressors
and We admitted him to Our mercy: for he was of the righteous people
Before them Noah prayed to Us, We accepted his prayer and delivered him and his family from the great calamity
We helped him against those people who had denied Our revelations; surely they were an evil people, so We drowned them all in the Great Flood
We also bestowed favors upon Davidand Solomon: when the two were judging a case regarding the field into which the sheep of certain people had strayed by night, and We were watching them to arrive at judgment
at that time We gave Solomon insight to arrive at the right decision, although We had given wisdom and knowledge to both of them. We caused the mountains and the birds to celebrate Our praises with David; it was We Who made this happen
We taught him the armor’s craft, so that they might protect you in your wars: yet are you ever grateful
We made the raging winds subservient to Solomon, pursuing its course by his command to the land which We had blessed; and We have knowledge of everything
And We had subjected to him many of the Satans who dived for him into the sea and performed other duties besides this; and We were the One Who had control over them for him
Similarly We blessed Job, when he prayed to his Lord saying, "I am badly afflicted with disease: but of all those who show mercy You are the most Merciful
We accepted his prayer and relieved his affliction, and restored not only his family but also as many more with them as a favor from Us so that it may serve as a reminder to Our worshippers
Likewise, We blessed Isma‘il (Ishmael), Idris and Zul-kifl, for all of them practised patience
We admitted them to Our Mercy, for they were of the righteous people
We blessed Zun-nun (Jonah / Jonah), when he departed in anger, thinking We would not take him to task for this, but later he prayed to Us from the depths of darkness, "There is no god but You, glory be to You! Indeed I was the one who committed wrong
We accepted his prayer and delivered him from distress; thus do We deliver the believers
We also blessed Zakariya, when he prayed to his Lord, "O my Lord! Do not let me remain childless even though You are the best of inheritors
We accepted his prayer and gave him John, curing his wife for him to bear a child. They were ever quick in emulating good deeds and called on Us with hope, fear, and submission
And We blessed the woman (Mary), who guarded her chastity, We breathed into her of Our Spirit and We made her and her son a sign for the whole world
Verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood and I am your only Lord, therefore worship Me Alone
But the people have divided their religion into sects between them- to Us they shall all return
Whoever shall do good deeds, provided he is a believer, his endeavor will not be rejected: We are recording it all for him
It is not possible that a nation which We have destroyed may rise again
Until, when Gog and Magog will be let loose and they will swiftly swarm from every height
and the time of fulfillment for the True Promise will draw near, then behold! The eyes of the unbelievers will fixedly stare in horror: "O woe to us! We were indeed heedless of this warning; nay we were wrongdoers
Surely you (O pagans) and your deities that you worship besides Allah shall be the fuel of hell; therein you shall all enter
If those deities would have been true gods, they would not have gotten there; but there they shall abide forever
In there, sobbing will be their lot, and they will not be able to hear anything else
Certainly those for whom the good reward from Us has preceded them will be kept far away from it
They shall not hear even its slightest sound, and they shall dwell forever in the midst of whatever their souls desire
The time of Great Terror (Day of Judgement) will not grieve them, and the angels will receive them with greetings: "This is your Day that you were promised
On that Day We shall roll up the heavens like a scroll of writings; just as We originated the first creation, so shall We produce it again - that is Our promise, and We will fulfill it
We wrote this in The Zaboor (Psalms xxxvii, 29) after the reminder (Torah given to Moses): that as for the land, My righteous servants shall inherit it
Surely in this is great news for those people who worship Us
O Muhammad, We have not sent you but as a blessing for all the worlds
Tell them: "It has been revealed to me that your God is One God - will you then become Muslims
If they give no heed, tell them: "I have warned you all alike in complete fairness; now I do not know whether what you are threatened with is near or far
It is He Who knows your spoken words and hidden thoughts
I do not know whether this delay is a trial for you or you are being given respite for an appointed time
Finally the Prophet said: "O Lord! Pass Your Judgment with fairness. And O People! Our Lord is most Compassionate, Whose help we seek against the blasphemies you utter
O mankind! Have fear of your Lord; the catastrophic quaking of the Hour of Doom will be terrible indeed
On that Day you shall see that every nursing mother will forget her nursing-babe and every pregnant female will miscarry, and you will see people as if they are intoxicated, though they will not be drunk: such will be the horror of Allah’s chastisement
Yet there are some among people, who in their ignorance, argue about Allah and follow every rebellious devil
though they are doomed to seduce whoever takes them as their friends and lead him to the punishment of burning fire
O mankind! If you doubt that there is life after death remember that We first created you from dust, then from a sperm, then from a leech- like mass, then from a morsel of flesh, partly formed and partly unformed, so that We may manifest to you Our power. We cause to remain in the womb whom We wish for an appointed term, and then We bring you forth as infants; then We nourish you so that you may reach your age of full strength. There are some of you who die young and some who live on to their abject old age when all that they once knew they know no more. You sometimes see the land dry and barren; but no sooner do We pour down rain upon it then it begins to stir and swell, putting forth every kind of beautiful growth in pairs
This is because Allah is the Reality: it is He Who gives life to the dead and it is He Who has power over everything
and this is a proof that the Hour of Doom is sure to come there is no doubt about it; and that Allah will raise up those who are in the graves
Yet there are others among people who wrangle about Allah, though they neither have knowledge nor guidance, nor an enlightening Book
twisting things around in order to lead others astray from the Path of Allah - for such persons there is disgrace in this life, and on the Day of Judgment we shall make them taste the punishment of burning fire
saying: "This is what you prepared and sent forth with your own hands." Rest assured that Allah is not unjust to His worshippers
There are some people who worship Allah standing on the verge of faith (half faith and half disbelief). When such a person is blessed with good fortune he is content; but if he encounters a trial he turns back headlong; thus losing both this world and the Hereafter, which is a clear-cut loss
Then instead of Allah, he starts calling those deities who can neither harm nor help him; now that is going too far off in deviation from the Right Way
He is calling upon those who are more likely to harm than help; what an evil master and what an evil friend he chooses for help
As for those who believe and do good deeds, Allah will admit them to gardens beneath which the rivers flow. Surely Allah does what He wants
If anyone thinks that Allah will not help His Messenger in this world and in the Hereafter, let him stretch out a rope to the sky if he can and cut a hole to peep through and see for himself whether his device can avert that which irritates him
Thus have We revealed this The Qur’an in clear verses; and verily Allah gives guidance to whom He wants
Surely as for those who are true believers (the Muslims), the Jews, the Sabians, the Christians, the Magians and the ones who commit shirk (polytheists) - Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection; for Allah is a witness over everything
Do you not see how all who dwell in the heavens and the earth bow down in worship to Allah, including the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the animals, and a large number of people, even a large number of those deserving the punishment. He who is humbled by Allah has none who can raise him to honor; surely Allah does what He pleases
These are the two adversaries (the believers and disbelievers) who dispute with each other about their Lord: as for the disbelievers, garments of Fire will be cut out for them, boiling water will be poured over their heads
which will not only melt their skins but also the inner parts of their bellies
and there will be maces of iron to lash them
Whenever, in their anguish, they try to escape therefrom, they will be forced back therein, and will be told: "Taste the punishment of conflagration
As for those who have faith and do good deeds, Allah will certainly admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow. They shall be decked with pearls and bracelets of gold, and their garments will be of silk
This is because during their life on earth, they were guided to accept the pure words of Allah and they were shown the Way of the All-Praiseworthy
As for those who are unbelievers and debar others from the Way of Allah and from the Masjid-al-Haram, to which We have assigned all mankind with equal rights whether they are natives or foreigners, and whoever intends to deviate from righteousness to wrongdoing in its vicinity, We will make him taste a painful punishment
Remember! We identified the site of the Sacred House to Abraham, saying, "Worship none besides Me, sanctify My House for those worshippers who make Tawaf (walking counterclockwise around it as a part of the Hajj rituals), and stand in prayer, bow, and prostrate themselves
and make a proclamation of Hajj (Pilgrimage) to mankind: they will come to you on foot and on lean camels from every distant quarter
so that they may witness the benefits which are made available here for them, and pronounce the name of Allah over the cattle which We have provided as food for them, on the appointed days, then eat meat themselves and feed the indigent and needy
Then they should accomplish their needful acts of shaving or cutting their hair and taking a bath, fulfill their vows and go for Tawaf-e-Ziyarah to the Ancient House
This was the object for which the Ka’bah was built, and whoever honors the sacred rites of Allah, it is good for him in the sight of his Lord. The meat of cattle is lawful to you, except what has already been mentioned to you; therefore, shun the abomination of idols and shun all false statements
Dedicate yourselves to Allah and do not commit shirk with Him: for anyone who commits shirk, it is as though he had fallen from the sky; then his body is either snatched away by birds or carried away by the wind to some far-off place
so it is, and he who respects the Symbols of Allah, surely shows the piety of his heart
You may benefit (by using their milk) from the cattle dedicated for sacrifice, until the time of their slaughter, then their place of sacrifice is near the Ancient House
For every nation We prescribed a way of sacrifice so that they may pronounce the name of Allah over the cattle which He has given them for food, your God is one God; so submit yourselves to Him as a Muslim, and give good news to the humble
whose hearts tremble at the mention of Allah; who endure adversity with patience, who establish Salah and spend in charity out of what we have given them
We have included the sacrificial camels among the Symbols of Allah, for there is much good for you in them. Therefore, pronounce the name of Allah over them while standing, and when they fall down on their sides after slaughter, then eat of their meat, feed the contented (poor who do not ask) and the beggars (poor who ask). Thus We have subjected these animals to you so that you may be grateful
It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches Allah; it is your piety that reaches Him. Thus, He has subjected these animals to you so that you may glorify Allah for giving you guidance, and O Prophet, give good news to those who do good to others
Surely Allah wards off evil from those who are true believers: for certainly Allah does not love anyone who is treacherous, ungrateful
Permission to fight back is hereby granted to the believers against whom war is waged and because they are oppressed; certainly Allah has power to grant them victory
those who have been unjustly expelled from their homes only because they said, "Our Lord is Allah." Had not Allah repelled some people by the might of others, the monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques in which Allah’s praise is daily celebra
These are the people who, if We establish them in the land, will establish Salah and pay Zakah, enjoin justice and forbid evil; the final decision of all affairs is in the hands of Allah
If they deny you O Muhammad, remember that before them the people of Noah, ‘Ad and Thamud
the people of Abraham and Lot
as well as the residents of Madyan had denied their Prophets, likewise Moses was also denied. Initially, I gave respite to all those unbelievers and then I seized them: see how terrible was My disapproval
How many townships, teaming with wrong doings, have We utterly destroyed! Today they lie with their roofs fallen in, their wells abandoned, and their lofty castles deserted
Have they not traveled through the land? Have they no hearts to learn wisdom, or ears to hear the Truth? Certainly it is not their eyes which are blind, but it is the hearts in their breasts which are blind
These people ask you to hasten the threatened punishment. Well, Allah will never go back on His promise. In fact a day of your Lord (time period in which Allah's decision is executed) is equal to a thousand years of your calculation
There have been many townships teeming with wrong doings, to whom at first I gave respite and at the end I smote them. Towards Me is the destination of all
O Muhammad, tell them: "O mankind! I am merely a plain Warner to you
Those who accept the true faith and do good deeds shall be forgiven and provided honorable sustenance
but those who strive against Our revelations, shall be the inmates of flaming fire
Never have We sent a Messenger or a prophet before you, O Muhammad, with whose wishes Satan did not tamper; but Allah abrogates the interjections of Satan and confirms His own revelations, for Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise
He makes Satan’s interjections a temptation for those whose hearts suffer from the disease of hypocrisy and whose hearts are hardened - that’s why the wrongdoers are in such an extreme dissension
so that those who are endowed with knowledge may realize that this (Qur’an) is the Truth from your Lord and thus believe in it and humble their hearts towards Him, and surely Allah will guide the believers to the Straight Way
As for the unbelievers, they will never cease to doubt the revelation, until the Hour of Doom overtakes them suddenly or there comes on them the punishment of the Day of Disaster
On that Day the Kingdom will be that of Allah’s; He will judge between them; so those who have embraced the true faith and done good deeds shall enter the gardens of delight
but the unbelievers who have denied Our revelations shall receive a disgraceful punishment
As for those who migrated for the sake of Allah and afterwards were killed or died, Allah will make a generous provision for them; certainly Allah is the One Who is the best Provider
He will admit them to a place with which they shall be well pleased; for Allah is All-Knowing, Most Lenient
Thus shall it be! He that retaliates equal to the infliction he received and then is wronged again, will most certainly be helped by Allah; surely Allah is the One Who is All-Forbearing, Most Forgiving
That is because it is Allah Who causes the night to pass into the day, and the day into the night, Allah is indeed All-Hearing, Most Observing
That is because Allah is the One Who is Real; and all those deities besides Him, whom they invoke, are false; indeed it is Allah Who is the Supreme, the Great
Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the sky so the land becomes green? Surely Allah is the Benignant, Aware
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; surely Allah is the One Who is the Self-sufficient, the Praiseworthy
Do you not see that Allah has subdued to you all that is in the earth and the ships that sail through the sea by His command? He is withholding the sky in a way that it cannot fall down on the earth without His permission; surely Allah is very kind and merciful to mankind
He is the One Who has given you life, will cause you to die and then will bring you back to life again - yet man is indeed very ungrateful
To every nation We have prescribed the rites of worship which they observe, therefore, let them not dispute with you concerning this matter - keep calling them to the Way of your Lord; for most surely you are rightly guided
If they argue with you, say: "Allah knows best all that you do
Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning the matters in which you differ
Do you not know that Allah is aware of all that is in heaven and the earth? Certainly all of this is recorded in a Book and it is very easy for Allah to do so
Yet they worship besides Allah those deities for which He has revealed no sanction, nor they themselves have any knowledge about them; certainly the wrongdoers shall have no helper
When Our revelations are recited to them with all their clarity, you can notice a denial on the faces of the unbelievers. They can barely restrain themselves from assaulting those who recite Our revelations. Say to them: "Shall I tell you something which is far worse than that? It is the fire of hell, which Allah has promised to those who reject the truth; what an evil abode it will be
O mankind! Here is an example for your understanding, so listen to it carefully. Those deities whom you call besides Allah, cannot create a single fly, even if they all combined their forces, rather, if a fly snatches away anything from them they cannot even get it back; how feebleminded are the suppliants and how powerless are those whom they supplicate
They do not render to Allah the homage due to Him; in fact, Allah is the One Who is All-Powerful, All-Mighty
Allah chooses His messengers from among the angels and from among the human beings, for surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and to Allah shall all matters return for decision
O believers! Bow down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord and do good deeds so that you may attain salvation
Strive in the Way of Allah as you ought to strive with sincerity and discipline; He has chosen you and has not laid upon you any hardship in the observance of your faith - the faith of your father Abraham. He named you Muslims before in prior scriptures and in this (The Qur’an), so that His Messenger may testify against you and you yourselves may testify against rest of the mankind. Therefore, establish Salah, pay Zakah and hold fast to Allah, Who is your Protector - so what an excellent Protector and what a splendid Supporter
Indeed successful are those believers
who are humble in their Salah (prayers)
who avoid vain talk
who are punctual in the payment of Zakah (charity)
who guard their private parts
except with their spouses or those who are legally in their possession, for in that case they shall not be blamed
however those who seek to go beyond that in lust are the ones who shall be the transgressors
who are true to their trust and covenants
and who are diligent about their Salah (prayers)
These are the heirs
who will inherit paradise; and live therein forever
Indeed We have created man from an essence of clay
then placed him as a drop of semen in a firm resting place
then changed the semen into a leechlike mass, then leechlike mass into a fetus lump, then fetus lump into bones, then clothed the bones with flesh, and then We brought him forth as quite a different creature from the embryo - so blessed is Allah, the best of all creators
Then after living for a while you shall all die
then most surely you shall be raised to life again on the Day of Resurrection
We have made seven avenues (heavens) above you; and We are never unmindful of Our creation
We send down water from the sky according to a due measure, then We cause it to settle in the soil - you should know that if We please, We can certainly take it away
then with it We cause to grow gardens of palm trees and grapes for you; yielding abundant fruit for you to eat
and also a tree which grows on Mount Sinai which produces oil and relish as a food for those who like to eat it
In cattle, too, there is a lesson for you: from within their bodies We produce milk for you to drink, besides this you gain numerous other benefits; some of them you eat
yet on others as well as on ships you ride
We sent Noah to his people. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no other god but Him, are you not afraid of Him for committing shirk
The chiefs of the unbelievers among his people said, "Noah is but a human like you, he desires to assert his superiority over you. If Allah wanted to send Messengers, He could have sent down angels, we have never heard such a thing as he says from our forefathers
Some of them said: "He is just a madman, so bear with him for a while
Noah said, "O my Lord! Help me against their calling me a liar
So We revealed Our will to him, saying: "Build an ark under our supervision according to Our instructions; and when Our judgement comes to pass and water wells out from 'At-Tannur', take aboard a pair (a male and a female) from every species and take your family, except those of them against whom the judgement has already been passed; and do not plead with Me in favor of the wrongdoers, for they are doomed to be drowned in the flood
Then when you have embarked on the ark with your companions, say: "Praise be to Allah Who has delivered us from the nation of wrongdoers
and pray, "O my Lord! Bless my landing from this Ark, for You are the best to make my landing safe
There are many lessons in this story, and surely We do test people
Then We raised after them a new generation (the people of ‘Ad)
and sent to them a Messenger (Hud) from among themselves, who said to them: "Worship Allah! You have no other god except Him. Will you not fear Him for committing shirk
But the chiefs of his people - who disbelieved the message and denied the life in the hereafter, - on whom We had bestowed affluence in this worldly life, said: "This person is but a human like you; he eats of what you eat and drinks of what you drink
If you obey a human like yourselves, you shall indeed be lost
What! Does he claim that when you are dead and turned into dust and bones, you will be brought to life out of your graves
Impossible! Just impossible is that with which you are being threatened with
There is no other life but our life of this world: we live here and die here, and shall never be raised to life again
This man is but an impostor, forging a lie against Allah, and we are not going to believe him
At this the Messenger prayed: "O my Lord! Help me against their calling me a liar
Allah responded: "After a short time they will surely be sorry
So the Blast overtook them in all justice and We swept them away like the rubbish of dead leaves - so gone is the nation of wrongdoers
After them We raised other generations
no people can hasten their term nor can they postpone it
and sent forth Our Messengers one after another: every time a Messenger came to his people, they disbelieved him, so We punished them one by one and made them a history; so gone is the nation of disbelievers
Then We sent Moses and his brother Haroon (Aaron) with Our signs and clear authority
to Pharoah (Pharaoh) and his chiefs: but they received them with arrogance for they were very haughty people
They said: "What! Should we believe in two human beings like ourselves, and whose people are our slaves
So they disbelieved both of them and became among those who were destroyed
And We gave Moses the Book, so that his people might be rightly guided
And We made the son of Mary (Jesus) and his mother a sign for mankind, and gave them a shelter on a peaceful lofty ground, furnished with a fresh spring
O Messengers! Eat of pure things and do good deeds, certainly I have knowledge of all your actions
In fact, your religion is one religion, and I am your only Lord: so fear Me Alone
Yet people have divided themselves into factions and each faction rejoices in its own doctrines
well! Leave them in their heedlessness for an appointed time
Do they think that, in giving them wealth and children
We are eager for their welfare? By no means! They do not understand the reality of the matter
Surely those who live cautiously for fear of their Lord
who believe in the revelations of their Lord
who do not commit shirk with their Lord
who give to charity whatever they can give, and their hearts are full of fear by the very idea that they shall have to return to their Lord
it is they who rush in doing good deeds and try to be the first in attaining them
We charge no soul with more than it can bear; We have a Book of record which shall clearly tell the truth, and they shall not be treated unjustly
But their hearts are blind to all this; and their deeds are also different from the believers. They will continue doing their misdeeds
until when We seize those of them who live in comfort with punishment; lo! Then they start crying for help in supplication
We shall say: "Do not cry for help this Day, for surely from Us you shall receive no help
My revelations were recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels
in arrogance, talking nonsense about The Qur’an like one telling fables by night
Do they not ponder over the Word of Allah or has anything new come to them which did not come to their forefathers
Or is it because they do not recognize their Messenger, who is a member of their own community, that they deny him
Or are they really convinced that he is a madman? Nay! In fact he has brought them the Truth and most of them dislike the Truth
Had the Truth followed their appetites, the heavens, the earth and everything therein would have been disrupted. Nay! We have given them their reminder, but they are heedless to their reminder
Or is it that you are asking them for some recompense? But the recompense of your Lord is the best, for He is the best provider of sustenance
As a matter of fact, you (O Muhammad) are calling them to the Straight Way
and surely those who do not believe in the hereafter will ever stray from the Straight Way
If We show them mercy and relieve them of their affliction, they would obstinately persist in their rebellion, blindly wandering to and fro
for even now, when We have inflicted punishment on them, they have neither submitted to their Lord nor humbled themselves towards Him
Until when We open upon them a gate of severe punishment, you will see that they are plunged in utter despair
It is Allah Who has given you ears, eyes and hearts - yet seldom you show gratitude
it is He Who has placed you in the earth and before Him you shall all be assembled on the Day of Judgement
It is He Who gives life and cause you to die, and in His control is the alternation of the night and the day: then why don’t you understand
On the contrary they just say what their forefathers said before them
who said: "What! After death when our bodies become dust and bones, could we really be raised to life again
We have heard many such threats and so did our forefathers before us. These are nothing but legends of primitive people
Say: "To whom belongs the earth and everything therein? Tell me if you know
They will promptly reply: "to Allah!" Ask them: "Then why you do not use your common sense and believe in Him
Say: "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Glorious Throne
Right away they will say: "Allah." Ask them: "Then why you do not fear Him
Say: "In whose hands is the sovereignty of all things, protecting all, while against Him there is no protection? Tell me if you know
Quickly they will reply: "Allah." Ask them: "Then how can you be so bewitched
The fact of the matter is that We have brought them the Truth, and undoubtedly these people are liars
Never has Allah begotten a son, nor is there any god besides Him. Had it been so, each god would govern his own creation, and each would have tried to overpower the others. Exalted be Allah, above the sort of things they attribute to Him
He knows what is hidden and what is open: far above is He from the shirk of these people
Pray: "O my Lord! If You inflict that punishment with which they are being threatened in my lifetime
then O Lord, do not include me amongst these unjust people
Surely We have the power to let you see the punishment with which they are being threatened
Repel evil with good - We are fully aware of their slanders
and say, "O my Lord! I seek refuge in You from the prompting of the Satans
and O Lord! I seek refuge in You even from their coming near me
These people will never refrain from wrongdoing until when death comes to anyone of them, he will say: "O Lord! Send me back
so that I may do good deeds in the world that I have left behind." Never! This is just a statement which carries no value, it will be too late because there will be a barrier between them and the world they have just left till the Day they are raised to life again
On the Day when the Trumpet will be blown, they will neither have worldly relations between them any more, nor will they ask about each other
Then only those whose weight of good deeds is heavy, will attain salvation
As for those whose weight of good deeds is light, they will be the ones who have lost their souls to live in hell forever
The Fire will burn their faces and they will grin therein with their lips displaced
We shall say to them: "Were My revelations not recited to you, and did you not deny them
They will say: "O our Lord! Our misfortune overwhelmed us and we became erring folk
Our Lord! Get us out of here; if we ever return to sin, then we shall indeed be wrongdoers
In answer to this Allah will say: "Stay here in shame and do not plead with Me
For you are the same people, who used to make fun of some of My worshippers who prayed: ‘Our Lord, We believe in You; please forgive us and have mercy on us, for You are the Best of those who show mercy!’
But you ridiculed them so much, that you even forgot My very existence, and went on laughing at them
Today I have rewarded them for their fortitude, and they are the ones who have achieved bliss
They will be asked: "How many years did you live on earth
They will reply: "We lived there a day or part of a day; You may ask those who kept the count
It will be said: "Well, now you know that your stay was just a little while - what a pity, you did not believe it then
Did you think that We had created you without any purpose and that you would never return to Us for accountability
Therefore, exalted be Allah, the Real King; there is no god but Him, the Lord of the Honorable Throne
Whoever invokes another god besides Allah - about whose divinity he has no proof -he will have to give an account to his Lord. Surely such unbelievers will never attain salvation
Say: "O Lord, forgive, have Mercy, You are the Best of those who show mercy
This is a Surah which We have revealed and made obligatory; its revelations contain clear verses, so that you may take heed
As for the fornicatoress and the fornicator (a female and a male guilty of rape), flog each female and a male guilty of rape one hundred lashes and do not take pity in enforcing the law ordained by Allah, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day, and let a party of the believers witness their punishment
The fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatoress or a pagan, and likewise to a fornicatoress, none shall marry her but a fornicator or a pagan: such marriages are forbidden to the believers
Those who accuse a chaste woman of fornication and do not produce four witnesses to support their allegation, shall be flogged with eighty lashes and their testimony shall not be accepted ever after, for they are the ones who are wicked transgressors
except those who repent thereafter and mend their conduct; for Allah is surely Forgiving, Merciful
Those men who accuse their own wives but have no witness except themselves, each one of them shall be made to swear four times by Allah that his charge is true
and the fifth time calling down upon himself the curse of Allah if he is lying
As for the wife, the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by Allah that his (her husband's) charge is false
and the fifth time calls down the wrath of Allah on herself if his charge is true
If it were not for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, you would have no method of handling these situations. Allah is the Acceptor of Repentance, All-Wise
Those who concocted the slander are from a clique among you. Do not regard this incident as only an evil, for it also contains a good lesson for you. Whoever took any part in this sin, has earned his share accordingly, and the one who took on himself the leading part, shall have a terrible punishment
Why did not the believing men and believing women, when they heard of this slander, think well of their own people, and say: "This is clearly a false accusation
Why did they not produce four witnesses? If they cannot produce the required witnesses, they are the liars in the sight of Allah
Were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah towards you in this world and the Hereafter, you would have been severely punished for your involvement in this scandal
when you passed on with your tongues and uttered with your mouths that about which you had no knowledge. You took it lightly while it was a very serious offence in the sight of Allah
Why did you not, when you heard about it, say: "It is not befitting for us to talk about it, God forbid! This is a monstrous slander
Allah admonishes you never to repeat a mistake like this, if you are true believers
Allah has made His revelations clear to you, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise
Those who love to broadcast such slanders among the believers will have a painful punishment in this life and in the Hereafter. Allah knows and you do not know
Were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah towards you, this scandal would have produced very bad results for you. Allah is indeed very Kind, most Merciful
O believers! Do not follow the footsteps of Satan: because anyone who follows the footsteps of Satan is seduced by him to commit acts of indecency and wickedness. If there had not been the grace and mercy of Allah upon you, none of you would have ever been purified from that sin, for it is Allah Alone Who purifies whom He pleases, and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
Let not those among you who are endowed with grace and amplitude of means swear to withhold their help from their relatives, the indigent and those who left their homes for the cause of Allah - rather let them forgive and overlook - do you not wish that Allah should forgive you? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Those who accuse chaste but careless believing women are cursed in this life, and in the Hereafter they shall have a grievous punishment
Such people should not forget that Day when their own tongues, their own hands and their own feet will testify against their misdeeds
On that Day, Allah will give them the full reward they deserve, then they will realize that Allah is the One Who manifests the Truth
Unclean women are for unclean men, and unclean men are for unclean women; and pure women are for pure men, and pure men are for pure women. They are free from the slanderer’s accusations; for them there shall be forgiveness and honorable provision from Allah
O believers! Do not enter houses other than your own until you have sought permission and said greetings of peace to the occupants; this is better for you, so that you may be mindful
If you do not find the person you wanted to see, then do not enter until permission is given to you; and if you are asked to go back, then go back; this is more fitting for you; and Allah is cognizant of what you do
There is no blame on you if you enter houses which are not used for dwelling and in which you have something belonging to you; and Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal
Enjoin the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their modesty; that is chaster for them. Surely Allah is well aware of their actions
Likewise enjoin the believing women to lower their gaze and guard their modesty; not to display their beauty and ornaments except what normally appears thereof; let them draw their veils over their bosoms and not display their charms except to their husbands, their fathers, their fathers-in-law, their own sons, their stepsons, their own brothers, their nephews on either brothers’ or sisters’ sides, their own womenfolk, their own slaves, male attendants who lack sexual desires or small children who have no carnal knowledge of women. Also enjoin them not to strike their feet in order to draw attention to their hidden trinkets. And O believers! Turn to Allah in repentance, all of you, about your past mistakes, so that you may attain salvation
Get the singles among you married as well as those who are fit for marriage among your male slaves and female slaves. If they are poor, Allah will make them free from want out of His grace: for Allah has boundless resources and is All-Knowing
And let those who do not find means to marry keep themselves chaste until Allah enriches them out of His bounty. As for those of your slaves who wish to buy out their liberty, execute the deed of liberty with them if you find them deserving, and give them some of the wealth which Allah has given you. Do not force your slave-girls into prostitution for your own worldly gains, if they wish to preserve their chastity; and if anyone forces them into it, then surely after such a compulsion Allah will be forgiving and merciful to them
We have already sent down to you revelations giving you clear guidance and cited examples of those people who passed away before you to serve as a warning and an admonition for the righteous people
Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His Light is as if there were a Niche, in which there is a lamp, the lamp is enclosed in crystal, the crystal is of a starlike brilliance, it is lit with the olive oil from a blessed olive tree which is neither eastern nor western, its very oil would almost be luminous though no fire touched it -as though all the means of increasing Light upon Light are provided Allah guides to His Light whom He pleases. Allah cites such parables to make His message clear to the people; and Allah has knowledge of everything
His Light is found in those houses which Allah has sanctioned to be built for the remembrance of His name; where His praise is sung, in the mornings and in the evenings again and again
by such people whom neither business nor business profit can divert from the remembrance of Allah, nor from establishing Salah and nor from paying Zakah, for they fear the Day of Judgement when hearts will be overturned and eyes will be petrified
who hope that Allah will reward them according to the best of their deeds and add for them even more out of His grace: for Allah gives without measure to whom He pleases
As for the unbelievers, their deeds will disappear like a mirage in a sandy desert, which the thirsty traveller thinks to be water, but when he comes near, he finds it to be nothing, instead he finds Allah to settle his account - Allah is swift in settling accounts
Or another parable of unbelievers' efforts is that of a person trying to swim in a bottomless ocean overwhelmed with billows, one over the other, overcast with dark clouds - layers of utter darkness one above another - so much so that if he stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it. The one to whom Allah does not give light, will have no light
Do you not see that Allah is the One Who is praised by all those who are in the heavens and in the earth? The very birds praise Him as they wing their flight. Each one knows its prayers and how to praise Him, and Allah has full knowledge of all their actions
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and towards Allah lies the final goal
Do you not see that Allah makes the clouds move gently, then joins them together, then piles them up in masses, then you see the rain coming from inside them? He also sends down hail from the clouds that look like mountains in the sky, afflicting therewith whom He wills and turning it away from whom He pleases; the flash of His lightning almost takes away sight
Allah alternates the night and the day; there is indeed a lesson in it for those who possess insight
Allah has created from water every living creature: of them there are some that creep upon their bellies, some that walk on two legs, and yet some that walk on four; Allah creates what He pleases; surely Allah has power over everything
We have indeed sent down revelations demonstrating the Truth, and Allah guides to the Straight Way whom He pleases
They say: "We believe in Allah and the Messenger and we obey," but no sooner do they utter these words than some of them turn their backs; these are no believers
When such people are called to Allah and His Messenger that He may judge between them, behold! A party of them declines to come
However, if they have the truth on their side, they come to him voluntarily
Is there a disease in their hearts? Either they are skeptical, or else they fear that Allah and His Messenger will deny them justice. Nay! In fact they are the ones who are the wrongdoers
The response of the true believers, when they are called to Allah and His Messenger that he may judge between them, is only to say: "We hear and we obey." Such are the ones who will attain felicity
Only those who obey Allah and His Messenger, have fear of Allah and do good deeds, are the ones who will be the winners
They solemnly swear by Allah that if you command them, they will go forth leaving their homes. O Muhammad tell them: "Do not swear; your obedience not your oaths will count; surely Allah is fully aware of what you do
Say: "Obey Allah and obey the Messenger. If you do not, the Messenger is still under obligation to fulfill his duty, as you are under obligation to fulfill yours; and if you obey him, you shall be rightly guided. Note it well that the responsibility of the Messenger is only to deliver Allah’s message clearly
Allah has promised those of you who believe and do good deeds that He will most surely make them vicegerent in the earth as He made their ancestors before them, and that He will establish for them their religion, the one which He has chosen for them, and that He will change their present state of fear into peace and security. Let them worship Me Alone and not to commit shirk with Me; and if anyone rejects faith after this, it is they who are the transgressors
Therefore establish Salah, pay Zakah and obey the Messenger, so that you may be shown mercy
Never think that the unbelievers can frustrate anything in the land. As for them, the fire shall be their home, and that is an evil abode
O believers! Let your servants and those children who have not yet attained puberty ask your permission before coming in to see you on three occasions: before Fajr Salah (dawn prayer), at noon when you put off your clothes, and after the Isha Salah (night prayer). These are your three times of privacy. At other times, there is no blame on you if you, or they, go around visiting one another. Thus Allah makes His revelations clear to you, for Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise
And when your children reach the age of puberty, let them still ask your permission as their elders do. Thus Allah makes His revelations clear to you, for Allah is All-Knowing, All- Wise
There is no blame on such elderly women who have no interest in getting married, if they lay aside their cloaks without displaying their adornment, but it is better for them if they do not discard. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing
There is no blame on the blind, nor there is blame on the lame, nor there is blame on the sick, to eat at your table. Nor shall it be an offense for you to eat in the houses of your own children, or your fathers, or your mothers, or your brothers, or your sisters, or your paternal uncles, or your paternal aunts, or your maternal uncles, or your maternal aunts, or your sincere friends, or in houses with the keys of which you are entrusted. There is no blame on you whether you eat together or apart; however, when you enter the houses, you should greet one another with the greeting of peace prescribed by Allah blessed and pure. Thus Allah makes His revelations clear to you, so that you may grow in understanding
The true believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and who, when gathered with him on a matter requiring collective action, do not depart until they have obtained his permission - only those who ask your permission are the ones who truly believe in Allah and His Messenger - so when they ask your permission to leave and attend to theirs private business, you may give permission to those of them whom you deem appropriate and implore Allah to forgive them; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Do not consider the summoning of the Messenger in the same manner, as you consider the summoning of one another among yourselves. Allah knows those of you who slip away, concealing themselves behind others. Let those who disobey his orders beware, lest some trial befall them or a painful punishment be inflicted on them
Beware! Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth belongs to Allah. He knows all your thoughts and actions. On the Day of Judgment when they will be brought back to Him, He will tell them all that they have done. Allah has the knowledge of everything
Blessed is the One Who has revealed Al-Furqan (the criterion to distinguish right from wrong: The Qur'an) to His servant, that he may be a Warner to the worlds
He is the One to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, has begotten no son and has no partner in His kingdom; He has created everything and ordained them in due proportions
Yet the unbelievers have taken besides Him other gods which can create nothing but are themselves created, which can neither harm nor help even themselves, and which have no power over life or death, or raising the dead to life
Those who deny the Truth say: "This Al-Furqan (The Qur'an) is but a forgery which he (Muhammad) himself has devised and some other people have helped him." Unjust is what they do and falsehood is what they utter
And they say: "These are the stories of the ancients which he has copied down from what is read to him day and night
Tell them: "This (The Qur'an) is revealed by Him Who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth; surely He is Ever- Forgiving, Merciful
And they say: "What sort of Messenger is he who eats food and walks through the streets? Why has no angel been sent down with him to threaten the disbelievers
Why has he not been given a treasure or at least a garden from which he could eat?" And these wicked people further say: "You are only following a man who is bewitched
See what sort of examples they apply to you! Because they are lost and cannot find the way to refute the truth of Tawhid and life after death
Blessed is He, Who, if He wills, could give you much better things than what they propose for you: not one but many gardens beneath which rivers flow; and make for you palaces too
But in fact they deny the Hour - and for the one who denies the coming of the Hour, We have prepared a blazing fire
When it shall come into their sight, from a long distance, they will hear its raging and roaring
And when, chained together, they are flung into some narrow space, they will fervently plead for death
But they will be told: "Do not plead for one death today, but plead for many deaths
Ask them: "Which is better, this hell or the eternal paradise which the righteous are being promised, which will be the reward of their good deeds and also their final destination
wherein they will live forever and get everything that they wish for: and this is the promise worth praying for, which your Lord is going to fulfill
On that Day, He will gather all these people together along with the deities whom they worshipped besides Allah, and ask: "Were it you who misled these servants of Mine, or did they choose to go astray themselves
Those deities will answer: "Glory be to You! It was not befitting for us that we could take any guardian besides You, but You let them and their forefathers enjoy the comforts of worldly life until they forgot the Reminder, and thereby became worthless people
Thus your gods will deny all that you profess today. Then you shall neither be able to avert your punishment nor shall you get any help from anywhere; and everyone among you who is guilty of wrongdoing, We shall make him taste the mighty punishment
We have sent no Messenger before you, who did not eat or walk through the streets. In fact, We test you by means of one another. Now, will you show patience, for your Lord is Ever Observant
Those who do not expect to meet Us on the Day of Judgement say: "Why are not the angels sent down to us or why do we not see our Lord?" Certainly they are too proud of themselves, and have revolted in a great revolt
On the Day when they see the angels, it will not be a Day of rejoicing for the criminal; rather they will cry: "May there be a stone barrier between us and the angels of punishment
Then We shall turn to the deeds which they did, based on their wrong opinions, and render them vain like blown dust
In contrast, the heirs of paradise shall have the best residence and finest lodging on that Day
On that Day when the heavens shall burst asunder with clouds and the angels will be sent down ranks after ranks
the real Kingdom on that Day will belong only to the Compassionate (Allah), a hard Day shall it be for the unbelievers
On that Day the wrongdoer will bite his hands saying: "Oh! Would that I had only taken the pathway alongside the Messenger
Oh! Would that I had never chosen so-and-so for my companion
He was the one who led me astray from the admonition even after it had reached me." Satan is ever treacherous to man
The Messenger will say: "O my Lord! Surely my people took this Qur’an for foolish nonsense
That is how We made for every Messenger an enemy among the criminals, but your Lord is sufficient for you (O Muhammad) as a Guide and Helper
The unbelievers ask: "Why is not the Qur’an revealed to him all in a single revelation?" This method of slow, well arranged, piecemeal revelations is adopted to strengthen your heart
The other reason for this method is that any time they come to you with an argument, We reveal to you the Truth and properly explain it
Those who will be dragged headlong into hell shall have an evil place to dwell in, for they had lost the Way by taking an utterly wrong stand
We gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Haroon (Aaron) as a deputy with him
and said to them: "Both of you should go to the people who have denied Our Revelations." But those people rejected Our Messengers, as a result We destroyed them with utter destruction
Likewise, the people of Noah We drowned when they rejected the Messengers and made them an example for mankind; and We have prepared a painful punishment for such wrongdoers
The nations of ‘Ad and Thamud were also destroyed, and so were the dwellers of Ar-Rass, and many generations between them
We admonished each of them by citing examples of those who were destroyed before them, even then they rejected Our revelations, so We exterminated each one of them
These unbelievers must have passed by that town which was destroyed by a fatal rain; had they not seen its ruins? But the fact of the matter is they do not believe in the life hereafter
Whenever they see you, they scoff at you, saying: "Is this the man whom Allah has sent as a Messenger
Had we not stood firm, he (Muhammad) would have turned us away from our gods." Very soon, when they face the punishment, they will realize who actually went off the Right Path
Have you ever seen the one who has taken his own desires as his god? Would you take the responsibility of guiding him
Or do you think that most of them listen or try to understand? They are nothing but animals - nay, they are even further off the track
Have you not seen how your Lord extends a shadow? If He wanted, He could make it constant. Then We made the sun an indication of it
as the sun climbs up, We draw it in little by little towards Ourselves
He is the One Who has made the night a mantle for you, and sleep a rest, and made the day to rise up again
He is the One Who sends the winds as heralds announcing His Mercy and sends down pure water from the sky
so that with it We may give life to a dead land, and quench the thirst of countless animals and men that We have created
We distribute this water among them so that they may glorify Us, yet most people refuse to do anything except show ingratitude
Had it been Our Will, We could have sent a Warner to every town
therefore, do not yield to the unbelievers, and make Jihad (strive) against them with this Qur'an, a mighty Jihad (strenuous striving)
He is the One Who has made the two seas rolling, the one sweet and fresh, the other salt and bitter, and set a rampart between them, an insurmountable barrier
He is the One Who has created man from water, then made for him blood relationships and that of marriage relationships, your Lord is indeed All-Powerful
Yet they worship those deities besides Allah which can neither help nor harm them, over and above this, the unbeliever has become a helper of every rebel against his own Lord
But O Muhammad! We have sent you only to proclaim good news and to give warning
Say: "I ask of you no recompense for this work except that he who wants, may take the Right Way to his Lord
Put your trust in the Ever-Living (Allah) Who never dies: celebrate His praise, for He Alone is sufficient to be aware of the sins of His servants
The One Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, and is firmly established on the Throne of authority; the Compassionate (Allah): as to His Glory, ask the one who knows
When it is said to them, "Prostrate yourselves before the Most Compassionate," they ask: "Who is that Most Compassionate? Are we to prostrate just because you order us to?" It merely increases their disdain
Blessed is the One Who has decked the sky with constellations and placed in it a lamp and a shining moon
He is the One Who has caused the night and the day to succeed each other, for him who desires to learn a lesson or desires to render thanks
True servants of the Compassionate (Allah) are those who walk on the earth in humility and when the ignorant people address them, they say: "Peace
who pass the night prostrating before their Lord and standing in prayers
who say: "Our Lord! Ward off the punishment of hell from us, for its punishment is atrocious
certainly it is an evil abode and an evil resting place
who, when they spend, are neither extravagant nor stingy, but keep the balance between those two extremes
who do not invoke any other god besides Allah, nor kill any soul which Allah has made sacred, except for a just cause, nor commit fornication - he that does this shall be punished for his sin
and his punishment shall be doubled on the Day of Resurrection and in disgrace he shall abide forever
except the one who repents, becomes a true believer, and starts doing good deeds, for then Allah will change his evil deeds into good, and Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful
He that repents and does good deeds, has truly turned to Allah with good turning
Those are the ones who do not bear witness to falsehood and, if they ever pass by futility, pass with dignity
Who, when reminded about the revelations of their Lord, do not turn a blind eye and a deaf ear to them
Who pray: "Our Lord! Make our wives and our children to be the comfort of our eyes, and make us leaders of the righteous
Such are the ones who will be rewarded with the lofty places in paradise for their patience, wherein they shall be welcomed with greetings and salutations
They shall live forever in that excellent dwelling and excellent resting place
O Muhammad! Say: "My Lord does not care at all if you invoke Him or not. Now that you have rejected His revelations, soon you will face the inevitable punishment
Tua Sin M'im
These are verses of the Glorious Book
O Muhammad, you will perhaps fret yourself to death with grief because they do not believe
If We wanted, We could send down upon them a sign from the heaven before which they would bend their necks in submission, but that is not what We want
They have been turning their backs on each fresh warning that comes to them from the Compassionate (Allah)
But now that they have neglected the warning, they will soon come to know the reality of what they have been mocking at
Have they not looked at the earth to see how We have caused all kinds of noble pairs to grow in it
Surely in this there is a sign; yet most of them do not believe
In fact your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
Remind them of the story when your Lord called Moses and said: "Go to the wicked people
the people of Pharoah (Pharaoh). Have they no fear
Moses submitted, saying: "My Lord! I fear that they will reject me
My breast feels cramped and my tongue is not eloquent; send Haroon (Aaron)
They have a charge of manslaughter against me and I fear they may put me to death
Allah said: "Indeed not! Proceed, both of you, with Our signs; surely We are with you, listening
Go to Pharoah and tell him: "We are the Messengers from the Lord of the Worlds
You should send with us the Children of Israel
When they went to Pharoah and conveyed the Message of Allah, he said: "Did we not cherish you when you were a child? Did you not stay several years of your life among us
Then you did what you did; you are so ungrateful
Moses replied: "I did that when I was a misguided youth
I fled from you all because I feared you; but now my Lord has granted me wisdom and appointed me as one of His Messengers
Is it a favor with which you taunt me, that you have enslaved the Children of Israel
Pharoah said: "Who is this Lord of the Worlds
Moses replied: "He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, if you really care to believe
Pharoah said to those around him, "Do you hear that
Moses continued: "He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
Pharoah interjected: "This Messenger of yours, who has been sent to you, is crazy
Moses continued:" He is the Lord of the east and west, and all that lies between them. If you would only care and try to understand
At this, Pharoah, who did not want to listen any more said: "If you serve any other god besides me, I shall have you thrown into prison
At this, Moses said: "What if I show you a convincing sign
Pharoah said: "Go ahead, show it if you are of the truthful
Hearing this, Moses threw down his staff, and thereupon it changed into a veritable serpent
Then he drew forth his hand and it became shining bright for the spectators
After witnessing both the miracles, Pharoah (Pharaoh) said to the chiefs around him: "This fellow is certainly a skilled magician
who seeks to drive you out from your land by the force of his magic. Now what is your advice
They submitted: "Put him and his brother off for a while, and dispatch heralds to the various cities
to bring you every skilled magician
So the magicians were brought together at the appointed time on a fixed day
The people were motivated through saying: "Would you come to the gathering
So that we may follow the magicians if they are dominant
When the magicians arrived, they asked Pharoah: "Shall we get a reward if we are dominant
Pharoah replied: "Yes of course! You will even be made my courtiers
Moses said to them: "Cast down what you are going to cast
Thereupon they cast down their ropes and staffs, saying: "By the glory of Pharoah, we shall be the winners
Then Moses threw down his staff, and lo! It swallowed their false devices
At this, all the magicians prostrated themselves
saying: "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
the Lord of Moses and Haroon (Aaron)
Pharoah shouted: "How dare you believe in him before I give you permission? He must be your master who taught you the witchcraft. But soon you shall find out. I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides and crucify you all
They replied: "We don’t care! We are going to return to our Lord anyway
We only desire that our Lord may forgive us our sins, as we are the first to believe
We revealed to Moses, saying: "Set off with my servants by night and beware that you will be pursued
Pharoah (Pharaoh) sent heralds to all the cities
and to mobilize his people he said: "These Israelites are but a handful of people
who have provoked us much
while we have a large army, well prepared
Thus did We make them leave their gardens and their water springs
their treasures and sumptuous dwellings
This is how they were made to lose, while on the other hand We made the Children of Israel inheritors of such things
At sunrise the Egyptians pursued them
When the two hosts came face to face, the companions of Moses cried out: "We are surely overtaken
Moses said: "Not at all! My Lord is with me; He will show me a way out
Then We revealed Our will to Moses: "Strike the sea with your staff," and the sea was cleft asunder, each part stood like a mighty mountain
We made the other party (Pharoah and his army) follow them
We delivered Moses and all who were with him
and drowned the others
Surely there is a lesson in this: yet most of these people do not learn this lesson to become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
Narrate to them the story of Abraham
when he asked his father and his people: "What is that which you worship
They replied: "We worship idols, and sit beside them with all devotion
Abraham asked: "Do they hear you when you call on them
Can they help you or harm you
They replied: "No! But we found our forefathers doing so
Abraham said: "Have you ever seen with open eyes these which you have been worshipping
you and your forefathers
They are all enemies to me; except the Lord of the Worlds
Who created me, then He gave me guidance
He is the One Who gives me food and drink
Who gives me health when I get sick
Who will cause me to die and then bring me back to life
Who, I hope, will forgive me my mistakes on the Day of Judgment
After this, Abraham prayed: "O my Lord! Bestow wisdom upon me and admit me among the righteous
grant me a reputation of truthfulness on the tongue of later generations
count me among the inheritors of the paradise of Bliss
forgive my father, for he is from among those who have gone astray
do not hold me up in shame on the Day when everybody will be raised back to life
the Day when neither wealth nor sons will avail anyone
and when none shall be saved except him who will come before Allah with a pure heart
when paradise shall be brought in the sight of the righteous
while hell shall be spread open to the straying
and they will be asked: "Now, where are those whom you worshipped
besides Allah? Can they help you or even help themselves
Then they will be toppled into it, both they and those who misled them
together with all the armies of Iblees
wherein they will argue with one another
saying: " By Allah, we were indeed in manifest error
when we made you equals with the Lord of the Worlds
It was the criminals who led us astray
Now we have no intercessors
and no loving friends
If we could but once return to our worldly life, we would be of the true believers
Surely in this narration there is a great lesson, but most of these people do not learn a lesson to become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
The people of Noah, also, rejected the Messengers
Remember when their brother Noah asked them: "Have you no fear of Allah
Rest assured that I am a trustworthy Messenger of Allah towards you
so fear Allah and obey me
I do not ask you for any reward for my services, for my reward will be given by the Lord of the Worlds
so fear Allah and obey me
They replied: "Should we believe in you, whereas your followers are but the lowest of the low
He said: "I have no knowledge as to what they have been doing
their account is the concern of my Lord, if you could use your common sense
I am not going to drive away any believer
I am nothing but a plain Warner
They said: "O Noah! If you do not stop, you shall be stoned to death
Noah prayed: "O Lord! My people have disobeyed me
Decide the case between me and them openly. Deliver me and the believers who are with me
So We granted his prayer, delivered him and those with him in the laden ark
and drowned the rest in the flood
Surely in this story there is a great lesson, but most of these people do not learn a lesson and become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
The people of 'Ad, too, disbelieved their Messengers
Remember when their brother Hud asked them: "Have you no fear of Allah
Rest assured that I am a trustworthy Messenger of Allah towards you
So fear Allah and obey me
I do not ask you any reward for my services, for my reward will be given by the Lord of the Worlds
Are you erecting a monument on every high place for fun
Are you building strong fortresses as if you are going to live here forever
Whenever you lay your hands on anyone, you act like cruel tyrants
Have fear of Allah and obey me
Fear the One Who has given you all the things that you know
He has given you flocks and children
gardens and fountains
Truly I fear for you the torment of a dreadful Day
They replied: "It is the same to us whether you preach us or you are not one of the preachers
Such preaching is nothing but an ancient myth
We are not going to be punished
So they disbelieved him and We utterly destroyed them. Surely in this story there is a great lesson, but most of these people do not learn a lesson and become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
The people of Thamud also disbelieved their Messengers
Remember when their brother Saleh asked them: "Have you no fear of Allah
Rest assured that I am a trustworthy Messenger of Allah towards you
So fear Allah and obey me
I do not ask you for any reward for my services, for my reward will be given by the Lord of the Worlds
Will you be left in peace to enjoy all that you have here forever
Gardens and fountains
cornfields and palm-trees laden with juicy fruit
carving your dwellings in the mountains and leading a happy life
Have fear of Allah and obey me
Do not follow the bidding of the extravagant
who create corruption in the land and reform nothing
They replied: "You are but one of the bewitched
You are no more than a human being like us. Bring forth a sign if you are one of the truthful
Saleh said: "Well, here is the she-camel (the sign that you asked for). She shall have her share of water as you all have yours, each drinking on an alternate appointed day
Do not touch her with evil, lest the punishment of a dreadful Day may overtake you
Yet they hamstrung her, then became full of regrets
so the punishment overtook them. Surely in this story there is a great lesson, but most of these people do not learn a lesson and become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
The people of Lot, also, disbelieved their Messengers
Remember when their brother Lot asked them: "Have you no fear of Allah
Rest assured that I am a trustworthy Messenger of Allah towards you
So fear Allah and obey me
I do not ask you for any reward for my services, for my reward will be given by the Lord of the Worlds
Will you fornicate with males from among the creatures of the worlds
and leave those whom your Lord has created for you to be your mates? Nay! You are a people who have transgressed all limits
They replied: "If you do not stop, O Lot, you shall become one of the expelled
Lot said: "I am certainly one of those who abhor your actions
O Lord! Deliver me and my family from their wicked deeds
So We delivered him and all his family
except an old woman who was left among those who remained behind
Then We utterly destroyed the rest
We rained down on them the rain of brimstones: and evil was the rain which fell on those who were forewarned
Surely in this story there is a great lesson, but most of these people do not learn a lesson and become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
The people of Aiykah, also, disbelieved their Messengers
Remember Shu‘aib asked them: "Have you no fear of Allah
Rest assured that I am a trustworthy Messenger of Allah towards you
So fear Allah and obey me
I do not ask you for any reward for my services, for my reward will be given by the Lord of the Worlds
Give full measure and be not of those who cause losses to others by fraud
Weigh with even scales
and do not cheat your fellow men of what is rightly theirs: nor spread evil in the land
Fear Him Who has created you and the generations before you
They replied: "You are surely one of those who are bewitched
You are no more than a human being like us and we think that you are lying
Let a fragment fall out of the sky on us if you are telling the Truth
Shu’aib said: "My Lord has full knowledge of all your actions
So they disbelieved him, and the torment of the day of darkness (dark clouds carrying Allah's scourge) seized them, and indeed it was the torment of an extremely dreadful day
Surely in this story there is a great lesson, but most of these people do not learn a lesson and become believers
The fact is that your Lord is the Mighty as well as the Merciful
Surely this Qur’an is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds
The trustworthy Spirit (Angel Gabriel) brought it down
upon your heart so that you may become one of those who are appointed by Allah to warn the people
in a plain Arabic language
This fact was foretold in the scriptures of the former people
Is it not sufficient proof for the people that the learned men of the children of Israel knew about it
Even so that if We had revealed it to a non-Arab
and he had recited it to them in fluent Arabic, they would still not have believed in it
We have thus caused unbelief in the hearts of the guilty
They are not going to believe in it until they see the painful scourge
which, in their heedlessness, will come to them suddenly
Then they will ask: "Can we be given some respite
Do they wish to hurry on Our scourge
Just think! If We let them enjoy this life for many years
and then the scourge with which they are threatened falls upon them
of what avail will their past enjoyments be to them
Never have We destroyed a population to whom We did not send Warners
they were forewarned, and We have never been unjust
This Qur’an is not brought down by the Satans
it is neither in their interest nor in their power to produce such a masterpiece
They are kept too far off to even hear it
So do not call on other gods besides Allah, lest you become one of those who incur His punishment
Admonish your close relatives
and lower your wing of kindness to those of the believers who follow you
but if they disobey, tell them: "I am not accountable for what you do
Put your trust in the All-Mighty, the Merciful
Who observes you when you get up
and when you walk among those who prostrate themselves in worship
He is the One Who hears all and knows all
Shall I tell you, O people, on whom the Satans descend
They descend on every slandering sinner
those who listen to hearsay - and most of them are liars
and those poets who are followed by those who go astray
Do you not see, how aimlessly they wander in every valley
preaching what they do not practice themselves
However, an exception is made for those (poets) who believe, do good deeds, engage much in the remembrance of Allah and defend themselves when wronged, showing no vindictiveness. The unjust oppressors will soon find out what vicissitudes their affairs will take
Tua Sin. These are verses of the Qur’an, the Glorious Book
a guide and good news for the believers
who establish the Salah (prayer) and pay the Zakah (charity) and firmly believe in the hereafter
As for those who do not believe in the hereafter, We make their deeds seem fair to them, therefore they blunder about in their folly
They are the ones for whom there is an evil punishment, and in the hereafter, they will be the greatest losers
And O Muhammad, most surely you are receiving this Qur’an from the One Who is wise and All-Knowing
Relate to them the story of Moses, when he said to his family: "I have seen a fire; soon I may either bring you some information from there or a lighted torch to warm yourselves with
When he came to it, a voice called out to him: "Blessed be He Who is in this fire and all around it! Glory be to Allah the Lord of the Worlds
O Moses, this is Me, Allah, the All-Mighty, the Wise
Throw down your staff." When he saw it moving like a snake, he turned back and fled without even looking back. "O Moses, do not be afraid," said Allah, "My Messenger need not be afraid in My presence
unless, of course, he is guilty of wrongdoing; even then, if he replaces that wrongdoing with a good deed, I am indeed Forgiving, Merciful
Now put your hand into your pocket, it will come out shining white without any harm. These two signs are from the nine signs that you will be given during your mission to Pharoah (Pharaoh) and his people; for truly, they are a people of transgressors
But, when our signs were shown to them, they said: "This is clear sorcery
They were convinced in their hearts about the truth of those miracles, yet they denied those signs in their wickedness and pride. So you see, what was the end of those transgressors
We bestowed knowledge on Davidand Solomon. They both said: "Praise be to Allah Who has exalted us above many of His believing servants
Solomon succeeded David. He said: "O people! We have been taught the language of birds and given all sort of things. This is indeed a great blessing from Allah
Solomon gathered an army comprised of Jinns, men and birds; they all were kept under strict discipline
Once in an expedition he was marching with his army when they came across a valley of ants, one of the ants said: "O ants, get into your habitations lest Solomon and his army crush you under their feet without even noticing it
So Solomon smiled, laughing at its statement, and said: "O Lord! Inspire me to render thanks for Your favors, which You have bestowed on me and on my parents, to do such good deeds that will please You; and admit me, by Your mercy, among Your righteous servants
He took a roll call of the birds and said: "I do not see the hoopoe, where is he? How could he be absent
I will certainly punish him severely or even slay him, if he does not offer me a reasonable excuse for his absence
The hoopoe, who did not take long in coming, said: I have just found out that which you do not know. I have brought you reliable information about the people of Sheba
I found that a woman is ruling over them, she has been given everything and she possesses a magnificent throne
Further I found that she and her people prostrate themselves before the sun instead of Allah. Satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them and thus turned them away from the Right Way, so that they may not be guided
to prostrate themselves before Allah, the One Who brings to light all that is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows exactly what you hide and what you reveal
Allah! There is no god but Him. He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne
Solomon said: "Soon we shall find out whether what you say is true or false
Go and deliver to them this letter of mine, then turn aside and wait for their answer
The Queen said: "O my chiefs! A very important letter has been delivered to me
it is from Solomon, and it begins with the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful
It reads: Do not be arrogant against me and come to me in complete submission (as a Muslim)
Then she asked: "O chiefs! Let me hear your advice, for I make no decision without your counsel
They replied: "We are a valiant and mighty nation. You are the commander. So we shall be waiting for your command
The queen said: "When the kings invade a town, they ruin it and debase its honorable people; and thus they always do
Therefore, I shall send them a present and see with what reply my envoys will return
When the envoys of the queen came to Solomon, he said: "Do you want to provide me wealth? The wealth which Allah has given me is far more than what He has given you. You may very well keep your presents
Go back to your people: if your people do not submit, we will march against them with such an army of which they shall never be able to face, and we shall drive them out of their land humbled and disgraced
Later on when Solomon heard that the Queen of Sheba was coming in submission, he asked: "O my chiefs! Which of you can bring to me her throne before they come to me in submission
An audacious one from the Jinns said: "I will bring it to you before you adjourn your court; and most surely I have the necessary strength and I am trustworthy
One person who had knowledge of the Book said: "I can bring it to you in the twinkling of an eye." As soon as Solomon saw the throne placed before him, he exclaimed: "This is by the grace of my Lord to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful. Any who is grateful, surely his gratitude is a gain for his own soul, and any who is ungrateful should know that surely my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Self- Exalted
Further he said: "Without any comment to her, set her throne in her sight; let us see whether she recognize it or she is of those who cannot recognize the Truth
So when the queen arrived, she was asked: "Is your throne like this?" She replied: "It looks as if it is the same; we had come to know that Solomon is not only a king but also a Prophet, therefore we have already become Muslims
Other deities whom she worshiped besides Allah had prevented her from believing, for she belonged to an unbelieving folk
Then she was asked to enter the palace. When she saw its floor, she thought that there was pool of water, so she tucked up her skirts uncovering her legs. Solomon said. "This is just a glossy paving of this palace." At this she exclaimed: "O my Lord
To the people of Thamud, We sent their brother Saleh, saying: "Worship Allah," but they divided themselves into two discordant factions
Saleh said: "O my people! Why do you wish to hasten towards evil rather than good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of Allah so that you may be shown mercy
They said: "We consider you and your companions a sign of bad luck." He said: "Your luck is with Allah; in fact, you are a people under trial
There were nine ringleaders in the city who created mischief in the land and reformed nothing
They said to one another: "Let us pledge on oath by Allah that we shall make a secret night attack on him and his family, then we shall tell his guardian that we were not even present at the time his family was killed, and that we are telling the truth
Thus they plotted a plan, and We too plotted a plan which they did not perceive
Just see what was the outcome of their plot! We annihilated them completely, together with all their people
There lies their houses in desolate ruins as a result of their wrongdoings. Verily in this story there is a lesson for those people who use their common sense
Yet We delivered the true believers who were righteous
Also mention to them of Lot, when he said to his people: "Do you commit indecency though you see its iniquity
Do you approach men for your sexual desires instead of women? The fact is that you are a people steeped in ignorance
But his people gave no answer except that they said: "Drive out the family of Lot from your city: they pose to be very pious
So, We delivered him and his family except his wife - about whom We had decreed that she shall be of those who will remain behind
and We rained down on them a shower of brimstones, and evil was the rain which fell on those who were forewarned
Say: "Praise be to Allah and peace be on His servants whom He has chosen to deliver His message. Ask them: " Who is better? Allah or the deities they associate with Him
Is not He (Allah), Who has created the heavens and the earth, sends down rain from the sky and with it brings forth the beautiful gardens not better than the false gods that they worship? It is not in your ability to cause the growth of trees for those gardens. Is there another god besides Allah who could do that? No doubt they are a people who have swerved from justice in ascribing equals to Him
Just think who has made the earth a place for your residence, caused in it the rivers to flow, set mountains upon it and placed a barrier between the two seas? Is there another god besides Allah? Nay, most of them have no knowledge
Just think who answers the oppressed person when he cries out to Him and relieves his affliction, and makes you, O mankind, inheritors of the earth? Is there another god besides Allah? How little do you reflect
Just think who guides you in darkness on the land and the sea, and who sends the winds as heralds of good news of His mercy? Is there another god besides Allah? Exalted be Allah above what they associate with Him
Just think who originates creation and then repeats its production, and who gives you sustenance from the heavens and the earth? Is there another god besides Allah? Say: "Show us your proof if you are telling the truth
Say: No one in the heavens or in the earth has the knowledge of the unseen except Allah and their gods do not know when they shall be raised to life again
Their knowledge does not grasp the Hereafter; rather they are in doubt about it; nay, they are blind concerning it
The unbelievers say: "What! When we and our fathers have become dust, shall we really be raised from the dead
This promise which is made to us was also made to our forefathers before us; these are nothing but the legends of primitive people
Say: "Travel through the earth and see what has been the end of the criminals
O Prophet, do not worry about them nor feel distressed because of their plots
They also say: "When will this promise be fulfilled if what you say be true
Say: "It may be that a part of what you wish to hasten is near at hand
The fact is that your Lord is very gracious to mankind: yet most of them are ungrateful
Indeed your Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal
Nor there is any secret in the heaven and the earth which is not recorded in a clear Book
In fact, this Qur’an clarifies for the Children of Israel most of those matters in which they differ
It is certainly a guide and blessing to true believers
Surely your Lord will decide between them by His judgement, He is the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing
Therefore, put your trust in Allah, for you are certainly on the manifest Truth
The fact is that you cannot make the dead hear you, nor can you make the deaf hear the call especially when they turn their backs and pay no heed
nor can you guide the blind people to prevent them from straying; none will listen to you except those who believe in Our revelations and become Muslims
When the time to fulfill Our word comes to pass, We will bring out from the earth a monster that shall speak to them, because the people did not believe in Our revelations
On that Day We shall gather from every nation a multitude of those who disbelieved Our revelations; then they shall be arranged in classifications according to their merits
until when they have all arrived, their Lord will ask: "Did you deny My revelations without gaining their comprehensive knowledge? If not this, what else were you doing
The sentence will be carried out against them for the consequence of their wrongdoings and they will not be able to utter a word
Do they not see that We have made the night for them to rest in, and the day to give them light? Surely there are signs in this for the true believers
On the Day, when the trumpet shall be blown and all who dwell in the heavens and the earth shall be terrified except those whom Allah will choose to spare, and all shall come to Him in utter humiliation
these mountains which you see and think are firmly fixed, will pass away like clouds. Such is the might of Allah, Who has perfected all things. He is aware of what you do
Those who have done good deeds shall be rewarded with what is better and shall be secure from the terror of that Day
And those who have done evil deeds, shall be flung upon their faces in the hellfire. Should you not be rewarded according to your deeds
O Muhammad, say to them: "I have been commanded to worship the Lord of this city (Mecca), the One Who has made it sacred and Who is the Owner of all things; and I am commanded to be of those who are Muslims
and that I should recite The Qur’an. Now, whoever follows this guidance will be guided for his own good, and to him who goes astray, say: "I am merely a Warner
Then proclaim: "Praise be to Allah, very soon He will show you His signs and you will recognize them. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do
Tua Sin M'im
These are the verses of the Glorious Book that makes the things clear
In all truth, We narrate to you some information about Moses and Pharoah (Pharaoh) for the instruction of the believers
The fact is that Pharoah elevated himself in the land and divided its residents into groups, one group of which he persecuted, putting their sons to death and sparing only their females. Indeed he was one of the mischief-makers
But We wanted to favor those who were oppressed in the land, and make them leaders, and make them the heirs
establish them in the land, and show Pharoah, Haman and their warriors at their hands the same which they feared
So We revealed Our will to the mother of Moses: "Suckle him, and when you feel any danger to his life, cast him into the river without any fear or grief; for We shall certainly restore him to you and make him one of Our Messengers
We made Pharoah’s family pick him up from the river: it was intended that Moses may become their adversary and a cause of their sorrow; for Pharoah, Haman and their warriors were all sinners
The wife of Pharoah said: "This child may become the comfort of the eyes for me and for you. Do not kill him. He may prove useful to us or it may be that we will adopt him as our son." They were unaware of the result of what they were doing
On the other hand, the heart of Moses’s mother was sorely troubled. She would have disclosed as to who he was, had We not strengthened her heart so that she might become one of the true believers
She said to Moses’s sister: "Go, and follow him." So she (Moses's sister) watched him from a distance in such a way that the others did not notice it
We had already ordained that he would refuse to suck any foster mother. His sister came to Pharoah's wife and said: "Shall I point out to you a house whose people will take care of him for you and they will be sincere to him
Thus did We restore him to his mother that her eye might be comforted, that she might not grieve and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true. Yet most of the people do not understand
When he reached maturity and became full-grown, We bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge. Thus do We reward the righteous
One day he entered the city at a time when its people were not yet active, he found two men reaching to each others throats; one was from his own race and the other of his foes. The man of his own race appealed for his help against his foe, whereupon Moses gave his foe a blow which killed him. On seeing what he has done he said: "This is the work of Satan, surely he is an enemy that openly misleads
Then he prayed: "O my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul, please forgive me." So Allah forgave him, surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
Moses promised: "O my Lord! After this favor that You have bestowed on me, I shall never be a helping hand to the criminals
Next morning as he was walking in the city in fear and caution, suddenly he saw the same man whom he had helped the day before cried out to him again for help. Moses replied: "You are certainly a misguided person
Then when Moses was about to lay his hands on a man who was an enemy to both of them, he cried out: "O Moses! Do you intend to kill me as you killed a person yesterday? You only want to become a tyrant in the land and have no intention of reforming anything
At that time, there came a man running from the other end of the city and said: "O Moses! The chiefs are plotting to kill you, therefore, run away, surely I am your well wisher
Hearing this, Moses left that place in fear and caution, praying: "O my Lord! Deliver me from the nation of wrongdoers
As he made his way towards Madyan, he said: "Soon my Lord shall guide me to the Right Way
When he arrived at the well of Madyan, he saw a multitude of men watering their flocks, and besides them two women who were keeping their flocks back. He asked: "What is the problem?" They replied: "We cannot water our flocks until the shepherds take away their flocks from the water, because we are weak and our father is a very old man
So he watered their flocks for them and went back to the shade and prayed: "O Lord! Surely I am in desperate need of whatever good that You may send down to me
Soon after that, one of the two women came to him walking bashfully and said: "My father is calling you. He wishes to reward you for watering our flocks for us." When Moses came to him and narrated his story, the old man said: "Have no fear. You have escaped from those wicked people
One of the daughters said: "Father, hire this man. The best that one can hire is a man who is strong and trustworthy
The old man said to Moses: "I am willing to give you one of my daughters in marriage if you stay in my service for eight years; but you may complete ten if you wish. I do not want to put you in trouble; Allah willing, you will find me one of the righteous
Moses replied: "So be it an agreement between me and you. Whichever of the two terms I complete, let there be no compulsion on me. Allah is the witness to what we have agreed upon
After completing the term of his agreement, when Moses was travelling with his family, he saw a fire in the direction of Mount Tur. He said to his family: "Stay here, I saw a fire and I hope to bring some information from there or a lighted torch with which you may warm yourselves
But when he reached there, a voice called out to him from the right side of the valley of the blessed spot from a tree , saying: "O Moses, surely I am Allah the Lord of the Worlds
Then Allah commanded, "Throw down your staff." When Moses saw that the staff was writhing like a snake, he turned his back and fled, and did not even look behind. Allah said, "O Moses, come back and do not fear; you are quite safe
Now put your hand into your pocket: it will come out shining white without any harm to you -whenever you feel afraid, draw your hand towards yourself to ward off fear - these are two credentials from your Lord towards Pharoah and his chiefs, surely they are wicked people
Moses submitted: "Lord! I have killed one of them: I fear that they will put me to death
My brother Haroon (Aaron), he is more eloquent in speech than I: send him with me as a helper to confirm my words; I fear that they will treat me as a liar
Allah replied: "We will certainly strengthen your arm with your brother and give both of you such authority that they shall not be able to harm you. Now proceed with Our signs. You, and those who follow you, will surely triumph
When Moses came to them (Pharoah and his chiefs) with Our clear signs and invited them to Islam, they said: "This is nothing but baseless sorcery; we never heard such a thing in the time of our forefathers
Moses stated: "My Lord knows best who it is that comes with guidance from Him and who will gain the reward of the hereafter; surely the wrongdoers will not attain felicity
Pharoah said: "O Chiefs! You have no other god that I know of, except myself. O Haman! Bake for me bricks from clay and build me a high tower so that I may climb it to see the God of Moses; most surely I think him to be one of the liars
He and his warriors were arrogant in the land without any right; they thought that they would never be brought back to Us
So We seized him and his warriors, and flung them into the sea. See what was the end of wrongdoers
We made them leaders who started calling people to hellfire, but on the Day of Resurrection they will not get any help
We laid a curse on them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be of the despised
We gave Moses the Book (Torah), after We had destroyed the former generations, an eye opener, a guide, and a blessing so that they may be reminded
O Muhammad, you were not present on the western side of the mountain when We gave Moses the Law, nor did you witness that event
We raised many generations and a long time has passed over them; you were not living among the people of Madyan, reciting to them Our revelations; but it is We Who are sending to you the news of that time
Nor were you at the side of the mountain of Tur when We called out to Moses, but it is your Lord’s mercy that you are being given this information so that you may forewarn a nation to whom no Warner had come before you. Maybe they will take heed
so that they may not be able to say, when a disaster befalls them on account of their misdeeds: "Our Lord, had You sent us a Messenger, we should have followed Your revelations and become the believers
Now that the Truth has come to them from Us, they are saying: "Why is he (Muhammad) not given the like of what was given to Moses?" Have they not rejected that which was given to Moses before? They claim: "These (Torah and Qur’an) are the two works of sorcery complementing each other!" And they say: "We believe in neither
Ask them: "Bring a Book from Allah which is a better guide than these two, I will follow it, if what you say be true
So if they do not meet this demand, you should know that they only follow their own desires. And who is more misguided than the one who follows his own desires rather than the guidance from Allah? In fact, Allah does not guide such wrongdoing people
We have conveyed Our Word to them over and over again in order that they may take heed
Those to whom the scriptures were given before this (Jews and Christians), they do recognize the Truth and believe in this (Qur’an)
When it is recited to them they say: "We believe in it, surely this is the Truth from our Lord: indeed we were Muslims even before this
They are the ones who will be given their reward twice, because they have endured with fortitude, repelling evil with good and giving in charity out of what We have given them
When they hear vain talk, they withdraw from it saying: "Our deeds are for us and yours for you; peace be on to you: we do not desire the way of the ignorant
O Prophet, you cannot give guidance to whom you wish, it is Allah Who gives guidance to whom He pleases, and He is quite aware of those who are guided
Those who do not wish to be guided say: "If we go along with you and accept this guidance, we shall be driven out from our land." But have We not given them a secure sanctuary to which are brought the fruits of all kinds as a provision from Us? But most of them have no knowledge
How many towns have We destroyed who once flourished in their economy? Just see those dwellings of theirs, only a few of which have been inhabited after them; at last We Alone became their inheritors
Your Lord would never destroy the towns until He had sent in their metropolis a Messenger, proclaiming to them Our revelations; and We would not destroy towns except when their dwellers had become wrongdoers
The things which you have been given are but the provisions and adornments of this worldly life; and that which is with Allah is better and more lasting. Why don’t you use your common sense
Can a person to whom We have made a handsome promise and he is sure to receive it, be like the one to whom We have only given the provisions of this world and he is scheduled to be presented on the Day of Resurrection for punishment
Let them not forget that Day when We shall call them and ask: "Where are those whom you deemed to be My associates
Those who are proven guilty as charged will say: "Our Lord! These are the ones whom we led astray; we led them astray as we were astray ourselves. However, we plead our innocence before You; it MidEastWeb for Coexistence http:www.mideastweb.org 185 was not us that they worshipped
Then they will be told: "Appeal to your shoraka' (associate gods)," so they will appeal them but will get no answer. They will see the punishment and wish that they had accepted guidance
Let them also not forget that, on that Day, He will call them and ask: "How did you answer Our Messengers
They will be so confused on that Day that they will not even ask one another
However, the one who has repented in this life, and believed, and done good deeds may hope to be among those who will achieve salvation
We said: "Do not be afraid! You will surely come out on top
Throw that which is in your right hand. It will swallow up every thing they have produced. What they have produced is nothing but a magician's trick, and a magician can never succeed against a miracle no matter how skillful he may be
When the magicians saw the serpent of Musa swallowing all their display, being professionals they knew that it was not magic, so the magicians humbled themselves by prostrating and said: "We believe in the Rabb of Haroon and Musa
Fir`on said: "How do you dare to believe in Him without my permission? This man must be your master, who taught you witchcraft. Well, I will cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides and crucify you on trunks of palm-trees; then you will know which one of us can give a more terrible and more lasting punishment
The magicians replied: "We can never prefer you, rather we prefer the miracle which we have witnessed and Him Who has created us. Therefore do whatever you will; you can only punish us in this worldly life
As for us, we have believed in our Rabb so that He may forgive us our sins and the magic you have forced us to practice. Better is the ever lasting reward of Allah
Surely he who will come to his Rabb as a sinner shall be consigned to Hell - wherein he shall neither die nor live
While he who will come to Him as a believer and has done good deeds shall have the highest ranks
Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow, live therein forever; such is the reward of those who purify themselves from evil
We sent Our revelation to Musa, saying: "Set forth with my servants at night and strike a dry path for them through the sea without fear of being overtaken by Fir'on and without any fear while passing through the sea
Fir`on followed them with his armies but the waters completely overwhelmed them as it could overwhelm them
Thus Fir`on misled his people instead of guiding them aright. - See more at: http://alim.org/library/quran/surah/english/20/MAL
O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, We fixed a time to grant you The Taurat on the right side of Mount Tur and We sent down to you Manna (sweet dish) and Salva (quail meat)
saying: "Eat of the good things We have provided for your sustenance and do not transgress, lest you should incur My wrath, and whoever incurs My wrath is surely bound to perish
Your Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses for His work whom He pleases. It is not for them (pagans) to choose indeed Allah Who enlarges the provision for whom He wills and restricts it from whom He pleases. If Allah had not been gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us too. Alas! We did not remember that the disbelievers never attain felicity
As for the abode of the Hereafter, We have reserved it for those who seek neither glory nor corruption in the earth; the ultimate good is for the righteous
Anyone who brings a good deed shall have something even better; while anyone who brings an evil deed will find that those who perform evil deeds will be punished only to the extent of their misdeeds
O Prophet, rest assured that He Who charged you with The Qur'an will bring you to the best destination. Say: "My Lord best knows him who has brought guidance and him who is in manifest error
You (O Muhammad) never expected that the Book would be revealed to you. Only through your Lord's mercy has it been revealed to you: therefore do not be a helper in any way to the unbelievers
Let no one turn you away from the revelations of Allah now that they have been revealed to you. Invite people to your Lord and be not of the pagans (who join other deities with Allah)
Invoke no other god besides Allah. There is no god but Him. Everything is perishable except Him. To him belongs the judgement and to him will you all be returned
Alif Lam M'im
Do the people think that they will be left alone on saying "We believe," and that they will not be tested
We did test those who have gone before them. Allah has to see (for the purpose of reward and punishment) who are the truthful and who are the liars
Or do the evildoers think that they will escape from Our reach? How bad is their judgment
He that hopes to meet Allah must know that Allah’s appointed time is sure to come and He hears all and knows all
He that strives, does that for his own soul; for Allah is certainly transcendent and beyond any need of the worlds
As for those who believe and do good deeds, We shall cleanse them of their sins and We shall reward them according to the best of their deeds
We have enjoined man to show kindness to his parents; but if they (your parents) force you to commit shirk with Me, of which you have no knowledge, do not obey them. To Me is your return and I will inform you of what you have done
Those who have accepted the true faith and do good deeds shall be admitted among the righteous
There are some among people, who say: "We believe in Allah;" yet when they suffer in the cause of Allah they confuse the persecution of people with the punishment of Allah. But when there comes help in the shape of a victory from your Lord, they are sure to say: "We have always been with you." Is not Allah fully aware of what is in the hearts of the people of the world
Most surely Allah knows those who believe and knows those who are the hypocrites
The unbelievers say to the believers: "Follow us, and we will bear the burden of your sins." But they will not bear any burden of their sins; they are surely lying
Of course, they shall bear their own burdens as well as the burdens of others in addition to their own; and on the Day of Resurrection they shall be questioned about their invented lies
We sent Noah to his people and he lived among them a thousand years less fifty. Then because of their wrongdoings the flood overtook them
But We delivered him and all who were in the ark and We made that ark a sign for the peoples of the world
Likewise Abraham, when he said to his people: "Worship Allah and fear Him, this is better for you if you understand
You worship idols besides Allah and fabricate falsehood. In fact, those whom you worship besides Allah have no power to give you your sustenance, therefore seek your sustenance from Allah, and worship Him. Give thanks to Him, for to Him you shall be returned
If you deny the Message, then nations have denied before you . The only duty a Messenger has is to deliver Allah’s Message clearly
Do they not see how Allah originates creation then repeats its process? Surely it is easy for Allah
Say to them: "Travel through the earth and see how Allah originates the creation, then creates the later creation. Surely Allah has power over everything
He punishes whom He wills and shows mercy to whom He pleases, and to Him you shall be turned back
Neither can you frustrate Him in the earth or in the Heaven; nor have you any protector or helper besides Allah
As for those who disbelieve Allah’s revelations and deny that they will ever meet Him, they are the ones who shall despair of My mercy and they are the ones who shall have a painful punishment
The people of Abraham had no answer except to say: "Kill him!" Or "Burn him!" But Allah saved him from the fire when they tried to burn him. Surely in this incident there are signs for those who believe
After coming out from the fire safely, Abraham addressed them: "Today you have made idols, instead of Allah, a means of affection among yourselves, but remember, on the Day of Resurrection you shall disown and curse one another. Fire shall be your abode and you shall have no helper
Witnessing this whole incident, Lot affirmed his belief with Abraham. Finally Abraham said: "I will migrate towards my Lord (go where my Lord has bidden me). He is the Mighty, the Wise
We gave him Isaac (Isaac a son) and Jacob (Jacob - a grandson), and placed the Prophethood and the Book in his progeny - thus We gave him his reward in this life, and in the hereafter he will surely be among the righteous
When Lot said to his people: "Surely you are committing such sexual misconduct as no one in the worlds has ever attempted before you
Do you lust after males, commit robbery on the highways and commit evil deeds even in your assemblies?" His people had no answer except to say: "Bring us the scourge of Allah if you are truthful
Lot prayed: "O Lord! Help me against this degenerate nation
When Our Messengers (angels) came to Abraham with the good news (the birth of a son in his old age), they said: "We are to destroy the people of that town, for its people are indeed wrongdoers
Abraham said: "But Lot is in there." The angels replied: "We know who is in there: we shall certainly save him and his family, except his wife, who will remain behind
And when Our Messengers (angels) came to Lot he became sad and anxious on their account, for he felt powerless to protect them. But they said "Do not fear nor grieve (we are the angels assigned for their torment): we shall save you and your family except your wife; she will be of those who will remain behind
We are going to bring down a scourge from heaven upon the people of this town on account of their transgression
Surely We have left a clear sign from it (the ruins of this town) for people who care to understand
To the people of Madyan We sent their brother Shu‘aib, who said: "O my people! Worship Allah and look forward to the Last Day, and do not transgress in the land wickedly
But they denied him, so a severe earthquake seized them and by the morning they were lifeless bodies in their own homes
Likewise We destroyed the people of ‘Ad and the Thamud: you have seen the traces of their dwellings. Satan had made their foul deeds fair-seeming to them and diverted them from the Right Way, though they were intelligent people
Moses came to Qarun (Korah), Pharoah (Pharaoh) and Haman with clear signs but they remained arrogant in the land; yet they could not go ahead of Us
We seized all of them for their sinfulness: against some We sent a violent tornado full of stones, some were seized by a mighty blast, some were swallowed up by the earth, and yet some We drowned. It was not Allah Who was unjust to them, but they were unjust to their own souls
The parable of those who take protectors other than Allah is that of a spider who builds for itself a dwelling, and surely the weakest of all dwellings is the dwelling of a spider, if they but knew it
Surely Allah knows whoever they invoke besides Him; He is the All-Mighty, the Wise
These are the parables that We cite for mankind; but none will grasp them except the wise
Allah has created the heavens and the earth to manifest the Truth. Surely in this there is a sign for the believers
Recite from this Book (Al-Qur'an) which has been revealed to you and establish Salah (Islamic prayers). Surely Salah keeps one away from shameful and evil deeds; and surely the remembrance of Allah (and Allah’s mention of your name in front of the angels) is the greatest indeed, Allah knows what you do
Do not argue with the People of the Book except in good taste - except with those who are wicked among them - and say: "We believe in that which is sent down to us and that which is sent down to you; Our God and your God is the same One God to Whom we submit as Muslims
O Prophet, We have sent down this Book to you (similar to that of Moses and Jesus). So the People of the Book believe in it, and so do some of these (people of Arabia): and none but unbelievers deny Our revelations
O Muhammad, you have never read a book before this nor have you ever transcribed one with your right hand. Had you done either of these, the quibblers could suspect it
Rather, these are clear signs in the breast of those who are endowed with knowledge: and none deny Our signs except the wrongdoers
They ask: "Why have the signs not been sent down to him from his Lord?" Tell them: "The signs are in the hands of Allah. I am only a plain Warner
Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you this Book (AL-Qur’an) which is recited to them, surely in it is a blessing and a reminder for those who believe
Tell them: "Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you - for He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth - those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve Allah, it is they who shall be the losers
They challenge you to hasten the scourge on them. Had a time not been fixed for it, the scourge would already have overtaken them. It is going to come suddenly and catch them unaware
They challenge you to hasten the scourge, whereas hell has already encircled the unbelievers
On that Day the punishment shall cover them from above and from beneath their feet, and Allah will say: "Now taste the reward of your deeds
O My servants who have believed! Surely My earth is spacious to migrate if needed, therefore worship Me and Me Alone
Every soul shall taste death, then to Us you shall all return
Those who embrace true faith and do good deeds shall be lodged in the mansions of paradise beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever. What an excellent reward for the doers of good deeds
the ones who have shown patience and put their trust in their Lord
How many creatures are there that do not carry their provisions with them? Allah provides for them as He provides for you. It is He Who is All-hearing, All-knowing
If you ask the disbelievers as to who has created the heavens and the earth, and subjected the sun and the moon to His laws? They will certainly say: "Allah!" How are they then being deluded away from the truth
Allah gives abundantly to whom He pleases and sparingly to whom He wills; surely Allah has knowledge of all things
And if you ask them who sends down rainwater from the sky and thereby raises the dead land back to life?" They will certainly say: "Allah!" Say, "Praise be to Allah!" Yet most of them do not use their common sense
The life of this world is nothing but a pastime and play! It is the life of the hereafter that is the true life, if they but knew it
If they embark on a ship, and the ship gets into trouble, they call upon Allah, being sincerely obedient to Him; but when He brings them safely to land, they start committing shirk (giving credit for their safe arrival to others)
so that they may become ungrateful for the blessing that We have bestowed on them and enjoy the life of this world! They will soon come to know the result of this behavior
Do they not see that We have made for them a secure sanctuary in the Ka'bah, while the people are being snatched away from all around them? Do they still believe in falsehood and deny the blessings of Allah
And who is more wicked than the one who forges a lie against Allah or rejects the Truth when it reaches him? Is not the hell a fitting abode for such disbelievers
As for those who strive in Our cause, We will surely guide them to Our ways; rest assured that Allah is with the righteous
Alif Lam M'im
The Romans have been defeated (by the Persians, in Syria - A.D. 615; the Prophet Muhammad’s sympathies were with the Romans who were Christians, while the pagan Arabs were on the side of the Persians who were idol worshippers)
in the neighboring land, but after this defeat, they will soon be victorious
within a few years. The command lies with Allah in the past instance as well as in the future. On that day the believers will rejoice
for the victory of the Romans as well as their own victory against the pagans with the help of Allah. He helps whom He pleases and He is the All-Mighty, the Most Merciful
This is the promise of Allah and Allah never breaks His promise; but most people do not know
They only know the outward show of this world’s life, but they are heedless about the life to come
Have they not considered in their own minds that Allah created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them for a just reason and for a specified time? But the truth is that many among mankind do not believe in the meeting with their Lord (the Day of Resurrection)
Have they not traveled through the earth and seen what was the end of those before them? They were superior in strength than these; they tilled the soil and built on it more than these have ever built. There came to them their Messengers with clear signs (but they rejected them to the detriment of their own destruction): it was not Allah Who wronged them, but they wronged their own souls
Evil was the outcome for those who committed evil, rejected the revelations of Allah and kept ridiculing them
It is Allah Who originates creation; then repeats it, and then to Him you shall be brought back
On the Day when the Hour of Judgement will be established, the criminals shall be in despair
None of their shoraka' (gods which they had set up besides Allah), will be there to intercede for them and they themselves will disown their shoraka
On that Day when the Hour of Judgement will be established, mankind will be sorted out
Those who have embraced the faith and have done good deeds shall be made happy in a garden of paradise
And those who have rejected Faith, denied Our revelations and the meeting of the hereafter shall be presented for punishment
Therefore, glorify Allah in the evening and in the morning
all praise is due to Him in the heavens and the earth - so glorify Him in the late afternoon and when the day begins to decline
He brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the living, and gives life to the earth after its death. Likewise you shall be brought forth to life after your death
Of His signs, one is that He created you from dust; and then behold you men are scattered throughout the earth
And of His signs, another one is that He created for you mates from among yourselves that you may find comfort with them, and He planted love and kindness in your hearts; surely there are signs in this for those who think about it
And yet others of His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference of your languages and colors; surely there are signs in this for the knowledgeable
And among His signs is your sleep at night and quest for His bounty during the day; surely there are signs in this for those who pay heed
And of His signs is the showing of lightning, in which there is fear as well as hope, and He sends down rainwater from the sky and with it gives life to the earth after its death; surely there are signs in this for those who use their common sense
And of His signs are the firmly standing heaven and earth by His command; then as soon as He will summon you out of the earth, you shall come forth at one call
To Him belongs everything that is in the heavens and the earth; all are obedient to Him
He it is Who originates creation, then repeats it; and it is easy for Him. To Him belongs the highest similitude in the heavens and the earth, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
We give you an example from your own lives. Do you let your slaves be equal partners in the wealth which We have given you? Do you fear them as you fear each other? Thus do We spell out Our revelations for those who use their common sense
Nay! The wrongdoers are led by their own desires, without real knowledge. So who can guide those whom Allah leaves astray? They will have no helpers
Therefore, stand firm in your devotion to the upright faith - the nature made by Allah, the one on which mankind is created - and the laws of Nature ordained by Allah cannot be changed. That is the standard of true faith, but most among mankind do not know
Turn in repentance to Him, fear Him, establish Salah (regular five times daily prayers) and do not be of the pagans
those who divide their religion into sects and become separate groups, each group rejoicing in its own circle
When an affliction befalls the people, they turn in prayer to their Lord in repentance. But when He let them taste a blessing from Him, lo! Some of them start committing shirk
showing no gratitude for What We have given them. Enjoy yourselves; soon you will find out your folly
Have We sent down to them an authority, that speaks of the shirk which they are committing
When We give mankind a taste of blessing, they rejoice, but when some evil afflicts them because of their own misdeeds, lo! They are in despair
Do they not see that it is Allah Who gives abundantly to whom He pleases and sparingly to whom He wills? Surely there are signs in this example for those who believe
O believers, give what is due to your relatives, the needy and the traveller in need. That is best for those who seek the pleasure of Allah and it is they who will attain felicity
That usury which you give to increase the wealth of people, does not increase with Allah: but the Zakah that you give to seek the pleasure of Allah, shall be repaid to you many times over
It is Allah Who has created you, then provides you your daily bread, then He causes you to die, and then He will bring you back to life. Is there any of your shoraka' (associates you have set up besides Allah) who can do any of these things? Glory be to Him, and exalted be He above the shirk these people commit
Mischief (war between Roman and Persian empires) has appeared in the land and the sea in consequence of man’s own misdeeds. Through such wars Allah let people taste the fruit of their deeds, so that they may turn back from evil
O Prophet, tell them: "Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who have passed away before you: most of them were pagans (worshipped other gods besides Allah)
Therefore stand firm in your devotion to the true faith before that Day arrives on which there will be no chance of averting from Allah. On that Day, they shall be divided in two groups
Those who disbelieved will bear the burden of their disbelief, and those who have done good deeds will be made ready for their home in paradise
so that He may, out of His mercy, reward those who have believed and done good deeds. Surely He does not like the disbelievers
Of His signs is that He sends the winds as bearers of good news, and that He may let you taste His blessing, and your ships may sail by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty, and that you may be grateful
We sent before you Messengers to their respective people, and they brought them clear signs. Some rejected them while others believed, then We subjected the guilty ones to Our retribution and We aided the believers - it is due on Us to help the Believers
It is Allah Who sends the winds to raise the clouds, then He spreads them in the sky and breaks them into fragments as He pleases, then you see raindrops falling from their midst. When He showers this rain upon those of His servants whom He pleases, lo! They are filled with joy
though before its coming they may have lost all hope
Just look at the traces of Allah’s Mercy! How He gives life to the earth after its death. Surely the same way He will give life to the dead; for He has power over all things
And if We send a wind which turns their crops yellow, behold they will become even more firm in their disbelief
O Prophet, you cannot make the dead hear you, nor can you make the deaf hear your call especially when they have turned their backs and are running away
nor can you guide the blind out of their error. None will hear you save those who believe in Our revelations and submit themselves as Muslims
It is Allah Who has created you in a state of helplessness as a baby, then gave you strength to come out of helplessness in youth, then after strength again helplessness and grey hair in old age. He creates whatever He wills and it is He Who is the All- knowing, the Almighty
On the Day when the Hour of Judgement will be established, the criminals will swear that they did not stay in this world more than an hour; thus are they ever deluded
But those who are given knowledge and faith will say: "In fact you have stayed, according to the Book of Allah, till the Day of Resurrection and this is the Day of Resurrection: but you were not aware
On that Day, no excuse of theirs will avail the wrongdoers, nor will they be allowed to seek forgiveness
The fact is that We have set forth every kind of example for men in this Qur’an, but whatever sign you may bring, the unbelievers are sure to say: "You are preaching falsehood
Thus Allah has set a seal on the hearts of those who do not use their common sense
So O Prophet, have patience: surely the promise of Allah is true; and do not let those, who themselves have no certainty of faith, shake your firmness
Alif Lam M'im
These are verses of the Book of wisdom
a guide and a blessing for the righteous
who establish Salah (Islamic Prayers), give Zakah (obligatory Charity) and firmly believe in the hereafter
These are on true guidance from their Lord and these are the ones who will attain felicity
Among the people there are some who purchase frivolous tales so that they may lead people away from the Way of Allah, without any knowledge, and take the invitation to the Right Way as a mockery. For such people there will be a humiliating punishment
When Our revelations are recited to such a person, he turns his face away in arrogance as if he did not hear them or as if his ears are sealed: announce to him the news of a painful punishment
As for those who believe and do good deeds, there will be gardens of delight
wherein they shall live forever. The promise of Allah is true: He is the Almighty, the Wise
He created the heavens without visible pillars; He set mountains on the earth lest it should shake with you; and scattered through it all kinds of animals. We send down rain from the sky with which We grow every type of noble species in pairs
This is Allah’s creation; now, show Me what is there that others (gods) besides Him have created? - In fact the wrongdoers are in manifest error
We gave wisdom to Luqman so that he may be grateful to Allah. The one who pays thanks, does so for his own good; and the one who denies His favors, should know that Allah is certainly free of all wants, worthy of all praise
When Luqman, while advising his son, said to him: "O my son! Do not ever commit shirk (associating anyone else with Allah); surely committing shirk is the worst iniquity
We have enjoined man concerning his parents - his mother carries him in her womb while suffering weakness upon weakness and then weans him for two years - That’s why We commanded him: "Give thanks to Me and to your parents, and keep in mind that, to Me is your final goal
If they argue with you to commit shirk, of which you have no knowledge, then do not obey them; however you should still treat them kindly in this world, but follow the way of that individual who has turned to Me. After all, to Me is your return; then I will inform you about the reality of all that you have done
Luqman further said: "O my son! Allah will bring all things to light, be they as small as a grain of a mustard seed, be they hidden inside a rock or high above in the heavens or deep down in the earth. Allah is well aware of all things to their finest details
O my son! Establish Salah, enjoin good and forbid the evil. Endure with patience whatever befalls you, surely this shows your determination in conducting the affairs
Do not speak to the people with your face turned away, nor walk proudly on earth; for Allah does not love any self-conceited boaster
Be moderate in your pace and lower your voice; for the harshest of voices is the braying of a donkey
Do you not see that Allah has subjected to your benefit all that is in the heavens and in the earth, and has lavished on you His evident and hidden favors? Yet there are some people who still argue about Allah without knowledge, without guidance or an enlightening Book
When they are asked to follow what Allah has revealed, they reply: "Nay, we shall follow the ways upon which we found our forefathers." What! Will they still follow them even though Satan invites them to the punishment of the blazing fire
He who surrenders himself to Allah and leads a righteous life has indeed grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold; as the ultimate disposal of affairs rests with Allah
As for he who disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you. To Us is their return and We shall inform them the reality of their deeds; surely Allah knows the secrets of the breasts
We let them enjoy for a while this life, then in the hereafter We shall drive them to an unrelenting punishment
If you ask them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will certainly say: "Allah." Say: "Praise be to Allah!" But the fact is that most of them do not understand
To Allah belong all that is in the heavens and earth; surely Allah is the One Who is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
If all the trees on earth were pens, and the ocean were ink, replenished by seven more oceans, the writing of Allah’s Words (His wonderful signs and creations) would not be exhausted; surely Allah is Mighty Wise
Neither your creation nor your resurrection is anything but as simple as the creation and resurrection of a single soul; surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
Do you not see that Allah causes the night to pass into the day and the day into the night, that He has subjected the sun and the moon to His law, each pursuing its course for an appointed term, and that Allah is well aware of all your actions
This is because Allah is the only Reality and because all those to whom the people invoke besides Him, are false, and because Allah is the One Who is the Most High, the Great
Do you not see how the ships sail through the ocean by the grace of Allah so that He may show you some of His signs? Surely there are signs in this for every patient, thankful person
When any giant wave covers them like a canopy, they pray to Allah with all devotion making their faith pure for Him. But when He delivers them safely to land, some of them falter between belief and unbelief. None reject Our revelations except the treacherous and the ungrateful
O mankind! Have fear of your Lord and fear that Day when no father shall avail his son nor a son his father. Surely the promise of Allah is true. Let not the life of this world deceive you, nor let the Deceiver (Satan) deceive you concerning Allah
Surely Allah Alone has the knowledge of the Hour, He is the One Who sends down the rain and He knows what is in the wombs. No one knows what he will earn the next day; and no one knows in what land he will die. Surely, Allah knows all this and is aware of everything
Alif Lam M'im
This Book (Al-Qur'an), which contains no doubt, is revealed by the Lord of the worlds
Do the people say: "He (Muhammad) has forged it?" Nay! It is the Truth from your Lord, so that you may warn a people to whom no Warner has come before you: so that they may receive guidance
It is Allah Who has created the heavens, the earth and all that is between them in six periods, then firmly established Himself on the Throne of Authority. You have no guardian or intercessor besides Him. Will you not then take heed
He plans all affairs from the heavens to the earth: then each affair ascends to Him (takes place) in a time period which, to your calculations, is one thousand years
Such is He, the Knower of all the hidden and the open, the Almighty, the Merciful
It is He Who has given the best form to everything that He has created. He originated the creation of man from clay
then automated the creation of his progeny by an extract of a despicable water
then He fashioned him in due proportion and breathed into him of His spirit. He gave you ears, eyes and heart; yet you are seldom thankful
They say: "What! Once we are lost in the earth, shall we be created afresh?" Nay! They deny the fact that they will ever meet their Lord
Say: "The angel of death (Izra‘il) who is assigned for you will carry off your souls and bring you back to your Lord
If only you could visualize when the criminals will hang their heads before their Lord saying: "Our Lord! We have seen and we have heard; please send us back to the world and we will do good deeds: we are now convinced
In response to that, it will be said: "Had We so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance. But My word which I had said has been fulfilled, that I shall fill hell with jinns and men all together
Now taste the reward for your forgetting the meeting of this Day - We too have forgotten you now - taste the everlasting punishment in consequence of your misdeeds
Only those people believe in Our revelations, who, when they are reminded of them, prostrate themselves in adoration and celebrate the praises of their Lord and are not puffed up with pride
Who forsake their beds and invoke their Lord with fear and hope; and they spend in charity out of the sustenance which We have given them
No one knows what delights of the eye have been kept hidden for them as a reward for their good deeds
Can he who is a believer be like the one who is a transgressor? Of course, they are not alike
As for those who believe and do good deeds, they shall be awarded the gardens of paradise as a reward of their labors
But those who transgress shall be cast into the fire. Whenever they try to escape from it, they shall be pushed back into it, and it will be said to them: "Taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny
We shall certainly make them taste the lighter torment in this life before the greater punishment of the hereafter, so that they may return to the Right Way
Who could be more unjust than the one who is reminded of the revelations of his Lord and he turns away from them? Surely We shall take vengeance on such criminals
We gave the Book to Moses - so be not in doubt for receiving this Book which meets the same criteria - and We made it a guide for the Children of Israel
When they showed patience, We appointed from among them leaders giving guidance under Our command so long as they continued to have faith in Our revelations
Surely your Lord will decide between them, on the Day of Resurrection, concerning those matters wherein they differ among themselves
Do they not learn a lesson from the historical events of how many generations We have destroyed before them in whose dwelling-places they move about? Surely there are signs in this. Do they not listen
Do they not see how We drive the rain to the parched lands and therefrom bring forth crops of which they and their cattle eat? Have they no vision
Still they say: "When will this judgement take place, if you are telling the truth
Tell them: "On the Day of Judgement it will be of no benefit to the unbelievers even if they believe, since at that time they will not be granted a respite
Therefore, pay no heed to them, and wait as they are waiting
O Prophet! Fear Allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites: certainly Allah is aware and wise
Follow that which is revealed to you from your Lord: for Allah is aware of what you do
Put your trust in Allah: for Allah is your all-sufficient protector
Allah has not put two hearts in a person’s body: nor does He regard your wives whom you divorce through Zihar (divorcing a wife saying: from now on you are as my mother, depriving her conjugal rights yet keeping her like a slave nor letting her marry anyone else) as your mothers: nor does He regard your adopted sons as your sons. These are mere words which you utter with your mouths; but Allah declares the Truth and guides you to the Right Way
Name your adopted sons after their fathers; that is more just in the sight of Allah, and if you don’t know who their fathers are, then call them as your brothers in faith and your friends. There is no blame on you for an unintentional mistake, but you will be held responsible for what you do with the intention of your hearts; Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves and his wives are as their mothers. Blood relatives have a greater claim on one another than the other believers and the Muhajirin (early Muslims who migrated from Mecca to Medina) according to the Book of Allah: although you are permitted to some good (through leaving bequests) for your friends . This has been written in the Book of Allah
O Muhammad, remember the Covenant which We took from all the Prophets - from you as well as from Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus son of Mary - We took that solemn Covenant from all of them
so that He may question the truthful concerning the Truth (that they were entrusted with): as for the unbelievers, He has prepared a painful punishment
O believers! Remember the favor of Allah, which he bestowed on you, when you were attacked by your enemy’s army (during the battle of Trench/Confederates) and We unleashed against them violent winds and invisible forces. Allah saw all that you were doing
When the enemy attacked you from above and from below; when your eyes were petrified due to fear and your hearts leaped up to your throats, and you began to entertain all sorts of doubts about Allah
there, the believers were put to test; and were shaken with tremendous shaking
Remember, when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts there was a disease were openly saying: "Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion
And a party of them said: "O people of Yathrib (Medina)! You cannot stand the attack much longer. Go back to your city." And yet another party of them sought leave of the Prophet saying: "In fact our houses are insecure," whereas they were not insecure. They intended nothing but to run away from the battlefront
Had the city been entered from all sides, and had they been incited to sedition, they would have little hesitation to become partners in it
Even though they had made covenant with Allah not to show their backs, and the covenant with Allah must surely be answered for
Tell them: "Running away will not do you any good, and if you are running away from death or being killed, you would enjoy this life only for a little while
Ask them: "Who can protect you from Allah if He intends to harm you or who can prevent Him if He intends to show you mercy?" They will find none besides Allah to protect or help them
Allah is well aware of those among you who hold others back and those who say to their brethren: "Join us," and seldom take part in the fighting themselves
They are ever reluctant to assist you. Whenever they are in danger, they look towards you with their eyes rolling as though they were at the point of death, but when they are out of danger, they will come to greet you with their sharp tongues in greed for gain. Such people have no faith. Allah has made all their deeds null and void, and this is easy for Allah
They thought that the confederates would never withdraw. Indeed, if the confederates should come again, they would wish to be among the beduins and seek news about you from a safe distance; and if they happened to be with you, they would take but a little part in the fighting
You have indeed, in the life of Messenger-Allah, the 'Best Model' for him whose hope is in Allah and the Day of the Hereafter, and who engages himself much in the remembrance of Allah
When the true believers saw the confederate forces they said: "This is what Allah and His Messenger had promised us: Allah and his Messenger were absolutely true." This increased them all the more in their faith and their zeal in obedience
Among the believers there are men who have been true to their covenant with Allah: of them some have completed their vow through sacrificing their lives, and some others are waiting for it, and have not changed their determination in the least
All this happens so that Allah may reward the truthful for their truth and punish the hypocrites or accept their repentance if He wills: for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah turned back the unbelievers; they retreated in their rage without gaining any advantage, and Allah was sufficient to fight on behalf of the believers; for Allah is All- Powerful, All-Mighty
And brought down, from their fortresses, those people of the Book (The Jews of Bani Qurayzah) who supported the invaders, and cast terror into their hearts. As a result, some of them you slew and some you took as prisoners
Thus He made you heirs of their lands, their houses and their goods, and also the land (Khayber) on which you had never set your foot before. Truly, Allah has power over all things
O Prophet! Say to your wives: "If you desire the life of this world and its glitter, then come, I shall give you of these and let you go in an honorable way
But if you seek Allah and His Messenger and the home of the hereafter, then you should rest assured that Allah has prepared a great reward for those of you who are good
O wives of the Prophet! If any of you were guilty of open indecency, her punishment will be increased to double and this is easy for Allah
Those of you (O wives of the Prophet Muhammad) who obey Allah and His Messenger and practice righteousness, shall be granted double reward, and for them We have prepared a generous provision
O wives of the Prophet! You are not like the other women: if you fear Allah, then you should not be complaisant while talking to the men who are not closely related to you, lest the one in whose heart is a disease may thereby be encouraged, and speak using suitable good words
Stay in your homes and do not display your finery as women used to do in the days of ignorance (pre-Islamic days); establish Salah, pay Zakah, and obey Allah and His Messenger. O women of the household of Messenger, Allah only intends to remove uncleanliness from you and to purify you completely
Remember the revelations of Allah and wise sayings which are recited in your homes, surely Allah is aware of even the finest mysteries
Surely the Muslim men and the Muslim women, the believing men and the believing women, the devout men and the devout women, the truthful men and the truthful women, the patient men and the patient women, the humble men and humble women, the charitable men and the charitable women, the fasting men and the fasting women, the men who guard their chastity and the women who guard their chastity, and the men who remember Allah much and the women who remember Allah much - for all those, Allah has prepared forgiveness and a great reward
It is not fitting for a believing man or a believing woman to have an option in their affairs when a matter has been decided by Allah and His Messenger; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger has indeed strayed into a clearly wrong path
O Prophet, remember when you said to the one (Zaid, Prophet's adopted son) whom Allah as well as you had favored: "Keep your wife in wedlock and fear Allah." You sought to hide in your heart what Allah intended to reveal; you were afraid of the people whereas it would have been more appropriate to fear Allah. So when Zaid divorced his wife, We gave her to you in marriage, so that there remains no hindrance for the believers to wed the wives of their adopted sons if they divorced them. And Allah’s Command had to be carried out
There can be no blame attached to the Prophet for doing what is sanctioned for him by Allah. Such has been the way of Allah with those who have gone before; and the decrees of Allah are preordained
Those who are charged with the mission of conveying the message of Allah are to fear Him, they are supposed to fear none but Allah; for Allah is sufficient to settle their account
Muhammad is not the father of any of your men (he is not going to leave any male heirs). He is the Messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets. Allah has the knowledge of all things
O believers! Remember Allah as a frequent remembrance
and glorify Him morning and evening
It is He Who sends His blessings on you (believers) and so do His angels, that He may bring you out of darkness into light, for He is Merciful to the believers
On the Day of their meeting with Him, their greeting shall be: "Salaam (peace)!": and He has prepared for them a generous reward
O Prophet! Surely We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of good news and as a Warner
and to call the people towards Allah by His leave and a lamp spreading light (guidance)
Give good news to the believers that they shall have great blessings from Allah
Do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites, disregard their annoyances and put your trust in Allah; for Allah is sufficient as a disposer of affairs
O believers! If you marry believing women and divorce them before the marriage is consummated, you are not required to observe the Iddat (waiting period) which you should count for them, so give them some present and relieve them gracefully
O Prophet! We have made lawful to you the wives to whom you have given their dowers; and those ladies whom your right hands possess (from the prisoners of war) whom Allah has assigned to you; and the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts, who have migrated with you; and the believing woman who gave herself to the Prophet if the Prophet desires to marry her - this permission is only for you and not for the other believers; We know what restrictions We have imposed on the other believers concerning their wives and those whom their right hands possess. We have granted you this privilege as an exception so that no blame may be attached to you. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
You may put off any of your wives you please and take to your bed any of them you please, and there is no blame on you if you call back any of them you had temporarily set aside. This is most proper, so that their eyes may be cooled and they may not grieve, and that they will remain satisfied with what you give them. O believers! Allah knows all that is in your hearts; for Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing
It shall be unlawful for you, O Muhammad, to marry more women after this or to change your present wives with other women, though their beauty may be pleasing to you, however those ladies whom your right hands possess are an exception. Allah takes cognizance of all things
O believers! Do not enter the houses of the Prophet without permission, nor stay waiting for meal time: but if you are invited to a meal, enter, and when you have eaten disperse and do not seek long conversation. Such behavior annoys the Prophet, he feels shy in asking you to leave, but Allah does not feel shy in telling the truth. If you have to ask his wives for anything, speak to them from behind a curtain. This is more chaste for your hearts and for theirs. It is not proper for you to annoy the Messenger of Allah, nor ever to marry his wives after him; this would be a grievous offence in the sight of Allah
Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, surely Allah has full knowledge of all things
There is no blame on the ladies if they appear before their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sisters’ sons, their familiar women and those whom their right hands possess (slaves). O Ladies! Have fear of Allah: for Allah is a witness to all things
Indeed Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet. O believers, call for Allah’s blessings on him and saLute him with all respect
Surely those who annoy Allah and His Messenger, are cursed by Allah in this world and in the hereafter. He has prepared for them a humiliating punishment
And those who annoy believing men and believing women, for no fault of theirs, shall bear the guilt of slander and an evident sin
O Prophet! Enjoin your wives, daughters and the believing women that they should draw their outer garments over their persons. That is more proper, so that they may be recognized and not bothered. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
If the hypocrites, those in whose hearts is malice and the scandal mongers of Medina do not desist; We shall rouse you against them, and their days in the city - as your neighbors - will be numbered
They shall be cursed wherever they are found and they shall be seized and killed mercilessly
This has been the Way of Allah regarding such people among those who lived before you, and you will never find any change in the Way of Allah
People ask you about the Hour of Doom. Tell them: "Allah Alone has the knowledge of it. Who knows? It may be that the Hour is near at hand
Surely Allah has laid a curse on the unbelievers and has prepared for them a blazing fire
to live therein forever and they shall find no protector or helper
That Day, when their faces will roll about in the fire, they will say: "Woe to us! Would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger
They will further say: "Our Lord! We obeyed our chiefs and our great ones and they misled us from the Right Way
Our Lord! Give them double punishment and lay on them a mighty curse
O believers! Be not like those who slandered Moses, but Allah cleared him of what they said - for he was honorable in the sight of Allah
O believers! Fear Allah and always say the right thing
He will bless your works and forgive your sins - for he that obeys Allah and His Messenger, has indeed achieved the highest achievement
The fact is that We offered the Trust ( "freedom of choice") to the heavens, to the earth and to the mountains, but they refused to undertake it and were afraid, but man undertook it. He was indeed unjust and foolish
(The inevitable result of bearing the burden of Allah’s Trust is) that Allah will punish the hypocrite men, the hypocrite women, the pagan men and the pagan women, and that Allah will turn in mercy to the believing men and the believing women: for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Praise be to Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth! To Him be praise in the hereafter. He is the Wise, the Aware
He has the knowledge of all that goes into the earth and that which comes out of it; and all that comes down from heaven and that ascends to it. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving
The unbelievers say: "The Hour of Doom will never come to us." Tell them: "Nay! By my Lord, the Knower of the unseen, it shall certainly come upon you. Nothing, even equal an atom, in the heavens or the earth is hidden from Him; nor there is anything smaller or greater than that, but is recorded in the Clear Book
The Hour is going to come and the Day of Judgement shall be established, to reward those who have believed and done good deeds; it is them for whom there is forgiveness and an honorable sustenance
As for those who strive to discredit Our revelations, there will be a humiliating painful punishment
Those to whom knowledge has been given can see that the revelations sent down to you from your Lord are the Truth and it guides to the Way of the Almighty, the Praise Worthy
The unbelievers say to the people: "Shall we point out to you a man who claims that when your body will disintegrate and crumble into dust you shall be raised to life again
Has he forged a lie against Allah or is he mad?" Nay! In fact those who do not believe in the Hereafter are doomed, for they are in gross error
Do they not see the sky and the earth that surrounds them from front and from behind? If We want, We can cave in the earth to swallow them up or let the fragments of the sky fall upon them. Surely there is a sign in this for every devotee that turns to Allah in repentance
We bestowed Our blessings on David and commanded: "O mountains! Join him in singing My rhymes," and a similar command was given to the birds. We made iron soft for him
saying: "make coats of armor measuring out the links in mail and O people of David, do good deeds; surely I am watching over all of your actions
And We made the winds subservient to Solomon, which made a month’s journey in the morning and a month’s journey in the evening; and We made a fountain of molten copper to flow for him; and subdued Jinns for him who worked in front of him by the leave of his Lord; and if any of them turned aside from Our command, We made Him taste the punishment of the blazing fire
They worked for him as he desired: making arches, images, basins as large as reservoirs and built-in cooking cauldrons. We said: "O Family of David! Work gratefully." Only a few of My devotees are truly grateful
When We decreed Solomon’s death he was leaning on his staff. The Jinns did not know that he was dead until the termite ate away his staff and he fell down. Thus it became clear to the Jinns that if they had known the unseen, they would not have continued in the humiliating punishment of their task
For the people of Saba (Sheba, presently a town in Yeman) there was indeed a sign in their dwelling place: two gardens - one to the right and one to the left. It was said to them: "Eat of what your Lord has given you and render thanks to Him. Pleasant is your land and forgiving is your Lord
But they gave no heed. So We let loose upon them the waters of the dam (called Ma'arib) and We converted their two gardens into the gardens producing bitter fruit, tamarisks and a few lote bushes
Thus did We requite them for their disbelief; and never do We punish any but the ungrateful
Between them and the towns which We had blessed (Syria and Palestine), We placed other towns in prominent positions so that they could journey to and fro in measured stages. We said: "Travel through them by day and night in complete security
But they prayed: "Our Lord! Make our journeys longer." Thereby they wronged their souls and We made them merely a tale that is told and dispersed them in scattered fragments. Surely there is a sign in this for every patient, grateful person
In their case, Iblees' (Satan’s) suspicions proved true, as they all followed him except a small group of the believers
even though he had no authority over them. It all happened because We wanted to see who among them believed in the hereafter and who is in doubt concerning it. Your Lord is watching over all things
O Prophet, say to the pagans: "Call on those deities whom you pray besides Allah they do not have power over an atom’s weight of anything in the heavens or earth, nor have they any share in either, nor is any of them a helper to Allah
No intercession before Allah can avail anyone except for the one for whom He permits. Until when terror will be removed from their hearts, they shall ask the intercessors: "What has your Lord ordained?" They will answer: "The Truth," He is the Most High, the Great
O Prophet, ask them: "Who provides your sustenance from the heavens and the earth?" If they do not answer, then say: "It is Allah! Certainly one of us; either we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error
Further, tell them: "You shall not be questioned about our errors nor shall we be questioned about your actions
Say: "Our Lord will bring us all together, then He will rightly judge between us. He is the Judge Who knows everything
Say: "Show me those whom you have made associate gods with Him. Nay! By no means can you do it. Allah Alone is the Almighty, the Wise
O Prophet, We have sent you to the entire mankind, to give them good news and forewarn them, but most men do not know
They ask you: "When will this promise of resurrection be fulfilled, if you are telling the truth
Tell them: "For you the appointment of a day is fixed, which you can neither postpone for a moment nor bring it early
The disbelievers say: "We shall never believe in this Qur’an, nor in the scriptures which came before it." If you could only see when these wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, tossing accusing words on one another! Those who had been despised as weaklings will say to the arrogant: "If it were not for you, we would certainly have been believers
The arrogant will say to those despised weaklings: "Did we block you off from guidance when it came to you? Nay! Rather you yourselves were guilty
Those despised weaklings will say to the arrogant: "No! It was you who plotted day and night, bidding us to disbelieve in Allah and to set up equals with Him," - They will feel ashamed once they see the punishment, and We shall put yokes on the necks of those disbelievers; can there be any other reward except for what they did
Whenever We have sent a Warner to a town, its wealthy residents have said: "We surely disbelieve in what you are sent with
They say: "We have more wealth and children, which indicates that our gods are happy with us so we shall never be punished
O Prophet tell them: "Surely my Lord gives abundantly to whom He wills and sparingly to whom He pleases, but most people do not understand this
It is neither your wealth nor your children which bring you closer to Us even one jot, but those who believe and do good deeds; for them, there will be a double reward for their deeds and in high mansions shall they live in peace
As for those who strive in opposing Our revelations, they shall be brought for punishment
O Prophet tell them: "Surely my Lord gives abundantly to whom He pleases and sparingly to whom He wills. Whatever you spend in charity, He will pay you back. He is the best of those who provide sustenance
One Day He will gather them all together and ask the angels: "Was it you that these people used to worship
They will respond: "Glory be to You! Our tie is with You - as a protector - not with them; but they used to worship the Jinns and it was them in whom most of these people believed
On that Day you will be helpless to profit or harm one another. To the wrongdoers We shall say: "Taste the punishment of the fire which you persistently denied
Today when Our clear revelations are recited to them, they say: "This man only wants to turn you away from those gods to whom your forefathers have been worshipping." Others say: "This Qur’an is nothing but an invented falsehood." While yet others, who deny the truth when it comes to them, say: "This is nothing but plain magic
In fact, neither had We given them books to study, nor had We sent to them any Warner before you
Those who have gone before them also denied - these Arabs have not received one tenth of what We had granted them - yet when they denied My Messengers, see how terrible was My scourge
O Prophet say: "I would ask you one thing. For Allah’s sake! Think individually or consult one another and ponder whether your companion Muhammad is really mad? You yourself will come to the conclusion that he is nothing but a Warner to you to forewarn you of a severe punishment
Tell them: "I do not ask you for any recompense, even though what I preach is all in your interest. My reward is only due from Allah and He is a witness over everything
Say: "In fact my Lord reveals to me the truth, and He is the Knower of all hidden realities
Say: "The truth has arrived and falsehood neither originates nor restores anything
Say: "If I am in error, the loss is surely mine and if I am right, it is because of what my Lord has revealed to me. Surely He hears all and is very close
If you could only see the disbelievers on the Day of Judgement when they will be in a state of confusion! On that Day there will be no escape; and they will be seized from a nearby place
Then they will say: "We believe in it (the Truth brought by the Prophet": but how could they attain the Faith from such a far distant place)
They had disbelieved in it before - and they had sneered at the unseen when they were far away during their life on earth
A barrier will be placed between them and what they desired to have as was done with the similar people before them; for they were indeed involved in a misleading suspicion
Praise be to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth! Who appoint the angels having two, three and four pairs of wings as His messengers. He adds to His creation as He pleases; for Allah has power over all things
None can withhold the blessings which He bestows on people and none can award besides Him what He withholds. He is the Mighty, the Wise
O mankind! Call to mind the favors of Allah on you; is there any other creator than Allah who provides for you from the heavens and the earth? There is no god but Him. How then are you being deceived
O Prophet! If they deny you, so were the Messengers denied before you. All affairs shall ultimately be presented before Allah
O mankind! Certainly the promise of Allah is true, therefore let not the life of this world deceive you nor let the chief deceiver (Satan) deceive you about Allah
Surely Satan (Satan) is your enemy: so take him as an enemy. He is inviting his adherents towards his way so that they may become companions of the blazing fire
Those who disbelieve shall have a terrible punishment, and those who believe and do good deeds shall have forgiveness and a magnificent reward
Can that person be guided whose evil deeds are so fair seeming to him that he considers them good? The fact is that Allah leaves to stray whom He wills and guides whom He pleases. Therefore, O Prophet, let not your soul expire in sorrow on their account. Allah is aware of all their actions
It is Allah Who sends forth winds to raise up the clouds, then drives them to a dead land and therewith revive the earth after its death. Similar will be the resurrection of the dead
If anyone is seeking honor, let him know that all honor belongs to Allah Alone. Good words ascend to Him and good deeds are exalted by Him. As for those who plan evil deeds, they shall have severe punishment and their plots will be brought to nothing
It is Allah Who created you from dust, then from a sperm-drop, then He made you pairs. No female conceives or delivers without His knowledge. No long- lived man grows old or has his life cut short but is written in a Book; surely all this is easy for Allah
The two bodies of water, of which one is sweet and pleasant to drink and the other is salty and bitter, are not alike. Yet from each kind of water you eat fresh meat and extract ornaments which you wear; and you see the ships plough their course through them to seek the bounty of Allah, that you may be grateful
He causes the night to pass into the day and the day into the night, and He has made the sun and the moon to serve you; each one follows its course for an appointed term. Such is Allah, your Lord; His is the kingdom; and those to whom you pray besides Him do not even own a thread of a date-stone
If you pray to them they cannot hear your prayers and even if they could hear you they could not answer you. On the Day of Resurrection they will deny your associating them with Allah. O mankind! None can inform you about all this except the One Who is All-Aware
O mankind! It is you who stands in need of Allah, and it is Allah Who is Free of all wants, Worthy of all praise
If He wants, He can destroy you and replace you with a new creation
and this is not at all difficult for Allah
No bearer of a burden will bear another’s burden, and if a heavy laden person cries out for help, none will come forward to share the least of his burden, even though he be a close relative. O Prophet! You can only admonish those who fear their Lord - though they cannot see Him - and establish Salah. He that purifies himself does so for his own good. To Allah is the destination of all
The blind and the seeing are not alike
nor the darkness and the Light
nor the shade and the heat
nor the living and the dead. Certainly Allah can make anyone hear if He so wills; but, O Prophet, you cannot make those who are in the graves hear you
You are nothing but a Warner
Certainly We have sent you (O Muhammad) with the Truth as a bearer of good news and as a Warner, for there has not been a nation which has not had a Warner
If they disbelieve you, know that their predecessors also disbelieved their Messengers who came to them with clear signs, scriptures and the light-giving Book
But in the end I seized the disbelievers, and behold, how terrible was My disapproval
Do you not see that Allah sends down rain from the sky with which We bring forth fruits of various colors? Similarly, in the mountains there are streaks of various shades including white, red, jet-black rocks
Likewise men, beasts and cattle have their different colors. In fact, only those among His servants who possess knowledge fear Allah; surely Allah is All-Mighty, All-Forgiving
Surely those who recite the Book of Allah, establish Salah, spend out of what We have given them, secretly and openly, may hope for imperishable gain
That He may pay them back their full reward and give them even more out of His grace; surely He is Forgiving and Appreciative of His devotees
O Prophet, what We have revealed to you of the Book is the Truth, which confirms the previous scriptures. Surely, with respect to His servants, Allah is well Aware and fully Observant
We have given the Book as an inheritance to those of Our servants (Muslims) whom We have chosen, among them there are some who wrong their own souls, some follow a middle course and some, by Allah’s leave, excel in good deeds; which is the supreme virtue
They shall enter the gardens of Eden, where they shall be decked with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their dress therein will be of silk
They will say: "Praise be to Allah Who has removed all sorrow from us; Our Lord is indeed Forgiving and appreciative of His devotees
Who has admitted us to this Eternal Home out of His bounty, wherein we neither experience any toil nor sense of any weariness
As for the disbelievers, there shall be the fire of hell, no term shall be determined for them so that they could die nor shall its punishment be ever lightened for them. Thus shall We reward every disbeliever
Therein they shall cry for help: "Our Lord! Get us out, from now on we shall do good deeds and shall not repeat the ones we used to do". The response will be: "Did we not give you lives long enough so that he who would, could take a warning? Besides, someone did come to warn you. Now taste the fruit of your deeds, here there is no helper for the wrongdoers
Surely Allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth, He even knows the secrets of the breasts (hidden thoughts of people)
It is He Who has made you vicegerent on the earth. Whoever disbelieves, bears the burden of his disbelief; and for the disbelievers their disbelief does not increase anything except the wrath of their Lord and the disbelievers do not gain anything except an increase in their loss
O Prophet, say: "Have you ever considered your associate gods to whom you call upon besides Allah? Show me anything that they have created in the earth! Or what is their share in the creation of the heavens? Or have We given them a Book from which they derive a provision of shirk? Nay, in fact the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusions
It is Allah Who keeps the heavens and the earth from slipping out of their places. Should they ever slip, none can hold them back besides Him; certainly He is Most Forbearing, Oft-Forgiving
These very people used to swear on solemn oaths by Allah that if a Warner ever comes to them, they would be better guided than any other nation of the world; yet when a Warner has come to them they have increased in nothing but aversion
behaving arrogantly in the land and plotting evil, whereas the plotting of evil recoils none but the authors of it. Are they awaiting for that end which overtook the former nations? If so, you shall find no change in the ways of Allah, nor will you find any alteration in Allah’s way of dealing
Have they not traveled through the land and saw what was the end of those who went before them, who were far superior in strength than these people? There is nothing in the heavens or in the earth which can frustrate Allah; surely He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful
If it was Allah’s will to punish people for their misdeeds, He would have not left any living creature around them on the surface of the earth, but He is giving them respite for an appointed time; when their appointed time will come, they shall realize that in fact Allah has been watching His servants all along
Ya Sin
I swear by the Qur’an which is full of Wisdom
that you are indeed one of the Messengers who are sent
on a Straight Way
This Qur’an is revealed by the Almighty, the Merciful
So that you may warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, hence they are unaware
In fact, the Word has been proven true against most of them who are arrogant; so they do not believe
Since they have chosen to neglect Our revelations, We have thus put yokes round their necks right up to their chins so their heads are raised up
and We have put a barrier in front of them and a barrier behind them, and then We have covered them over so they cannot see
It is the same for them whether you warn them or warn them not, they will not believe
You can only warn those who follow the reminder and fears the Compassionate (Allah), though they cannot see Him. To such people give good news of forgiveness and a generous reward
Surely We shall resurrect the dead, We are recording all that they are sending ahead and that they are leaving behind. We have recorded everything in an open ledger
Narrate to them the example of the people of a certain town to whom the Messengers came
At first We sent to them two Messengers, but when they rejected both, We strengthened them with a third and they all said: "Surely we have been sent to you as Messengers
But the people replied: "You are but humans like us. The Compassionate (Allah) has revealed nothing; you are surely lying
They said: "Our Lord knows that we have indeed been sent as Messengers towards you
and our only duty is to convey His message plainly
The people replied: "We regard you as an evil omen for us. Desist, or we will either stone you or you will receive from us a painful punishment
They said: "Your evil omens lie within yourselves. Do you say this because you are being admonished? Indeed you are a nation of transgressors
In the meantime a man came running from the remote part of the City and said: "O my people! Follow these Messengers
Follow the ones who ask no reward of you and are rightly guided
It would not be justifiable on my part if I do not worship Him Who has created me and to Whom you shall be brought back
Should I take other gods besides Him? If the Compassionate (Allah) should intend to harm me, their intercession will avail me nothing, nor will they be able to save me
If I do so, I would indeed be in manifest error
Surely I believe in your Lord, so listen to me
Consequently they killed that man and it was said to him: "Enter paradise." He exclaimed: "Would that my people knew that what I know
How my Lord has granted me forgiveness and included me among the honored ones
After that We did not send any army against his people from heaven, nor was it necessary to do so
It was nothing but a single blast and they all became extinct
Alas for My bondsmen! Whenever there came to them a Messenger they mocked at him
Do they not see how many generations We have destroyed before them who will never return to them
While each one of them will be brought before Us on the Day of Judgment
The dead land may serve as a sign for them; We give it life and produce from it grain for them, which they eat
We also produce from it gardens with date-palms and vines, and We cause springs to gush forth from it
so that they may enjoy the fruits thereof. It was not their hands that made all this; should they not then give thanks
Glory be to Allah Who created all things in pairs: the plants of the earth, mankind themselves and other living things which they do not know
Another sign for them is the night; when We withdraw the daylight from it, and behold they are in darkness
The sun runs its course, this course is predetermined for it by the Almighty, the All-Knowing
As for the moon, We have designed phases for it till it again becomes like an old dry palm branch
Neither it is possible for the sun to overtake the moon, nor for the night to outstrip the day: each floats along in its own orbit
Another sign for them is how We carried their race through the flood in the laden ark
and similar vessels We have made for them on which they ride
If We want, We can drown them, and they will have no helper to save them, nor can they be rescued
except through Our mercy and unless We prolong their lives for a while
When it is said to them: "Have fear of that which is before you and that which is behind you, so that you may receive mercy," they pay no heed
Whenever any sign from the revelations of their Lord comes to them, they turn away from it
Whenever they are asked: "Spend out of what Allah has given you." The disbelievers say to the believers: "Should we feed those whom Allah can feed Himself if He so chooses? You are quite obviously in error
Further, they say: "When will this promise of resurrection come to pass, if what you say is true
In fact what they are waiting for is a single blast, which will seize them while they are yet disputing among themselves in their worldly affairs
Then, neither they will be able to make a will, nor be able to return to their families
Then a trumpet shall be blown and, behold, they will rise up from their graves and hasten to their Lord
They will say: "Oh, Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our graves? They will be told: "This is what the Compassionate (Allah) had promised and true was the word of the Messengers
It will be no more than a single blast, and then they will all be gathered before Us
On that Day no soul will suffer the least injustice and you shall be rewarded according to your deeds
Surely, on that Day, the residents of paradise will be busy with their joy
they and their spouses will be in shady groves reclining on soft couches
They will have all kinds of fruit and they will get whatever they call for
they will be greeted with the word "Salaam (Peace)" from the Lord of Mercy (Allah)
While to the sinners He will say: "Get aside today, you criminals
Did I not enjoin you, O children of Adam, not to worship Satan, who is your open enemy
and that you should worship Me, which is the Right Way
Yet, in spite of this, he (Satan) has led a great number of you astray. Didn't you have common sense
This is the hell, of which you were repeatedly warned
Now! Enter in it this Day because you persistently rejected the truth
On that Day, We shall seal their mouths while their hands will speak to Us and their feet will bear witness to all their misdeeds
Had it been Our Will, We could surely have blotted out their eyes; and let them run about groping for the way, then how could they see
And had it been Our Will, We could have nailed them to the ground, then neither could they move forward nor retrace their steps
Those to whom We grant long life, We reverse their nature. Don’t they understand anything from this
We have not taught him (Muhammad) poetry, nor does it behoove him. This is nothing but a reminder and a plain Qur’an
to warn those who are alive and to establish the charge against the disbelievers
Do they not see that among the other things which Our hands have fashioned, We have created cattle which are under their domination
We have subjected these animals to them, that they may ride on some and eat the flesh of others
in them there are other advantages and drinks (milk) for them. Should they not then be grateful
Yet they have taken other gods besides Allah hoping to get their help
But they do not have the ability to help them yet their worshippers stand like warriors ready to defend them
Let not their words grieve you (O Muhammad). Surely We have knowledge of all that they conceal and all that they reveal
Does not man see that We have created him from a sperm? Yet he stands up as an open adversary
He starts making comparisons for Us and forgets his own creation. He says: "Who will give life to bones that have been decomposed
Tell them: "He Who has created them for the first time, will give them life again, He is well-versed in every kind of creation
It is He Who produces for you the spark from the green tree to kindle therewith your own fires
Does He Who has created the heavens and the earth have no power to create the like thereof?" Of course He does! He is the skilful Creator
Whenever He intends a thing, He needs only to say: "Be," and it is
Glory be to Him in Whose hands is the Kingdom of all things; and to Whom you shall all be brought back
Dialogue between the followers and the leaders who mislead them. 37 AS-SAFFAT - IN RANKS In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. By those who range themselves in ranks
and by those who cast out demons
and by those who proclaim the message
surely your God is One
the Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all that lies between them, and the Lord of the easts
We have indeed decked the worldly heaven with beautiful stars
and have secured it against all obstinate rebellious Satans
They cannot even hear the words of the exalted assembly of angels and they are darted at from every side
they are repulsed and are under a constant chastisement
Eavesdroppers are persuaded by a flaming fire of piercing brightness
Ask them: "What is more difficult - their creation or the rest of Our creation? - Them We have created out of a sticky clay
You marvel at the wonders of Allah’s creation, while they ridicule at it
When they are admonished, they pay no heed
and when they see a sign, they mock at it
and say: "This is nothing but plain sorcery
What! When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we be raised to life again
we and also our forefathers of the ancient time
Tell them: "Yes and you shall be held up to shame
It will be just a single cry, and they will see it all with their own eyes
Ah, woe to us! They shall exclaim, "this is the Day of Judgement
It will be said: "Yes, this is the same Day of Judgement which you used to deny
It will be commanded: "Gather all the wrongdoers, their spouses and those whom they used to worship
besides Allah and show them the way to hell
When they will all be gathered and angels will start pushing them towards hell, Allah shall say: "Stop for a while, they have to be questioned
What is the matter with you today that you do not help each other
Nay! On that Day they shall all be submissive
Some of them will step forward to question one another
The followers will say to their leaders: "It was you who used to come at us from the right hand and forced us towards the wrong way
They will reply: "Nay! But it was you who had no faith
We had no power over you, the fact is that you were an inordinate people
true is the verdict which Our Lord has passed upon us, we shall indeed taste the punishment of our sins
We misled you, for we ourselves were astray
So on that Day they shall all be partners in the punishment
Thus, shall We deal with the criminals
for when they were told: "There is no god except Allah," they used to puff themselves up with pride
and say: "What! Should we give up our gods for the sake of a mad poet
Whereas he had come with the truth and had confirmed the message of prior Messengers
Then it will be said: "You are surely going to taste the painful punishment
and this reward is nothing except what you had done
But the sincere devotees of Allah
shall have familiar sustenance
fruits, and shall be honored
in the gardens of delight
Reclining face to face upon soft couches
they shall be served with goblets filled at a fountain of wine
a crystal-white drink, delicious to those who drink it
It will neither dull their senses nor they will become drunk
And beside them there will be bashful, dark big beautiful-eyed virgins
as if they were delicate eggs closely guarded
Some of them will be asking questions to others
One of them will say: "I had a friend
who used to ask: ‘Are you really of those who affirm (the message of Islam)
When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, shall we ever be brought to judgement?’
It will be said: "Would you like to see him
He will look down and see his friend in the midst of hellfire
Then he will say: "By Allah! You had almost ruined me
Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I should certainly have been among those who are brought there
Is it not so that we shall not die
after our first death and that we shall not be chastised
Most surely it is a mighty achievement
For such an end, let every one strive who wishes to strive
Is this a better entertainment or the tree of Zaqqum
Surely We have made this tree a trial for the wrongdoers
Surely it is a tree that grows in the bottom of the hellfire
bearing fruits as if they were heads of Satans
on it they shall feed and with it they shall fill their bellies
Then on top of that, they will be given a concoction made from boiling water
Then to hellfire they shall be returned
In fact, they found their fathers on the wrong path
and they are eagerly following their footsteps
Most of the ancients went astray before them
though We had sent Warners to them
See what was the end of those who had been forewarned: they all perished
except the sincere devotees of Allah
Noah prayed to Us; see how excellent was Our response to his prayer
We delivered him and his people from the mighty distress
and made his progeny to be the only survivors
and We left his good name among the later generations
SaLotation to Noah among the people of the worlds
Thus do We reward the righteous
Surely he was one of Our believing devotees
Then the rest We drowned in the great flood
Surely Abraham belonged to the first group
when he came to his Lord with a pure heart
Behold, he said to his father and to his people: "What are these that you worship
Would you serve false gods instead of Allah
What is your idea about the Lord of the worlds
Then he looked at the stars one time
and said "I am feeling sick
So his people left him behind and went away to their national fair
He sneaked into the temple of their gods and addressed them: "Why don’t you eat from these offerings before you
What is the matter with you that you don’t even speak
Then he fell upon them, smiting them with his right hand
The people came running to the scene
Would you worship that which you have carved with your own hands, he said
when Allah is the One Who created you and that which you have made
They said to one another: "Prepare for him a furnace and throw him into the blazing flames
Thus did they scheme against him: but We humiliated them in their scheme
Abraham said: "I am going to take refuge with my Lord, He will surely guide me
O Lord! Grant me a righteous son
So We gave him the good news of a gentle son
When he reached the age to work with him, Abraham said to him: "O my son! I have seen a vision that I should offer you as a sacrifice, now tell me what is your view." He replied: "O my father! Do as you are commanded: you will find me, if Allah so wills, of the patient
And when they both submitted to Allah and Abraham laid down his son prostrate upon his forehead for sacrifice
We called out to him: "O Abraham stop
You have fulfilled your vision." Thus do We reward the righteous
That was indeed a manifest test
We ransomed his son for a great sacrifice
and We left his good name among the later generations
SaLotation to Abraham
Thus We reward the righteous
Surely he was one of Our believing devotees
We gave him the good news of Isaac - a prophet - one of the righteous
We blessed him and Isaac both. Among their progeny there are some who are righteous and some who are clearly doing wrong to their own souls
We bestowed Our favor on Moses and Haroon
We delivered them with all their people from the mighty distress
We helped them so they became victorious
We gave them the Glorious Book (Torah)
and guided them both to the Right Way
We left their good names among the later generations
SaLotation to Moses and Haroon
Thus do We reward the righteous
Surely they were two of Our believing devotees
Ilyas (Elias) was surely one of Our Messengers
Behold, he said to his people: "Have you no fear of Allah
Would you invoke Bal (their invented god) and forsake the best of the Creators
Allah - Who is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
But they denied him, so they will certainly be called to account
with the exception of sincere devotees of Allah
We left his good name among the later generations
SaLotation to Ilyas
Thus do We reward the righteous
He was surely one of Our believing devotees
Lot was one of Our Messengers
Behold, We delivered him and his whole family
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind
and We destroyed the others
Surely you pass by their ruins by day
and by night. Will you not use your common sense
Jonah was surely one of Our Messengers
When he ran to the laden ship
took part in casting of lots, and was condemned
A whale swallowed him for he had become blameworthy
Had he not repented and became of those who glorify Allah
he would certainly have remained inside its belly till the Day of Resurrection
Then We cast him upon a desolate shore in a state of serious illness
and caused a gourd plant to grow over him
Then We sent him to a nation of one hundred thousand people or more
They believed in him, so We permitted them to enjoy their life for a while
Just ask the unbelievers: Does it make any sense that their Lord should have daughters while they choose to have sons
Or is it that We created the angels as females and they were present at their creation
Surely they invent a lie when they say
Allah has children. They are utter liars
Would He choose daughters rather than sons
What is the matter with you? How do you judge
Will you not take heed
Or do you have any proof of what you are saying
Show us your scriptures if you are truthful
They assert blood- relationship between Him and the jinns; and the jinns know quite well that they will be called to account
Glory be to Allah! He is free from what they ascribe to Him
except His sincere devotees who do not attribute such things to Him
Therefore neither you nor those whom you worship
can deceive anyone about Allah
except him who is destined for hell
The angels in fact say: "We each have our appointed place
We range ourselves in ranks for His service
and we are surely those who declare His glory
Before this, the same disbelievers used to say
If we had received a reminder which the earlier people had received
We certainly would have been sincere devotees of Allah
But now that the Qur’an has come, they reject it: but soon they will find out the consequences of this attitude
We have already promised Our servants whom We sent as Messengers
that they would certainly be helped
and that Our forces will surely be victorious
So give no heed to them for a while
you will see their downfall as they shall see your victory
Do they wish to hurry on Our punishment
But dreadful will be that morning, when it will descend in the courtyards of those who have been forewarned
So pay no heed to them for a while
You will surely see their downfall as they shall see your victory
Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, He is free from what they ascribe to Him
Peace be on the Messengers
and praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
Suad
And by the Qur’an which is full of admonition! Surely the unbelievers are in sheer arrogance and perverseness
How many generations have We destroyed before them? When their doom approached, they all cried out for mercy, but it was no longer the time to be saved
They wonder that a Warner has come to them from among themselves, and the disbelievers say: "He is a sorcerer telling lies
Does he claim that there is only One God in place of all other gods? Surely this is a strange thing
Their leaders go about saying: "Pay no heed, stand firm in the service of your gods; this slogan of One God is designed against you
We have not heard such a thing from anyone of the people of latter days (Jews and Christians): it is nothing but a fabrication
Is he the only fit person among us to whom the admonition is revealed?" But in fact they doubt My admonition, for they have not yet tasted My punishment
Do they have the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the All-Mighty, the Munificent One
Or do they have sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them? If so, let them ascend by any means to be in a position of dictating to Allah according to their wishes
Their faction is no more than an army who will be beaten right here
Before them the people of Noah, `Ad and Pharoah, the man of stakes, denied their Messengers
So did Thamud, the people of Lot and those of Aiykah (the people of Median) - all divided themselves into factions
all charged their Messengers liars, so just was my torment of annihilating them
These people also await nothing but a single mighty Blast - the one which none may retard
They say: "Our Lord, hasten our doom for us before the Day of Reckoning
O Prophet, have patience at what they say, and remember Our servant David, the man of strength, who was frequent in turning to Allah for guidance
We made the mountains join him in Our praises at evening and the sunrise
And the birds, too, with all their flocks, join in singing with him
We strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and sound judgment in speech and decision
Have you heard the story of the two litigants who made an entry into his private chamber through climbing over the wall
When they entered in upon David and he became terrified. They said: "Have no fear, we are two litigants, one of whom has wronged the other. Judge rightly between us and do not be unjust, and guide us to the Right Way
This man is my brother; he has ninety nine ewes while I have only one ewe. Yet he says: 'Turn her over to me' and he has the means to prevail against me in what he says
David said: "He has certainly wronged you in seeking to add your ewe to his flock: in fact many partners are unjust to one another; except those who believe and do good deeds, and they are few indeed." While he said this, David realized that We had tested him ( David had shown desire to one of his officers to divorce his wife so that he could marry her even though he already had 99 wives). So he sought forgiveness of his Lord and fell down on his knees and turned to Allah in repentance
So We forgave his error. He will enjoy a place of nearness with Us and an excellent abode
We said: "O David! We have made you a vicegerent in the earth, so rule among the people with justice and do not follow your own desires lest they mislead you from the Way of Allah. As for those who go astray from the Way of Allah, they shall surely have a severe punishment because of forgetting the Day of Reckoning
We have not created the heaven and the earth and all that lies between them in vain. That is the fancy of the unbelievers. Such disbelievers should be aware of the hellfire
Should We treat those who believe and do good deeds like those who create mischief in the earth? Should We treat the righteous like the sinners
This Book (Al-Qur’an) which We have sent down to you (O Muhammad) is highly blessed, so that they may ponder upon its verses and the men of understanding may learn a lesson from it
To David We gave Solomon, an excellent devotee! Who was frequent in returning to Us
Worthy of mention is the incident when, one evening, excellent-bred steeds, were presented before him
and he said: "Surely I have adopted the love of these good things with a view to glorify my Lord." In a race of the steeds, when they disappeared from sight
he commanded: "Bring them back to me." Then he began to pass his hand over their legs and necks with affection
Behold, We also put Solomon to test and placed a mere body on his throne, then he turned to Us in repentance
and said "O Lord! Forgive me and grant me a kingdom similar of which may not be given to anyone after me. Surely You are the real Giver
We accepted his prayer and subjected to him the wind, which blew gently in whichever direction he wanted
and the Satans (Jinns) including all kinds of builders, divers
and others fettered in chains
We said to him: "This is Our gift: you may give or withhold to whomever you want, without any accountability
Surely he has a place of nearness to Us and will have an excellent place of final abode
Mention Our devotee Job, when he called upon his Lord saying: "Satan has afflicted me with distress and suffering
and We asked him: "Strike your foot on the ground. A cool spring will gush forth. Wash and drink to refresh yourself
And We restored to him his family and many more with them as a grace from Ourselves and a reminder for the people of understanding
Then, to fulfill his oath of giving his wife one hundred strikes which he made during his sickness, We said: "Take a bunch of twigs and strike with it and do not break your oath." Certainly We found him full of patience. He was an excellent devotee, who turned to Us over and over again
And mention Our devotees Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: men of power and vision
Surely We chose them for their special quality of keeping in mind the abode of hereafter
Certainly they are with Us; among the best chosen
Also mention Isma‘il, Elisha and Zul-Kifl; all of them were among the best
This Qur’an is but a reminder. Surely the righteous shall return to an excellent resort
The Gardens of Eden, whose gates shall be wide open to receive them
They shall recline there, calling for abundant fruit and delicious drinks
and beside them there shall be bashful virgin companions of equal age
These are the things which you are being promised on the Day of Reckoning
this will be Our provision which will never finish
Such will be the reward for the righteous. But for the rebellious there will be an evil resort
hell, that is! In which they will burn - the worst abode
Such will it be the reward for the wrongdoers. So they will taste scalding water, pus
and other things of the same sort
It will be said to the ringleaders: "Here are your troops being thrown headlong with you. They are not welcomed here; for they are going to burn in the hellfire
The followers shall say to their misguided leaders: "But you! There is no welcome for you either! It was you who have brought us to this end. Such an evil abode
Then they will pray: "Our Lord, inflict on those who brought this fate upon us double punishment in the fire
Then they will say to one another: "But why do we not see those whom we deemed wicked
and whom we use to ridicule? Or has our eyesight failed to notice them
Surely, this is the very truth: the people in the hellfire will argue just like that
O Prophet, tell them: "My mission is only as a Warner; there is no divinity except Allah, the One, the Irresistible
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, the Almighty, the Forgiver
Say: "This is a supreme message
yet you pay no heed to it
Also say: "I have no knowledge of that time when the exalted chiefs disputed among themselves
I am informed about all this through a revelation because I am assigned the mission of a plain Warner
Behold when your Lord said to the angels: "I am about to create a man from clay
then when I have fashioned him and breathed of My spirit into him, kneel down and prostrate yourselves before him
Accordingly all the angels prostrated themselves
except Iblees; he acted arrogantly and became one of the disbelievers
Allah said: "O Iblees! What prevented you from prostrating yourself to the one whom I have created with My own hands? Are you too arrogant, or do you think that you are one of the exalted ones
Iblees said: "I am better than him: You created me from fire and created him from clay
Allah said: "Get out of here: for you are accursed
and My curse shall be on you till the Day of Judgment
Iblees said: "O Lord! Then give me respite till the Day of Resurrection
Allah said: "Well, you are given respite
till the Day of Appointed Time
Iblees said: "I swear by Your Honor, I will mislead them all
except your chosen sincere devotees among them
Allah said: "Fair enough and now what I am going to say is also fair
that I will fill hell with you and all of those who follow you among them
O Prophet, tell them: "I do not ask you any recompense for conveying this Message, nor do I pretend to be what I am not
This Qur'an is nothing but a Reminder to all the Worlds
and before long, you will certainly know its truth
The revelation of this Book (AL-Qur’an) is from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise
Certainly We have revealed to you the Book with the Truth: therefore worship Allah, offering Him your sincere obedience
Beware! Sincere true obedience is due to Allah Alone! As for those who take other guardians (worship the saints) besides Him saying: "We worship them only that they may bring us nearer to Allah." Surely Allah will judge between them concerning all that in which they differ. Allah does not guide him who is a liar and a disbeliever
If Allah had intended to take a son, He could have chosen anyone He pleased out of His creation: Glory be to Him! (He is above such things.) He is Allah, the One, the Irresistible
He created the heavens and the earth to manifest the Truth. He causes the night to succeed the day and the day to overtake the night. He has subjected the sun and the moon to His law, each one following a course for an appointed term. Is He not the All-Mighty, the All- Forgiving
He created you all from a single person, then from that person He created his mate. He also created for you eight head of cattle in pairs. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers in stages, one after another, in three layers of darkness. This is Allah, your Lord. To Him belongs the sovereignty. There is no god but Him. How can you then turn away from Him
If you disbelieve, then you should know that Allah does not need you. He does not like ingratitude from His servants. Therefore, if you are grateful He is pleased with you. On the Day of Judgement, no bearer of burdens will bear the burden of another. Ultimately, all of you have to return to your Lord. Then He will tell you the truth of all that you did in this life. Surely He knows even the secrets of your hearts
When some trouble befalls man, he cries to his Lord and turns to Him in repentance; but no sooner does He bestow on him His favor than he forgets what he has prayed for and sets up rivals to Allah, thus misleading others from His Way. Tell such people: "Enjoy your unbelief for a little while; certainly you will be of the inmates of hellfire
Can he who is obedient, pass the hours of night prostrating in worship or standing in adoration, fearing the hereafter and hoping to earn the Mercy of his Lord, be compared to the man who does not? Are the knowledgeable and the ignorant equal? In fact, none will take heed except the people of understanding
Say: "O My servants who have truly believed, fear your Lord; those who will do good deeds in this world shall receive a good reward. If it has become difficult to follow the Right Way where you live, then migrate, you will find that Allah’s earth is spacious. Those who endure with patience will be rewarded without measure
Say: "I am commanded to worship Allah and serve none but Him
and I am commanded to be the first of those who submit to Allah in Islam
Say: "Surely, I am afraid if I disobey my Lord, the punishment of a mighty Day
Say: "Allah Alone I worship, and Him Alone I serve
As for yourselves, I have conveyed to you the Truth and if you do not believe, then worship what you want besides Him." Say: "The real losers are those who will lose their souls as well their families on the Day of Resurrection. Ah! That will indeed be an open Loss
There shall be layers of fire above them and layers of fire beneath them. Such is the doom about which Allah wants His servants to fear, and says: "O My servants, avoid My wrath
As for those who refrain from worshipping Taghut (Satanic forces) and turn to Allah in repentance, there is good news. So O Prophet, give good news to My servants
who listen to the Word and follow the best meaning of it. Such are the ones whom Allah has guided and such are the ones who are endowed with understanding
Is the one against whom the sentence of punishment has been decreed equal to the one who refrains from evil? Can you rescue the one who is in the fire? Of course not
As for those who truly fear their Lord, they shall be lodged in lofty mansions, built with one story upon another, beneath which the rivers flow; this is the promise of Allah; Allah does not fail in His promise
Do you not see how Allah sends down water from the sky which penetrates the earth and come out through springs? With it He brings forth a variety of crops with different colors, then they wither and you see them turning yellow, and then finally He crumbles them to dust. Surely, in this example, there is a lesson for the people of understanding
Is the one whose heart Allah has opened to Islam and is walking in the light from his Lord like the one who has learned no lesson and is still a non-Muslim. So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of Allah! They are clearly in error
Allah has revealed the most beautiful message, a Book consistent in its verses yet repeating its teachings in different ways. Those who fear their Lord are filled with awe when they hear it, their skins and their hearts become pliant to the remembrance of Allah. Such is the guidance of Allah: He guides with it whom He pleases. But he to whom He confounds shall have none to guide him
Is the one who shall face the terrors of the Day of Resurrection be like the one who shall enter paradise? To such wrongdoers it will be said: "Now taste the fruits of your labor
Those who have gone before them also disbelieved, consequently, the punishment overtook them from the directions they least expected
So Allah made them taste humiliation in this worldly life, and the punishment in the life to come shall be even more terrible, if they but knew it
We have cited for mankind every kind of parable in this Qur’an, so that they may learn a lesson
This Qur’an is revealed in Arabic, which is free from any flaw, so that they may learn to be righteous
Allah cites you a parable - there is a slave man who is shared by many masters, each pulling this man to himself (like the man who worships other deities along with Allah), and there is another slave man who belongs entirely to one master (like the man who worships Allah Alone)- are the two alike in comparison? Praise be to Allah! But most of them do not know
O Prophet, you shall die and they too shall die
Then on the Day of Resurrection, your disputes shall be settled in the presence of your Lord
Who could be more wicked than the one who invents a lie against Allah and rejects the truth when it comes to him? Is there not an abode in hell for such unbelievers
And the one who comes with the truth and the one who confirms it surely are the Godfearing
They shall have from their Lord all that they wish for. Thus shall the righteous be rewarded
Allah will do away from their account their worst deeds and reward them according to their best deeds
Is Allah not all- sufficient for His servants? Yet they try to frighten you with others besides Him! For such whom Allah confounds, there can be no guide
But the one to whom Allah guides, none can lead him astray. Is not Allah All-Mighty, the Lord of retribution
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth?" They will surely say: "Allah." Ask them: "Do you think then, that if Allah intends to harm me, can they (your goddesses) - to whom you invoke besides Allah - save me from His harm or if He wants to bestow on me His blessings, can they withhold His blessings?" Tell them: "Allah is all-sufficient for me. On Him do the reliant rely
Say: "O my people! If you do not believe me, then do whatever you want in your positions and so shall I. Soon you will find out
as to whom shall come the disgraceful scourge and who shall get the everlasting punishment
O Prophet, surely We have revealed to you the Book with the truth, for the instruction of Mankind. He who follows the Right Way shall follow it for his own good; and he who goes astray shall do so at his own peril. You are not set up as a guardian over them
It is Allah Who recalls the souls of men upon their death, and of the living during their sleep. He withholds the souls of those on whom He has passed the decree of death, and restores the rest till an appointed term. Surely there are signs in this for those who think
Have they taken others besides Allah to intercede for them? Ask them: "How can they intercede, if they have neither control over anything nor do they understand
Say: "Intercession is wholly in the hands of Allah. To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and to Him you shall all be brought back
When Allah’s Oneness is mentioned, the hearts of those who deny the hereafter shrink with aversion; but when other gods are mentioned, they are filled with joy
Pray: "O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth, Who has the knowledge of the unseen and the seen! You Alone can judge the disputes of your servants concerning those matters in which they differ
If the wrongdoers possessed all the treasures of the earth and as much more besides it, they would gladly offer it to redeem themselves from the painful punishment on the Day of Resurrection. For Allah will show them what they would have never imagined
The evil result of their deeds will become manifest to them and they will be completely encircled by the very thing they used to mock at
Man is such that when he is in trouble he appeals to Us; but when We bestow Our favor upon him, he says: "This has been given to me because of certain knowledge I possess." Nay! It is but a test, yet most of them do not know
The same was said by those who passed before them, but they gained nothing from what they did
and the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them. Very soon, the wrongdoers among these people will also be overtaken by the evil consequences of their misdeeds and they will not be able to escape
Do they not know that Allah enlarges the provision for whom He pleases and restricts it from whom He wills? Surely there are signs in this for those who believe
Allah says: "O My servants who have transgressed against their souls, do not despair of Allah’s mercy, for Allah forgives all sins. It is He Who is the Forgiving, the Merciful
Turn in repentance to your Lord, and submit to Him before there comes to you the scourge: for then, there shall be none to help you
Follow the best way that is revealed to you by your Lord before the scourge comes to you all of a sudden while you do not even perceive it
Lest someone should say: ‘Alas! I neglected my duty towards Allah and I was one of those who mocked at His revelations
Or lest he should say: 'If Allah had guided me, I would have been one of the righteous
Or lest he should say upon seeing the punishment: 'I wish I had another chance, I would certainly be among the righteous
Then Allah will say to him: "My revelations did come to you; but you denied them, were arrogant and you were among the disbelievers
On the Day of Judgment you shall see that the faces of those who uttered falsehood against Allah shall be darkened. Is there not an abode in hell for such arrogant
On the contrary, Allah will deliver the righteous to their place of salvation. No harm shall touch them, nor shall they ever grieve
Allah is the Creator of all things and of all things He is the Guardian
To Him belongs the keys of the heavens and the earth. Those who deny the revelations of Allah, it is they who will be the losers
O Prophet say to the pagans: "O ignorant! Do you bid me to worship someone other than Allah
Tell them plainly because it has already been revealed to you as it was revealed to those before you that if you commit shirk, all your deeds will become fruitless and you will surely be among the losers
Therefore, worship Allah and be among His thankful servants
They have not recognized the worth of Allah as his worth should be recognized. On the Day of Resurrection the whole earth shall be in His grasp and all the heavens shall be rolled up in His right hand. Glory be to Him! Exalted be He above what they associate with Him
The Trumpet shall be blown, and all that is in the heavens and the earth shall swoon except those whom Allah will please to exempt. Then the Trumpet will be blown for the second time and behold! They shall all stand up, looking around
The earth will be shining with the light of her Lord, the Book of record will be laid open, the Prophets and other witnesses will be brought in, and justice shall be done between people with all fairness: none shall be wronged
Every soul will be paid in full according to its deeds, for He knows fully well as to what they did
After the Judgment, the Unbelievers will be driven to hell in groups. When they reach there, its gates will be opened and its keepers will say: "Did there not come to you Messengers from among yourselves, who recited to you the revelations of your Lord and forewarned you about the meeting of this Day?" "Yes," they will answer. But at that time the sentence of punishment would have been already announced against the unbelievers
They will be told: "Enter the gates of hell to live therein forever." Evil shall be the abode of the arrogant
As for those who fear their Lord, they shall be led towards paradise in groups. When they reach there, its gates will be opened, and its keepers will say: "Peace be upon you! You have done well, now enter to live therein forever
They will say: "Praise be to Allah Who has truly fulfilled His promise and gave us this land to inherit, now we can live in paradise wherever we like." How excellent will be the reward for the righteous
You will see the angels surrounding the Divine Throne, glorifying their Lord with His praises. The Judgment between the people will be made with perfect justice, and it will be proclaimed: "Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds
Ha M'im
The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the All- Knowledgeable
the Forgiver of sins, the Acceptor of repentance, the Stern in punishment and the Lord of bounty; there is no god except Him, to Whom all shall return
None dispute the revelations of Allah but those who disbelieve; so let not their affluent activity in the land deceive you
Before them the people of Noah denied the Message and so did other groups after them. Every nation plotted against its Prophet, seized him and sought to refute the truth through false arguments; but I smote them, and how terrible was My retribution
Thus shall the Word of your Lord be proved true against the disbelievers; they are the inmates of hellfire
Those angels who bear the Throne of Allah and those who stand around it glorify their Lord with His praises, believe in Him and implore forgiveness for the believers, saying: "Our Lord! You embrace all things with your mercy and knowledge. Forgive those who repent and follow Your Way, and save them from the punishment of the blazing fire
O Lord, admit them to the gardens of Eden which You have promised them together with all the righteous among their fathers, their wives and their descendants. You are the All-Mighty, All-Wise
Deliver them from all evil. He whom You will deliver from the punishment of their sins on that Day will surely earn Your Mercy and that will surely be the highest achievement
On the Day of Judgement it will be said to the disbelievers: "Allah’s hatred towards you was far greater -during your worldly life when you were called to the Faith and you used to refuse - than your hatred of yourselves
They will say: "Our Lord! Twice have You made us die and twice have You given us life. We now confess our sins. Is there any way out
They shall be answered: "You are facing this fate because when you were asked to believe in Allah, the One and Only, you disbelieved; but when you were asked to commit polytheism (associate other partners with Him), you believed. Today judgement rests with Allah, the Supreme, the Great
It is He Who shows you His signs and sends down sustenance from the heavens for you. Yet, none learns a lesson, from the observation of these signs, except those who turn to Him
So invoke Allah with sincere devotion to Him (worship none but Him) however much the unbelievers may dislike it
Possessor of the Highest Rank, the Master of the Throne of Authority sends down the Spirit by His command on those of His servants whom He chooses, that he (the Prophet who received the revelations) may warn mankind of the Day when they shall meet Him
The Day when they all shall come forth from their graves with nothing hidden from Allah. It will be asked: "Whose is the Kingdom today?" No one shall dare to speak, and Allah Himself will say: "It is Allah’s, the One, the Irresistible
Today every soul shall be rewarded for whatever it has earned; today there shall be no injustice; surely Allah is swift in settling accounts
O Prophet, warn them of the Day that is drawing near, when the hearts will leap up to the throats with grief; when the wrongdoers will have neither friend nor intercessor who could be given heed to
Allah knows the furtive looks and the secret thoughts
and Allah will judge with all fairness. As for those whom the unbelievers invoke besides Him, will not be in a position to judge at all. Surely it is Allah Alone Who Hears all and Sees all
Have they not travelled through the land and seen what was the end of those who have gone before them? They were far greater in power than these and left great traces in the land: but Allah seized them for their sins and there was none to protect them from Allah
That was because there came to them their Messengers with clear revelations and they denied them: so Allah seized them. Mighty is He indeed and stern is His retribution
Indeed We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority
to Pharoah Haman and Qarun (Korah); but they called him ‘a sorcerer, a liar’
Then, when he brought them the truth from Us, they said: "Kill the sons of those who share his faith and spare only their females." But futile were the schemes of the unbelievers
Finally Pharoah said: "Let me kill Moses; and let him invoke his Lord! I fear that he may change your religion or that he may cause mischief to appear in the land
Moses said: "I have indeed taken refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant one who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning
At this, a believer from among the relatives of Pharoah, who had kept his faith hidden, said: "Will you kill a man merely because he says: `My Lord is Allah, especially when he has brought you clear signs from your Lord? If he is lying, may his lie be on his head; but if he is speaking the truth, then some of the dreadful things he is threatening you with may very well fall on you. Surely Allah does not guide the one who is a lying transgressor
O my people! You are the rulers and are dominant in the land today: but who will help us against the scourge of Allah, should it befall us?" Pharoah said: "I am pointing out to you only what I see and I am guiding you only towards the right way
Then the person who was a true believer said: "O my people! In fact I fear for you the day of disaster like of what befell prior people
such as the people of Noah, `Ad and Thamud and those who came after them, and Allah does not intend to wrong His servants
And O my People! I fear for you the Day of wailing
when you will turn your backs and flee, when there will be none to protect you from Allah. The one to whom Allah lets go astray, shall have none to guide him
Do you remember that a long time before this, Joseph came to you with clear signs, but you ever remained in doubt concerning to what he brought; and when he died you said: 'After him, Allah will never send another Messenger.' Thus Allah confounds the ones who are the doubting transgressors
who dispute the revelations of Allah having no authority vouchsafed to them. Such an attitude is disgusting in the sight of Allah and of the believers. Thus Allah seals up the heart of every arrogant transgressor
After hearing this, Pharoah said: "O Haman! Build me a high tower that I may attain the means of access
an access to the heavens, so that I may see the God of Moses, I am convinced that he is lying." Thus Pharoah was seduced by his foul deeds and he turned away from the Right Way. The schemes of Pharoah led him to nothing but destruction
The man who was a true believer, said: "O my people! Follow me, I shall guide you to the Right Way
O my people! The life of this world is only temporary enjoyment, while the abode of hereafter is everlasting
The one who does evil shall be recompensed to the extent of the evil done; and the one who is a believer and does good deeds, whether man or woman, shall enter the paradise and therein receive sustenance without measure
And O my people! How is it that I call you to salvation, while you call me to the fire
You bid me to deny Allah and worship other gods I know nothing of; while I bid you to worship the All-Mighty, the All- Forgiving
No doubt you call me towards those who can be invoked neither in this world nor in the hereafter. In fact, we all have to return back to Allah and the transgressors are the ones who shall go to hell
So bear in mind what I have told you, I am entrusting my affairs to Allah, surely Allah is ever watchful over His servants
So Allah saved that believer from all those evil plots that the people devised against him, and the people of Pharoah were overtaken by a horrible scourge
It is the fire of hell before which they are presented morning and evening, and on the Day when the time of their Judgment will come, it will be commanded: "Make the people of Pharoah (Pharaoh) to enter the severest punishment
Then imagine that time when these people will start arguing with each other in the fire, and the weak followers will say to the arrogant leaders: "We were your followers: can you now save us from some of these flames
The arrogant leaders will reply: "We are all in it together! Allah has already judged between His servants
Also imagine when the dwellers of fire will ask the Keepers of hell: "Pray to your Lord for relieving our punishment at least for one day
The Keepers of hell will ask: "Did there not come to you Messengers with clear revelations?" "Yes," they will answer. The Keepers of hell will say: "Then pray yourselves." But vain shall be the prayer of the disbelievers
We surely will help Our Messengers and the believers both in this world’s life and on the Day when the witnesses will take a stand to testify
On that Day, no excuses shall avail the wrongdoers. The curse shall be their lot and the worst place will be their home
As you can see We gave Moses the Book of guidance and We made the Children of Israel to inherit that Book
which was a guide and an admonition to the people of understanding
So be patient, the promise of Allah is true. Implore forgiveness for your sins and celebrate the praises of your Lord evening and morning
Those who dispute the revelations of Allah with no authority bestowed on them; they nurture in their hearts arrogant ambitions which they shall never attain. Therefore, seek refuge with Allah; It is He Who hears all and sees all
Certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is a greater task than the creation of men; yet most people do not understand
The blind and those who can see are not alike, nor are the believers who do good deeds equal to the wicked; yet you seldom think
The hour of Doom is sure to come, there is no doubt about it; yet most people do not believe it
And your Lord says: "Call on Me, I will answer your prayers. Surely those who are too arrogant to worship Me shall soon enter hell in humiliation
MidEastWeb for Coexistence http:www.mideastweb.org 230 It is Allah Who has made for you the night to rest in and the day to see your way around. Surely Allah is bountiful to mankind, yet most of the people are not thankful
Such is Allah your Lord, the Creator of all things. There is no god but Him. None has the right to be worshipped except Him, so how are you being deluded
Thus were deluded those who denied the revelations of Allah
It is Allah Who has made the earth a resting place for you, and the sky a canopy. He has molded your bodies and molded them well, and has provided you with good things. Such is Allah your Lord. So glory be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds
He is the Ever-Living. There is no god but Him. Therefore call upon Him with your sincere devotion. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds
O Prophet, tell them: "I have been forbidden to invoke those whom you invoke besides Allah. How can I do this when clear revelations have come to me from my Lord, and I have been commanded to submit myself to the Lord of the worlds
It is He Who has created you from dust, then from a sperm, then from a leechlike mass, then He delivers you from the womb of your mother as a child, then He makes you grow to reach the age of full strength, then He makes you grow to reach an old age - though some of you die earlier - so that you may complete your appointed term and grow in wisdom
It is He Who gives you life and causes you to die. It is He Who when He decides to do something, needs only to say: "Be," and it is
Do you not see how those who argue about the revelations of Allah turn away from the Right Way
Those who have denied the Book and the Message which We have sent through Our Rasools shall soon come to know the truth when they will be cast into the fire of hell
when, with yokes and chains around their necks, they shall be dragged
through scalding fluid and burned in the fire of hell
Then they shall be asked: "Where are those gods whom you invoked in worship
besides Allah?" They will answer: "They have forsaken us, now we have come to know that those to whom we used to invoke, were in fact nothing." Thus Allah confounds the disbelievers
It will be said: "You have met this fate because during your life on earth, you took delight in things other than the truth and you led a wanton life
Now enter the gates of hell to live therein forever. What an evil abode will be for the arrogant
So be patient, O Prophet, Allah's promise is true. Whether We let you witness the evil consequences with which they are being threatened, or We recall you before We smite them, in any case, they shall all return to Us
O Prophet, We have sent many Rasools before you; of them there are some whose stories We have relayed to you and others whose stories We have not relayed to you. It was not possible for any of those Rasools to bring a sign except by the leave of Allah. Then when the command of Allah came, the matter was decided with justice, and it was the wrongdoers who suffered the loss
It is Allah Who has provided you with cattle, that you may use some for riding and some for food
and there are also other advantages in them for you; they take you where you wish to go carrying you on their backs as ships carry you by the sea
Thus, He shows you His signs; then, which signs of Allah you will deny
Those who have denied the Book WORSHIP/DECIPHERMENT have gone before them? They were more in number and superior in strength than these and they have left behind great traces of their power in the land; yet all that they did was of no avail to them
When their Messengers came to them with clear revelations, they proudly boasted about their own knowledge; but the very forewarned scourge at which they mocked, hemmed them in
When they saw Our scourge, they cried out: "We believe in Allah, the One and Only, and we reject all those gods whom we used to associate with Him
But after seeing Our scourge, their professing the faith (Islam) was of no use to them; such was the practice of Allah in dealing with His servants in the past, and thus the disbelievers were lost
Ha M'im
This is revealed by the Compassionate, the Merciful (Allah)
a Book whose verses are well explained, a Qur’an in the Arabic language for people who understand
A giver of good news and admonition: yet most of the people turn their backs and do not listen
They say: "Our hearts are concealed in veils from the faith to which you call us, there is deafness in our ears and there is a barrier between you and us: so you work your way and we keep on working our way
O Prophet say: "I am but a man like yourselves. It is revealed to me that your God is One God, therefore take the Right Way towards Him and implore His forgiveness. Woe to the pagans (those who associate other gods with Allah)
those who do not pay Zakah and deny the hereafter
As for those who believe and do good deeds, they will have a never ending reward
Ask them: "Do you really deny the One Who created the earth in two periods and do you set up rivals in worship with Him while He is the Lord of the worlds
He set upon it mountains towering high above its surface, He bestowed blessings upon it and in four periods provided it with sustenance according to the needs of all those who live in and ask for it
Then He turned towards the sky, which was but smoke, He said to it and to the earth: ‘Come forward both of you, willingly or unwillingly,’ and they submitted: ‘We shall come willingly.’
So, from this creation, He formed the seven heavens in two periods and to each heaven He ordained its laws. He adorned the lowest heaven with brilliant lamps and made it secure. Such is the design of the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing
Now if they turn away, say to them: "I have given you warning of a thunderbolt, like the thunderbolt which struck ‘Ad and Thamud
When their Messengers came to them from before and from behind, saying: "Worship none but Allah." They replied: "If our Lord wanted to send us a message, He would certainly have sent down angels, so we categorically deny the message with which you are sent
As for ‘Ad, they WORSHIP/DECIPHERMENT conducted themselves with arrogance in the land without any justification and said: "Who is stronger than us in might?" Could they not see that Allah Who created them, was mightier than them? Yet they continued to reject Our revelations
So, over a few ill-omened days, We let loose on them a furious hurricane to make them taste a shameful scourge in this life, but more shameful still will be the punishment of the hereafter, and they shall have none to help them
As for Thamud, We offer them Our guidance, but they preferred to remain blind rather than to receive guidance towards the Right Way; so the thunderbolt of humiliating scourge seized them for their misdeeds
but We saved those who believed and had the fear of Allah
Imagine that Day when the enemies of Allah will be brought together and led to the hellfire in groups
Finally when they reach there, their ears, their eyes, and their skins will testify to their misdeeds
And they will ask their skins: "Why did you testify against us?" Their skins will reply: "Allah Who gives the faculty of speech to everything, has made us speak. He is the One Who created you to begin with, and now to Him you are being brought back
During your life on earth you use to hide yourselves while committing crimes, you never thought that your own ears, your own eyes and your own skins would ever testify against you. Rather you thought that even Allah had no knowledge of many things that you do
This thought of yours, which you entertained concerning your Lord, has brought you to destruction and now you have become of those who are utterly lost
Then, whether they have patience or not, the fire will still be their home, and even if they beg for pardon, it shall not be granted to them
We have assigned intimate companions, of like nature, for them Who make their past and present seem fair to them; and the same word (sentence of punishment) proved true against them, which overtook generations of jinn and men who have gone before them, that they shall surely be in loss
The disbelievers say: "Do not listen to this Qur’an and make noise when it is recited so that you may gain the upper hand
We will certainly punish the disbelievers and requite them for the worst of their misdeeds
hell that is, the reward for such enemies of Allah, which will be their eternal home: a reward for their denying Our revelations
Wherein, the disbelievers will say: "Our Lord! Show us those among jinns and mankind who misled us: we shall trample them under our feet so that they become utterly disgraced
As for those who say: "Our God is Allah," and then stay firm on it, the angels will descend on them, saying: "Let nothing fear or grieve you. Rejoice for the good news of paradise that has been promised to you
We are your protectors in this life and in the hereafter. There you shall find all that your souls desire and all that you can ask for
A hospitable gift from the All-Forgiving, All-Merciful
Who is better in speech than the one who calls people towards Allah, does good deeds and says: "I am a Muslim
Good deeds are not equal to the evil ones. WORSHIP/DECIPHERMENT Repel other’s evil deeds with your good deeds. You will see that he with whom you had enmity, will become your close friend
But none will attain this quality except those who patiently endure and none will attain this quality except those who are truly fortunate
If any time you are tempted by Satan, seek refuge with Allah. It is He Who hears all and knows all
Among His signs are the night and the day and the sun and moon. Do not prostrate yourselves before the sun or the moon; rather prostrate yourselves before Allah, Who created them both, if you truly are His worshippers
So if the unbelievers disdain His worship, let them remember that the angels who are nearest to your Lord, glorify Him day and night and never feel tired
And among His other signs is the earth that you see barren; but when We send down rain upon it, it stirs to life and its yield increases. Surely He Who gives it life, will raise the dead to life. Surely He has power over all things
Those who pervert Our revelations are not hidden from Us. Just consider who is better? The one who is cast into the fire or the one who emerges safe on the Day of Resurrection? Do as you like; surely He is watching all your actions
Those who reject this reminder when it comes to them should know that in fact it is a mighty Book
No falsehood can approach it from before or from behind. It is a revelation from the One Who is Wise and Praiseworthy
Nothing is said to you (O Muhammad) that was not said to the Messengers before you: that surely your Lord is the Lord of forgiveness, and at the same time the Lord of painful retribution
Had We revealed this Qur’an in a foreign language, they (same people) would have said: "Why have not its verses been made clear? Why in a foreign language, while the audience are Arabs?" Say O Prophet: "To the believers, it is a guide and a healing; and the ones who do not believe, it is merely their deafness and their blindness; because they act as if they are being called from a far-off place
Before this Qur’an, We had given the Book to Moses and it was similarly disputed. If your Lord had not already given a word, the Judgment would have been passed between the disputants; grave though their suspicions were about it
He who does good deeds, does it for his own soul; and he who commits evil does so at his own peril: Your Lord is never unjust to His servants
He Alone has the knowledge of the Hour of Doom. No fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive, nor she gives birth but with His knowledge. On the Day of Judgment when Allah will ask the unbelievers: "Where are those partners that you associated with Me?" They will answer: "We confess that none of us can vouch for them
Those deities whom they used to invoke will vanish from them and they shall realize that there is no escape
Man is never tired of praying for good, but when any evil befalls him, he loses hope and is in despair
And if, after affliction, We vouchsafe him a favor from Ourself, he is sure to say: "I deserve this, I do not think that the Hour will ever come; and even if I am brought back to my Lord, I would still get good treatment from Him." The fact, however, is that We shall tell the disbelievers the truth of all that they had done and We shall make them taste a severe punishment
When We bestow favors on man, he turns away and drifts off to another side; and when an evil befalls him, he comes with lengthy supplications
O Prophet, ask them: "Have you ever considered: if this Qur’an is really from Allah and you deny it, who can be more astray than you who have gone too far in defying Him
Soon shall We show them Our signs in the universe and in their own souls, until it becomes clear to them that this Qur’an is indeed the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord is a witness over everything
Still they are in doubt about meeting their Lord! Yet it is He Who encompasses everything
Ha M'im
‘Ain Sin Qaf
Thus, Allah All-Mighty, the All-Wise sends His revelation to you, O Muhammad, as He sent to other Messengers before you
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He is the Supreme, the Great
The heavens might have almost broken apart from above those who are elevating Allah’s creatures to His rank, if the angels would have not been glorifying their Lord with His praise and begging forgiveness for those on earth. Behold! Surely it is Allah Who is the oft-Forgiving, most Merciful
Those who take others as their guardians besides Him, Allah Himself is watching them; and O Prophet, you are not the disposer of their affairs
Thus have We revealed to you this Qur’an in Arabic, so that you may warn the residents of the Mother City (Mecca) and its suburbs, and forewarn them of the Day of assembly about which there is no doubt: when some will go to paradise and others to the blazing fire
If Allah wanted, He could have made all of them a single nation; but He admits to His mercy whom He pleases; as for the wrongdoers, they will have no protector nor helper
Have they set up other guardians beside Him, while Allah Alone is the Guardian? It is He Who gives life to the dead and it is He Who has power over all things
O Prophet, tell them: Whatever the subject of your dispute is, its Judgment belongs to Allah: Such is Allah my Lord, in Him I have put my trust, and to Him I turn in repentance
the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you mates from among yourselves and also mates among the cattle from their own kind; by this means does He multiply you. There is no one like Him. He Alone hears all and sees all
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He gives abundantly to whom He pleases and sparingly to whom He wills. He is the Knower of everything
He has ordained for you the same Deen (way of life - Islam) which He enjoined on Noah - and which We have revealed to you O Muhammad - and which We enjoined on Abraham and Moses and Jesus: "Establish the Deen of Al-Islam and make no division (sects) in it." Intolerable for the pagans is that to which you O Muhammad call them. Allah chooses for His service whom He wills, and guides to His Way only those who turn to Him in repentance
The people did not become divided into sects until after knowledge had come to them out of envy among themselves. Had your Lord not issued the word to defer their punishment till an appointed time, the matter would have already been settled between them. The fact is that those who were made to inherit the Book after them, are surely in disquieting doubt concerning it
Therefore, call them to the true Deen, stay firm on the Right Way as you are commanded and do not follow their vain desires. Tell them: "I believe in whatever Allah has revealed from the Book and I am commanded to do justice between you. Allah is Our Lord and your Lord. We are responsible for Our deeds and you for yours. Let there be no dispute among us. Allah will bring us all together on the Day of Judgment and decide as to who is right and who is wrong, and to Him is the final return
Those who dispute concerning Allah after pledging obedience to Him, their dispute is futile in the sight of their Lord, on them is His wrath and for them there will be a terrible punishment
It is Allah Who has revealed this Book (Al- Qur'an) with the truth, and the Balance (to distinguish between right and wrong). What will make you realize that perhaps the hour of doom may be fast approaching
Only those who deny it seek to hasten it on; but the believers dread its coming and know that its coming is the truth. Behold! Those who dispute concerning the hour of doom are far astray
Allah is very Kind to His servants. He gives sustenance to whom He pleases. He is the Powerful, the Almighty
He who desires the harvest of the hereafter, shall be given a many fold increase in his harvest; and he who desires the harvest of this world, a share of it shall be given to him: but in the hereafter he shall have no share at all
Have they made shoraka' (partners with Allah) who, in the practice of their faith, have made lawful to them what Allah has not allowed? Had a decision of making the decision on the Day of Judgment not been issued already, the matter would have certainly been decided between them; surely the wrongdoers will have a painful punishment
You will see that the wrongdoers will be fearing the bad consequences of their deeds which will surely befall them. While those who believe and do good deeds shall dwell in the luxurious gardens of paradise, and shall receive from their Lord all that they wish for; that will surely be the magnificent blessing
Such a blessing is the good news which Allah gives to His servants who believe and do good deeds. O Prophet, say to them: "I do not ask you any recompense except your love for being my close relatives." He that does a good deed shall be repaid many times over. Surely Allah is oft-Forgiving, most-Appreciative
Do they say: "He has forged a falsehood against Allah?" But if Allah so willed, He could have sealed your heart. In fact Allah blots out falsehood and vindicates the truth by His words. Surely He knows everything that is hidden in your breast
It is He Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons their sins, and He knows whatever you do
He answers the prayers of those who believe and do good deeds and gives them even more out of His bounty. As for the unbelievers, they shall have severe punishment
Had Allah bestowed abundance upon His servants, they would have transgressed beyond bounds in the earth; that’s why He sends down in due measure as He pleases; He is well aware and observant of His servants
It is He Who sends down rain even after they have lost all hope, and spreads His Mercy. He Alone is the Praiseworthy Guardian
Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the living creatures that He has spread in both of them: and He is capable of gathering them all together whenever He wants
Whatever affliction befalls you is the result of what your own hands have done even though for many of your misdeeds He grants forgiveness
You cannot frustrate anything in earth and there is no protector or helper for you besides Allah
Among His signs are the ships which look like mountains upon the ocean
If He wants, He can cause the wind to become still and leave them motionless on their backs - surely in this example there are signs for every such person who patiently endures and is grateful
Or He may cause them to drown in consequence of even a few of their misdeeds, though He forgives many of their misdeeds
Those who dispute about Our revelations should know that there is no escape for them
Whatever you are given is nothing but a provision for the transitory life of this world, better and ever lasting is the reward which Allah has for those who believe, put their trust in their Lord
avoid major sins and shameful deeds, forgive even when they are angry
answer the call of their Lord, establish Salah, conduct their affairs with mutual consultation, spend out of the sustenance which We have given them
and when they are oppressed, help and defend themselves
The recompense for an injury is an injury proportionate to it; but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation he shall be rewarded by Allah; He does not like the wrongdoers
Those who avenge themselves when wronged cannot be blamed
The blameworthy are those who oppress their fellow men and conduct themselves with wickedness and injustice in the land. It is they who will have painful punishment
Those who endure with fortitude and forgive others, surely exhibit great courage in conducting their affairs
He whom Allah lets go astray has no protector after Him. When they will face the punishment, you will see the wrongdoers exclaim: "Is there any way back to the world
You will see them brought before awed and humiliated, looking at it with stealthy glances. The true believers will say: "The real losers indeed are those who have lost themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection." Beware! Surely the wrongdoers shall suffer everlasting punishment
They shall have no protectors who could help them besides Allah. The one whom Allah lets go astray has no way of escape
Answer the call of your Lord before that Day arrives which cannot be averted against the will of Allah. There shall be no refuge for you on that Day, nor shall you be able to deny your sins
Now if they give no heed, they should know that We have not sent you, O Muhammad, to be their keeper. Your only duty is to convey My message. Man is such that when We give him a taste of Our Mercy, he is very happy about it; but when, through his own fault, an evil afflicts him, he becomes utterly ungrateful
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He pleases. He gives daughters to whom He pleases and gives sons to whom He pleases
To some He gives both sons and daughters, and makes barren whom He will; surely He is All-knowledgeable, All-Powerful
It is not vouchsafed to any human being that Allah should speak to him face to face, He speaks either through inspiration, or from behind a veil, or through sending a messenger (angel Gabriel) authorized by Him to reveal His will; surely He is most High, most Wise
Thus, have We revealed to you O Muhammad, a Spirit (inspired Book - The Qur’an) by Our command: while you did not know what is The Book and what is the Iman (faith)? But We have made it (The Qur’an) a light whereby We guide those of Our servants whom We please; and surely you are guiding mankind to the Right Way
the Way of Allah - to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Beware! All affairs will eventually return to Allah for a decision
Ha M'im
By the Glorious Book
We have revealed this Qur’an in the Arabic language so that you may understand its meanings
Surely, it is a transcript of the Mother Book in Our keeping, which is sublime and full of wisdom
Should We take this Reminder away from you and ignore you because you are a nation who has transgressed all limits
And how many Prophets have We sent among the ancient peoples
Never did it happen that a Prophet came to his people and they did not mock at him
So We destroyed them, though they were stronger in power than these people, and provided an example in the case of prior people
If you ask them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will surely say: "They have been created by the All-Mighty, the All-Knowledgeable
The One Who has made the earth a resting place for you and traced out routes upon it so that you may find your ways
The One Who sends down rain from the sky in due measure and thereby resurrects a dead land - that’s how you shall be brought forth (raised to life again)
The One Who has created all living things in pairs and made for you the ships and cattle on which you ride
so that you may firmly sit on their backs, then as you mount, recall the goodness of your Lord and say: "Glory be to Him Who has subjected these to Our use, otherwise We could not have brought them under our control
and to our Lord we shall all return
Yet in spite of recognizing all this, they have made some of His servants to be a part of Him! Surely mankind is clearly ungrateful
Would Allah choose daughters (pagan Arabs believed that angels were the daughters of Allah) for Himself out of what He Himself creates and gives you sons
Yet when a new born-girl - the gender that they ascribe to the Compassionate - is announced to one of them, his face darkens and he is filled with grief
Do they ascribe to Allah, the female gender who is brought up among trinkets and is unable to make herself clear in disputation
They regard the angels, who are themselves servants of the Compassionate, as female divinities. Did they witness their creation? They should know that their testimony shall be noted down and they shall be called to account for it
They say: "Had it been the will of the Compassionate, We should never have worshipped them." They have no knowledge about that; they are merely guessing
Or have We given them a Book before this to which they hold authority for their angel-worshipping
The only argument they have is to say: "We found our forefathers practicing this faith and we are walking in their footsteps
Even so, whenever We sent a Warner before you to forewarn a nation, its affluent people said: "We found our forefathers practicing this faith and surely we are going to follow their footsteps
Each Warner asked: "What if I bring you better guidance than that which your forefathers practiced?" But they replied: "Well! We reject the faith with which you have been sent
Consequently, We inflicted Our retribution on them; then see what was the end of those who disbelieved
Behold! Abraham said to his father and his people: "I renounce the gods you worship
except Him Who created me, for He will surely guide me
And he left this statement as an abiding precept among his descendants, so that they should turn to it
But they started worshipping others, and rather than punishing I kept on providing them and their forefathers the comfort of this life, until there came to them the truth and a Messenger to expound it clearly
But now when the truth has came to them, they say: "This is magic and we do not believe it
They also say: "Why is this Qur’an not revealed to a man of great importance in the two towns (Mecca and Ta'if)
Is it they who distribute the blessings of your Lord? It is We Who distribute the means of their livelihood in the life of this world, raising some in rank above others, so that one may take others into his service. But the blessing of your Lord is far greater in value than the wealth of this world which they amass
And were it not that all mankind might become one nation of unbelievers, We would have given those who disbelieve in the Compassionate (Allah), such houses whose roofs, stairways by which they go to upper chambers all made with silver
and also the doors of their houses and couches on which they recline
along with ornaments of gold - for all these are nothing but merely comforts of this worldly life. It is the life of the hereafter which your Lord has reserved for the righteous
He who turns away from the remembrance (Reminder) of the Compassionate (Allah), We assign a Satan for him, who becomes his intimate companion
and turns such people away from the Right Path, while they think that they are guided aright
Ultimately, when that person will come to Us on the Day of Judgment, he will say to his Satan companion: "I wish that I was far apart from you as the east is from the west: you turned out to be an evil companion
Then it will be said to them: "Well, you have already done wrong, realizing this fact today will avail you nothing, as you both are partners in the same punishment
O Prophet, can you make the deaf hear, or give direction to the blind or those who choose to remain in manifest error
We shall surely inflict retribution on them, whether We take you away from this world
or let you see their end, which We have promised them: surely We have full power over them
Therefore, hold fast to this Qur’an which is revealed to you, surely you are on the Right Way
In fact this Qur’an is a reminder for you and your people; and you shall soon be questioned about it
Ask those of Our Messengers whom We sent before you if We ever appointed other gods to be worshipped besides the Compassionate Allah
We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs. He said to them: "I am a Messenger of the Lord of the worlds
When he showed them Our signs, they laughed at those signs
Yet We showed them sign after sign each greater than the one preceding it and We afflicted them with the scourge, so that they might return to the Right Way
Each time they were seized by a scourge, they requested Moses: "O magician! Pray to your Lord for us by virtue of the covenant He has made with you; we shall surely accept your guidance
But each time We lifted the scourge from them, they broke their pledge
One day Pharoah made a proclamation among his people: "O my people! Is not the kingdom of Egypt mine? Are not these rivers flowing beneath me? Can you not see
Am I not better than this despicable wretch, who can hardly express himself clearly
Why have no gold bracelets been given to him, or angels sent down to accompany him
Thus did he incite his people and they obeyed him; surely they were a nation of transgressors
At last when they provoked Us, We inflicted retribution on them and drowned them all
and made them a lesson and an example for the later generations
When Mary’s son Jesus is quoted as an example, your people raise a clamor at it
and say: "Are Our gods better or is he?" They cite this to you merely to provoke you. They are but a quarrelsome people
He (Jesus) was no more than a mortal whom We favored and made an example to the Children of Israel
Had it been Our will, We could create angels from you to succeed you in the earth
He (Jesus) is, in fact, a sign for the coming of the Hour of Doom. Therefore, have no doubt about its coming, follow me; this is the Right Way
Let not Satan mislead you, for he is your open enemy
When Jesus came with clear signs, he stated: "I have brought you wisdom, and to clarify some of those things about which you have disputes: so fear Allah and obey me
Surely it is Allah Who is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is the Right Way
In spite of these teachings, the factions disagreed among themselves; so woe to the wrongdoers from the punishment of a painful Day
Are they waiting for the Hour of Doom that it should come on them all of a sudden, without warning
On that Day, even friends will become enemies to one another with the exception of the righteous people
O My devotees! Today you have nothing to fear or to regret
it will be said to those who believed in Our revelations and became Muslims
Enter paradise, you and your spouses; you will be made happy
There they shall be served with golden dishes and golden goblets, and they shall have everything that their souls can desire and all that their eyes can delight in - and it will be said to them: "Now you shall abide therein forever
You have inherited this paradise by virtue of your good deeds
therein you shall have plenty of fruit to eat
But the criminals will abide in the punishment of hell
Their punishment will never be lightened, and they shall remain despair therein
We did not wrong them, but it is they who wronged themselves
They will cry: "O Malik (the keeper of hell)! Let your Lord put and end to us." But he will answer: "Nay! You are going to live forever
We have brought you the truth, but most of you hate the truth
If they have devised a plan to ruin you (O Muhammad), then surely We too shall devise a plan to ruin them
Do they think that We cannot hear their secret talks and their private conversation? Of course We do, and Our messengers (angels) who are assigned to them, record it all
O Prophet tell the Christians: "If the Compassionate (Allah) had a son, I would be the first to worship him
Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, He is above what they ascribe to Him
So let them blunder and play until they face their Day, which has been promised to them
It is He (Allah) Who is God in the heavens and God on earth; He is the All-Wise, the All-Knowledgeable
Blessed is He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them! He Alone has the knowledge of the Hour of Doom, and to Him you shall all be brought back
And those to whom they invoke besides Him, have no power to intercede for them except those who testify to the truth by virtue of knowledge
If you ask them Who created them, they will certainly say: "Allah." How then are they deluded away from the truth
Allah has heard the Prophet’s cry: "O Lord! Surely these are a people who would not believe
Therefore, O Prophet! Bear with them and wish them peace. They shall soon come to know the truth
Ha M'im
We swear by the Glorious Book
that We revealed this Qur’an in a blessed night (Layla-tul Qadr); for We wanted to forewarn mankind
In that night every matter is decided wisely
by a command from Ourself. Surely We send it (The Qur'an) down
as a blessing from your Lord; it is He Who is All-Hearing, All- Knowing
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, mark this, if you are true believers
There is no god but Him. He gives life and death. He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
Yet they play about in doubt
Well! Wait for the Day when the sky will pour down visible smoke
Enveloping all mankind; this will be a painful punishment
Then the mankind will say: "Our Lord! Remove from us this punishment, surely we have become real believers
But how can the acceptance of Our Message at that time be beneficial to them? A Messenger (Muhammad), who makes the things clear, has already come to them
yet they deny him, saying: "He is a madman, taught by others
We shall remove the affliction (famine from which they were suffering) for a while, but you will revert to the same old ways
One day We shall seize you with a mighty onslaught to exact Our retribution
Before them We had put the people of Pharoah (Pharaoh) to the same test, when an honorable Messenger came to them
saying: "Hand over to me the servants of Allah. I am to you a Messenger worthy of all trust
Do not hold yourselves above Allah, surely I have brought to you a clear authority
I have taken refuge with my Lord and your Lord against you injuring me
If you do not believe me, then leave me alone
But they became aggressive, so Moses prayed to his Lord: "These are indeed a criminal people
The reply came: "Set forth with My servants (Israelites) at night, surely you shall be pursued
When you have crossed the red sea along with your people miraculously, then leave the sea divided; for they are a host who are destined to be drowned
How many gardens and springs they left behind
And agriculture and grand palaces
And means of luxury and comfort which they used to enjoy
Thus was their end! And We let other people inherit what was once theirs
Neither Heaven nor earth sheds tears for them; nor were they given a respite
We did deliver the Children of Israel from a humiliating chastisement
inflicted by Pharoah who was the most arrogant among such inordinate transgressors
and We chose them, in spite of knowing their weaknesses above the nations of the world
We showed them signs in which there was a clear trial
As to these (people of Qureysh) who say
There is nothing beyond our first death and we shall not be raised again
Are these people better than the people of Tubba and those who were before them? We destroyed them all only because they had become criminals
It was not for a sport that We created the heavens the earth and all that lies between them
We have created them to reveal the truth, but most of them do not understand
Surely the Day of sorting out is the time appointed for the resurrection of them all
On that Day no one shall be able to protect his friend, nor shall they receive any help
except those to whom Allah will show His Mercy: for it is He Who is the All- Mighty, the All Merciful
Surely the Zaqqum tree
shall be the food of the sinners
it will be like the dregs of oil. Which shall boil in the belly
like the boiling of scalding water
A voice will be heard: "Seize him and drag him into the depth of the hell
then pour scalding water over his head
then the voice will say: "Taste it; you were such a powerful noble
This is the punishment which you use to doubt
Indeed, this is what you used to dispute
As for the righteous, they will be in a secure place
among gardens and springs
dressed in fine silk and rich brocade, sitting face to face
Such shall be their place! And We shall wed them to Hourin-Ayn (damsels with beautiful big and lustrous eyes)
There, in full peace, they shall call for every kind of fruit
and after having prior death in the world, they shall taste death no more; and He (Allah) will protect them from the torment of hell
as a grace from your Lord, and that will be the supreme achievement
Surely We have made this Qur’an easy by revealing in your own language so that they may take heed
If they do not accept the admonition then wait; surely they too are waiting
Ha M'im
This Book is revealed from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
Surely in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the true believers
and in your own creation and that of animals which are scattered through the earth, there are signs for those who are firm in faith
and in the alternation of night and day, in the sustenance that Allah sends down from heaven with which He revives the earth after its death and in the changing of the winds, there are signs for those who use their common sense
These are the revelations of Allah, which We are reciting to you in all truth. Then, in what report will they believe if not that of Allah and His revelations
Woe to each lying sinner
before whom the revelations of Allah are recited: he hears them, yet he arrogantly persists as though he never heard them; announce to him a painful punishment
And when something of Our revelations come to his knowledge, he takes them as a joke; for all such people there will be a humiliating punishment
Beyond them there lies hell, and nothing of what they have earned in this world will be of any benefit to them, nor those whom they have taken as their protectors besides Allah, and they shall have grievous punishment
This Qur’an is the true Guidance. As for those who deny the revelations of their Lord, there will be a terribly painful punishment
It is Allah Who has subjected the sea to you, so that ships may sail upon it by His command, and that you may seek His bounty and be grateful to Him
He also subjected to you whatever is between the heavens and the earth; all from Himself. Surely there are signs in this for those who think
O Prophet, tell the believers to bear with those who do not fear the coming of the bad days from Allah, so that He may Himself recompense those people according to what they have earned
He that does a righteous deed, does it for his own good; and he that commits an evil, does so at his own peril. In the end, you all will be brought back to your Lord
We gave the Book to the Children of Israel and bestowed on them rulership and Prophethood. We provided them with good things of life, exalted them above the nations
and gave them clear instructions relating to the matters of religion through revealing to them the Torah. Then they differed among themselves, not because of ignorance but, after the knowledge had come to them, out of envy among themselves. Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning the matters in which they have set up differences
O Prophet, We have put you on the Right Way (Shari'ah) concerning the religion, so follow it, and do not yield to the desires of ignorant people
for they can in no way protect you against Allah. In fact, the wrongdoers are protectors of one another, while the protector of the righteous is Allah Himself
These (the Qur’an and Shari'ah) are the eye openers for mankind; a guidance and a blessing to the true believers
Do the evil doers think that We shall hold them equal with those who believe and do good deeds, and that their lives and deaths shall be alike? Worst is the judgment that they make
Allah has created the heavens and the earth to manifest the truth, and to reward each soul according to its deeds, and none of them shall be wronged
Have you considered the case of such an individual who has made his own desires as his god, and Allah having knowledge let him go astray, and sealed his hearing and heart and drew a veil over his sight? Who is there to guide him after Allah has withdrawn His guidance? Will you not learn a lesson
The disbelievers say: "There is nothing but our life of this world. We live and die; nothing but time destroys us." In fact, they have no knowledge concerning this. They are merely guessing
When Our clear revelations are recited to them, they have no other argument but to say: "Bring our forefathers back if what you say is true
O Prophet tell them: "It is Allah Who gives you life and later causes you to die; then it is He Who will gather you all on the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt, yet most people do not understand
To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On that Day when the Hour of Judgment will be established, those who have denied His revelations shall be doomed to loss
You shall see every nation on its knees. Every nation shall be summoned to its book of record, and Allah will say: "Today you shall be rewarded for your deeds
This book of Ours speaks about you with the truth. Surely We have recorded all your deeds
As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. That will be a glorious achievement
But as to those who disbelieved, Allah will say: "Were My revelations not recited to you? But you showed arrogance and became a people of criminals
When it was said, "the promise of Allah is true and the Hour of Judgment is sure to come. You used to say, 'We don’t know what the Hour of Judgment is: we think it is just a conjecture, we are not convinced
Then the evil of their deeds will become manifest to them, and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
It will be said: "Today We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours! Hellfire will be your home and none will be there to help you
This is because you used to take Allah’s revelations as a joke and you let the worldly life deceive you." Therefore, on this Day neither shall they be taken out of hell, nor shall they be given a chance for amending their ways to please their Lord
So, praise be to Allah, the Lord of the heavens, the Lord of the earth and the Lord of the worlds
To Him belongs greatness throughout the heavens and the earth, and He Alone is the All- Mighty, the All-Wise
Ha M'im
This Book is revealed by Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
We created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them to manifest the truth and to last for an appointed term. Yet the disbelievers give no heed to Our warning
Ask them: "Have you pondered on those whom you invoke besides Allah? Show me anything that they have created in the earth, or do they have any share in the creation of the heavens? Bring me any Book revealed before this, or some remnant of divine knowledge if you are telling the truth
And who could be more astray than the one who invokes those deities besides Allah who cannot answer him till the Day of Resurrection - which, in fact, are not even aware that they are being invoked
And when mankind shall be assembled on the Day of Judgment, they will become enemies of those who invoked them and deny their worship altogether
When Our revelations are recited to them, clear as they are, and the truth comes before them, the disbelievers say: "This is plain magic
Do they say that the Prophet has fabricated it himself? O Prophet, tell them: "If I have fabricated it myself, then there is nothing that you can do to protect me from the wrath of Allah. He knows fully well what you say about it. Enough is He as a witness between me and you. He is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful
O Prophet tell them: "I am no prodigy among the Messengers; nor do I know what will be done with me or with you. I follow only what is revealed to me, and I am no more than a plain Warner
Further say: "Think, if this Qur’an is indeed from Allah and you reject it, when a witness (a Jew) from the Children of Israel has also testified to its similarity with earlier scriptures and has believed (accepted Islam), while you are showing arrogance, how unjust you are! Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people
The unbelievers say about the believers: "Had there been any good to believe in the message of the Qur’an, they would not have believed in it before us (because the unbelievers were strong and wealthy whereas believers were weak and poor)." And since they reject its guidance, they say: "This is an ancient falsehood
Yet before it the Book of Moses was revealed which was a guide and blessing; and this Book (Qur’an) confirms it. It is revealed in the Arabic language to forewarn the wrongdoers and to give good news to those who have adopted the righteous conduct
Indeed those who say: "Our Lord is Allah, and then remain firm shall have nothing to fear or to regret
They shall dwell in paradise forever as a reward for their good deeds
We have enjoined upon man to treat his parents with kindness. With much trouble his mother bore him, and with much pain did she give him birth. His bearing and his weaning took thirty months. When he reaches the age of full strength and becomes forty years old, he says: "My Lord! Grant me the grace that I may thank you for the favors which You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good deeds that will please You, and grant me good children. Surely I turn to You in repentance and surely I am of those who are Muslims
Such are the people from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds and overlook their misdeeds. They shall be among the residents of paradise: true is the promise that has been made to them in this life
But he who rebukes his parents and says: "Uff (as if to say, do not bother me)! Do you threaten me with a resurrection, whereas many a generations have passed before me and none has come back from among them?" And they both cry for Allah’s help and say: "Woe to you! Be a good believer. Surely the promise of Allah is true." But he replies: "This is nothing but tales of the ancients
Such are the people against whom the verdict of torment has proved true and they will be among the prior people of the jinns and the men that have passed away before them. Indeed they will be the losers
All will be assigned in ranks, according to their deeds, so that He may reward them fully for what they have done and they shall not be wronged
On that Day when the disbelievers will be brought before the fire, they will be told: "You squandered away your good things in your earthly life and you enjoyed them for a while. Today you shall be recompensed with a punishment of humiliation because you behaved with arrogance for which you had no right during your life on earth and because of the transgressions you committed
Tell them the story of ‘Ad’s brethren, the Prophet Hud, when he warned his people, the residents of Ahqaf - in fact Warners came to them before him and after him saying: "Worship none but Allah. Surely I fear for you the torment of a mighty Day
They replied: "Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Bring us the torment that you threaten us with, if you are telling the truth
The Prophet Hud said: "The Knowledge of when it is going to come is only with Allah. I am only conveying the Message with which I have been sent, however, I can see that you are ignorant people
Then when they saw the torment in the shape of a cloud coming towards their valleys, they said: "This cloud will bring us rain." - "Nay! It is what you were asking for, a fierce wind bringing you a woeful torment
It is going to destroy everything by the command of its Lord. Consequently by the morning, there was nothing to be seen except the ruins of their dwellings. Thus did We reward those guilty people
We had established them much better than We have established you, O Qureysh of Mecca, and endowed them with the faculties of hearing, seeing, and intellect. Yet their faculties of hearing, sight and intellect availed them nothing since they denied the revelations of Allah; and they were completely hemmed in by the same thing that they used to mock at
We have destroyed the towns which once flourished around you - and We repeatedly sent them Our revelations so that they may turn to the Right Way
Then Why did not those whom they worshipped besides Allah help them who they regarded as a means of attaining nearness to Him? But those deities utterly forsook them, because those were nothing but their lies and their false inventions
Tell them how We brought to you a group of jinns, who when they reached the place where you were reciting and listened to the Qur’an, said to each other: "Be silent." When the recitation was over, they returned to their people as warners
They said "O our people! We have just listened to a Book that has been revealed after Moses which is confirming that what came before it, and it guides to the truth and to the Right Way
O our people, answer the one who is calling you towards Allah and believe in him! Allah will forgive you your sins and save you from a painful punishment
He that does not answer the one who is calling towards Allah, shall neither escape in the earth, nor shall have any to protect from Him. Surely such people are in manifest error
Do they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation, has the power to raise the dead to life? Why not! Surely He has the power over everything
On the Day when the unbelievers will be brought before the fire, Allah will ask: "Is this not real?" "Yes, by our Lord!" They will answer. "Well, then taste the punishment now," Will He reply, "in consequence of your disbelief
Therefore, bear with them with patience, as did the Messengers endowed with firmness of purpose before you, and do not be in haste about them. On the Day when they shall see that which they are being threatened with, their life on earth will seem to them as if they had lived no more than an hour of a day. The Message of forewarning has been conveyed. Shall any be destroyed except the transgressors
Those who disbelieve and obstruct Allah's Way, He will render their deeds fruitless
As for those who believe and do good deeds and believe in what is revealed to Muhammad - the truth from their Lord - He will remove from them their evils and improve their condition
This is because the unbelievers follow falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. Thus, Allah cites their similitudes for mankind
Therefore, when you meet the unbelievers in the battlefield smite their necks and, when you have thoroughly subdued them, then take prisoners of war and bind them firmly. After the war lays down her burdens, then you have the choice whether you show them favor or accept ransom. Thus are you commanded. If Allah wanted, He Himself could have punished them; but He adopted this way so that He may test some of you by means of others. As for those who are slain in the cause of Allah, He will never let their deeds be lost
Soon He will guide them, improve their condition
and admit them to the paradise which He has announced for them
O believers! If you help the cause of Allah, He will help you and establish your feet firmly
As for the unbelievers, they shall be consigned to perdition, and He will bring their deeds to nothing
That is because they hate the revelations of Allah; therefore, He rendered their deeds fruitless
Have they not traveled through the land and seen what was the end of those who have gone before them? Allah destroyed them utterly and a similar fate awaits these unbelievers
This is because Allah is the Protector of the believers while the unbelievers have no protector
Surely Allah will admit those who believe and do good deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow. While those who are unbelievers, they are to enjoy only this life and eat as cattle eat; but in the hereafter, the fire shall be their abode
How many cities which were mightier than your city which has driven you out, have We destroyed for their disbelief, and there was none to save them
Can he who follows the clear guidance from his Lord be compared to him who is led by his own desires and whose foul deeds seem fair to him
Here is the parable of the paradise which the righteous have been promised: it has rivers the water of which will never be stagnant, rivers of milk whose taste never changes, rivers of wine delicious to those who drink, and rivers of honey pure and clear. In it they will have all kinds of fruits, as well as forgiveness from their Lord. Can such people be compared to those who shall dwell in hell forever, and they will be given scalding water which will cut their intestines into pieces
Some of them indeed listen to you but no sooner do they leave your presence than they ask those endowed with knowledge: "What was it that he said just now?" Such are the men upon whose hearts Allah has set a seal, and who follow their own desires
As for those who follow the Right Way, Allah will increase their guidance and bestow on them their righteousness
Are they waiting for the Hour of Doom to overtake them all of a sudden? Do they not know that its signs have already come and when it will actually overtake them, what chance will they have to benefit by this admonition
Therefore, you should know that there is no god but Allah; implore Him to forgive your sins and to forgive the believing men and believing women; for Allah knows your activities and your resting places
The believers were asking: "Why is not a Surah revealed allowing us to fight?" But when a decisive Surah carrying the order of allowing them to fight is revealed, you saw those in whose hearts was a disease looking at you like the one under the shadow of death. Woe to them
On their tongues is the promise of obedience and good talk, so if they would have proved their promise with Allah when the final command was given, it would have been better for them
Now what can be expected of you if you are put in authority, other than to do evil in the land and violate the ties of blood
Such are those whom Allah has cursed and made them deaf and blinded their sight
Will they not ponder upon the Qur’an? Are there locks upon their hearts
Those who turn back to unbelief after the guidance has become clear are seduced by Satan who gives them false hopes
That is why they said to those who showed an aversion to what Allah has revealed: "We shall obey you in some matters," and Allah knows their secret talks
Then what will they do when the angels carry off their souls, smiting their faces and their backs
That will happen because they followed the way that called for the wrath of Allah and hated to adopt the way of His pleasure, therefore He made all their deeds void
Do those in whose hearts is a disease think that Allah will not reveal their malice
Had We so pleased, We could have pointed them out to you and you would have recognized them promptly by their faces. But you will surely know them by the tone of their speech. Allah knows all of your actions
We shall put you to test until We know the valiant and the resolute among you, and test all that is said about you
The unbelievers who obstruct others from the Way of Allah and disputed the Messenger after the guidance has become clear to them shall in no way harm Allah; as a result, he will bring their deeds to nothing
O believers! Obey Allah and obey His Messenger, and do not let your deeds come to nothing
Those who disbelieve and obstruct the Way of Allah and die while they were still disbelievers, Allah will never forgive them
Therefore, do not be fainthearted crying for peace, for you will surely gain the upper hand. Allah is on your side and will never let your deeds be wasted
The life of this world is but a play and amusement. If you believe and follow the way of piety, He will grant you your rewards and will not ask you to give up your possessions
If He were to demand all of your possessions and press you for it, you would grow stingy, and He would bring out all your malice
Behold, you are those who are being asked to give in the cause of Allah. Yet some of you are stingy, whereas whoever is stingy to His cause, is in fact stingy to himself. Allah is self sufficient, it is you who are needy. If you turn away He will replace you by some other folk; who will not be like you
O Prophet, Surely We have granted you a manifest victory
so that Allah may forgive your past as well as your future sins, and may perfect His blessings upon you, and keep you on the Right Way
and that Allah may bestow on you His mighty help
It was He who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the believers, so that they may add more faith to their Faith. To Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Knowledgeable, All-Wise
He has caused you to do as you have done, so that He may admit the believing men and believing women into the gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever and remove their ills from them; and that is the highest achievement for men in the sight of Allah
And that He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women and the pagan men and the pagan women, who entertained an evil thought about Allah. A turn of evil shall befall them, for Allah's wrath is upon them. He has laid His curse on them and prepared for them the fire of hell, which is a very evil abode
To Allah belongs the forces of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
O Prophet, We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of good news, and as a Warner
So that you, O people, may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that you may help him and honor him and glorify Allah morning and evening
Surely those who swore allegiance to you O Prophet, indeed swore allegiance to Allah Himself. The Hand of Allah was above their hands. Now, the one who will break his pledge, will break it at his own peril, and the one who will keep his pledge that he has made with Allah, shall soon be given a great reward by Him
The beduin Arabs who stayed behind will soon say to you: "Our goods and families kept us occupied, so please ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Tell them: "Who can intervene on your behalf with Allah if it be His will to do you harm or He pleases to do you good? Allah is well aware of your actions
Rather you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families; this fancy seemed pleasing to your hearts. You conceived evil thoughts and thus incurred damnation
He who does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, We have prepared a blazing fire for such unbelievers
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth: He forgives whom He pleases and He punishes whom He wills. Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful
When you set forth to take the spoils of war, those who stayed behind will say: "Let us come with you." They wish to change Allah’s decree. Tell them plainly: "You shall not come with us. Allah has already said this before." Then they will say: "Nay! But you are jealous of us." Whereas there is no question of jealousy, but little do they understand such things
Tell the beduin Arabs who stayed behind: "You shall soon be called upon to fight against a mighty people then either you will fight or they will embrace Islam. Then if you obey, Allah will grant you a good reward, but if you turn away as you have done before, He will inflict on you a painful penalty
There is no blame on the blind, the lame, and the sick if they stay behind. He that obeys Allah and His Messenger shall be admitted to gardens beneath which the rivers flow, and he that turns away shall be punished with a painful punishment
Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquillity upon them and He rewarded them with a speedy victory
and many spoils which they will soon acquire. Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
Allah has promised you many spoils which you shall acquire, and has given you these spoils of Khayber with all promptness. He has restrained the hands of enemies from you, so that it may serve as a sign to the believers and that He may guide you to the Right Way
Besides, He promises you other spoils as well, which are not yet within your reach but Allah has surely encompassed them. Allah has power over everything
Even if the unbelievers had fought with you, they would have been put to flight, and would have not found any protector or helper
Such has been the practice of Allah in the past; and you shall find no change in the practice of Allah
It is He Who has restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of Mecca, after that He had given you victory over them, and Allah was watching all your actions
They are the ones who disbelieved and obstructed you from the Masjid-al-Haram (Sacred Mosque - Ka'bah) and prevented your offerings from reaching their destination. Had there not been believing men and believing women in the city of Mecca, whom you did not know, and their possibility of being trampled under your feet and thus incurring unwitting guilt on their account, Allah would have allowed you to fight, but He held back your hands, so that He may admit to His mercy whom He will. Had the believers stood apart from them, We would certainly have punished the disbelievers among them with painful punishment
While the unbelievers set up in their hearts the arrogance - the arrogance of the time of ignorance - Allah sent down His tranquillity upon His Messenger and the believers and made the believers to adhere to the word of piety; for they were most worthy and deserving of it. Allah has full knowledge of everything
Indeed Allah has in all truth shown the vision to His Messenger, that, Allah willing, you shall enter the Masjid-al-Haram (Ka'bah) fearless and secure to perform Umrah or Hajj and some having their heads shaved and others having their hair cut, for He knows what you do not know. So, He granted you a near victory before the fulfillment of that vision
It is He who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the religion of truth, so that He may exalt this religion over all other religions: and sufficient is Allah as a witness
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are strong against the unbelievers and compassionate to each other among themselves. When you see them, you will find them making Rakuh (bowing down) and Sajud (prostrate in prayers), and craving for the blessings from Allah and His good pleasure. They have the marks of Sajud (prostration) on their foreheads, the traces of their prostration. This is their similitude in the Torah; and their similitude in the Gospel: they are like the seed which puts forth its sprout, then strengthens it, then becomes thick and stands firmly on its stem, delighting the sowers of the seed, so that through them He may enrage the unbelievers. Yet to those of them who will believe and do good deeds, Allah has promised forgiveness and a great reward
O believers! Do not put yourselves ahead of Allah and His Messenger. Fear Allah; surely Allah hears all and knows all
O believers! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud when talking to him as you speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds should come to nothing while you do not even perceive it
Those who lower their voices and speak softly in the presence of Allah’s Messenger are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for piety; they shall have forgiveness and a great reward
Those who call out to you, O Muhammad, from outside the private apartments, most of them lack common sense
If only they had patience until you could come out to them, it would certainly be better for them. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O believers, if an evildoer comes to you with some news, verify it (investigate to ascertain the truth), lest you should harm others unwittingly and then regret what you have done
And know that Allah’s Messenger is among you. If he were to follow you in most affairs, you would certainly be in trouble. Allah has endeared this faith to you and beautified it in your hearts, making unbelief, wrongdoing, and disobedience abhorrent to you. It is they who are rightly guided
through Allah’s grace and blessing. Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise
If two parties among the believers fall into mutual fighting, make peace between them. Then if one of them transgresses against the other, fight the one who has transgressed until he returns to the commands of Allah. Then, if he returns, make peace between them with justice and be fair; for Allah loves those who are fair and just
The believers are brothers to one another, therefore, make reconciliation between your brothers and fear Allah, so that you may be shown mercy
O believers! Let no men laugh at other men who may perhaps be better than themselves; and let no woman laugh at another woman, who may perhaps be better than herself. Do not defame through sarcastic remarks about one another, nor call one another by offensive nicknames. It is an evil thing to be called by a bad name after being a believer, and those who do not repent are the ones who are the wrongdoers
O believers! Avoid immoderate suspicion, for in some cases suspicion is a sin. Do not spy on one another, nor backbite one another (to say something about another behind ones back that if one hears it, dislikes it). Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Surely you would abhor it. Fear Allah; for Allah is the Accepter of repentance, Merciful
O mankind! We created you from a single pair of a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes that you might get to know one another. Surely the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is he who is the most righteous. Allah is All-Knowledgeable, All-Aware
The beduin Arabs say: "We have believed." Tell them: "You have not believed; rather say 'We have become Muslims;' for faith has not yet found its way into your hearts. If you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not deny you the reward of your deeds; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The true believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, then never doubt; and make Jihad (exert their efforts) with their wealth and their persons in the cause of Allah. Such are the ones who are truthful in their claim to be the believers
O Prophet say to those who claim to have believed: "Do you apprise Allah of your religion? Whereas, Allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth and He has full knowledge of everything
They think they have conferred upon you a favor by embracing Islam. Tell them: "You have conferred upon me no favor by accepting Islam. It was Allah Who has conferred a favor upon you in guiding you to the true faith; admit this, if you are men of truth
Surely Allah knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is watching all your actions
Qaf. By the Glorious Qur’an (O Muhammad you are the Messenger of Allah)
But they wonder that there has come to them a Warner from among themselves. So the unbelievers say: "This indeed is very strange
that after we are dead and have become dust we shall be raised to life again, such a return is far from reason
We know all that the earth consumes of their bodies, and We have a Book which keeps records of everything
Nay! But these people deny the truth when it comes to them, and they are confused
Have they never looked at the sky above them, and marked how We have made it and adorned it, and there are no flaws in it
And the earth, how We have spread it out and set upon it mountains and caused to grow in it every kind of beautiful vegetation
All these things are eye-openers and a reminder for every servant returning to Allah
We send down blessed water from the sky with which We bring forth gardens and the harvest grain
and tall palm trees laden with clusters of dates, piled one over another
a sustenance for the servants; thereby giving new life to dead land. That is how the resurrection will be of the dead from the earth
Before, the people of Noah and the dwellers of Ar-Rass denied this truth and so did Thamud
‘Ad, Pharaoh and the brethren of Lot
the dwellers of the Al-Aiykah and the people of Tubba; all of them disbelieved their Messengers and thus brought down upon them My threatened scourge
Were We fatigued with the first creation that they are in doubt about a new creation
We created man, We know the prompting of his soul, and We are closer to him than his jugular vein
Besides this direct knowledge ,We have assigned to every one two scribes (guardian angels), the one seated on his right and the other on his left
not a single word does he utter but there is a vigilant guardian ready to note it down
When the agony of death will bring the truth before his eyes, they will say: "This is what you were trying to escape
And the Trumpet shall be blown; that will be the Day of which you were threatened
Each soul will come forth; with it there will be a an angel to drive and an angel to bear witness
It will be said: "You were heedless of this, but now We have removed your veil, so your eyesight is sharp today
His companion will say: "Here is my testimony ready with me
The sentence will be: "Throw into hell every stubborn disbeliever
every opponent of good, and every doubting transgressor
who set up other gods besides Allah. Throw him into severe punishment
His companion will say: "Our Lord! I did not mislead him. He himself had gone far astray
Allah will say: "Do not dispute with each other in My presence. I gave you warning beforehand
My words cannot be changed, nor am I unjust to My servants
On that Day, We shall ask the hell: "Are you full?" And the hell will answer: "Are there any more
Paradise shall be brought close to the righteous, which will no more be a distant thing
and it will be said: "Here is what you were promised. It is for every penitent faithful person
who feared the Compassionate (Allah) without seeing Him and will come before Him with a devoted heart
Allah will say: "Enter it in peace; this is the Day of Eternal Life
There they shall have all that they wish, and We shall have yet more to give
How many generations, far stronger in power, have We destroyed before them! They searched the entire land: but could they find any refuge
Surely in this there is a lesson for every person who has a heart, and can hear and witness
We created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them in six periods, and no fatigue touched Us
Therefore, O Prophet, bear with them in patience whatever they say, and keep on glorifying your Lord before sunrise and before sunset
And glorify Him during a part of the night and after the prostration (prayers)
And listen! The Day when the Caller will call out from a place quite near
the Day when the people will hear the mighty blast in reality; that will be the Day of coming forth (the dead will rise from their graves)
Surely it is We Who give life and death; and to Us shall all return
on that Day when the earth shall split asunder and the people shall be rushing out of it; that gathering them together shall be quite easy for Us
We know very well what these unbelievers say. You (O Muhammad) are not there to compel them to believe. So admonish with this Qur’an every such person who fears My warning
By the dust scattering winds
then by the heavy laden clouds
then by their swift gliding
then by those who distribute the big affair (rain)
surely, that which you are being promised is true
and surely, the Day of Judgment shall come to pass
By the sky full of orbits
surely you contradict one another in what you say
only the perverse persons turn away from the truth
Woe to those who judge by conjecture
those who are engulfed in ignorance and heedlessness
They ask: "When will the Day of Judgment be
It will be the Day when they will be punished in the fire
and it will be said: "Taste your chastisement! This is what you were seeking to hasten
As to the righteous, they will be in the midst of gardens and springs
joyfully receiving what their Lord shall give them; for they were before that (during their life on earth) righteous people
They used to sleep but little in the night time
pray for forgiveness in the early morning
and share their wealth with the needy who asked for it, and those who did not ask
In the earth, there are signs for the firm believers
and also in your own selves; can you not see
In heaven is your sustenance and all that you are promised
I swear by the Lord of heaven and earth that this is true, as certain as you are speaking now
Have you heard the story of Abraham’s honored guests
When they came to him and said: "Peace be upon you!" "Peace be upon you also!" he answered, and seeing that they were strangers
he went quietly to his family, brought a roasted calf
and placed it before them saying: "Will you not eat
When he saw them not eating, he became afraid of them. They said: "Have no fear," and they gave him good news of a son endowed with knowledge
Hearing this his wife came forward, with astonishment she smote her forehead and said: "A son to a barren old woman
They replied: "Thus has said your Lord: surely He is the Wise, the Knowledgeable
Abraham asked: "O Divine Messengers, what is your errand
They replied: "We have been sent to a guilty nation (people of Lot, who were homosexuals)
to shower upon them brimstone
marked by your Lord for the transgressors
Then We saved all those who were believers in the town
We found none but one household of true Muslims
We left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment
There is also a sign for you in the story of Moses: when We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority
but he turned his back along with his chiefs, saying: "He (Moses) is a sorcerer or a madman
Consequently, We seized him and his warriors, and cast them into the sea. Indeed he deserved much blame
There is also a sign in the story of 'Ad: when We let loose on them a blighting wind
which made rotten everything that it blew on
Likewise the story of Thamud, when it was said to them: "Enjoy yourselves for a while
but they disobeyed the commandment of their Lord; consequently they were overtaken by the thunderbolt even while they were looking on
So neither they could stand up on their feet nor could they defend themselves
And We destroyed the people of Noah before them because they too were transgressors
We have built the heavens with Our hands, for We have the power to do so
We have spread out the earth; how excellent a spreader We are
We have created everything in pairs, so that you may learn a lesson from it
O Prophet, say to mankind: "Rush towards Allah, surely I am assigned by Him as a plain Warner to you all
Do not set up another god besides Allah, surely I am assigned by Him as a plain Warner to you all
It has been the case that whenever a Messenger came to the peoples before them, they said about him: "He is a sorcerer or a madman
Have they transmitted this statement from one generation to the next? Nay, but they are all a rebellious people
So, O Prophet, ignore them; you are not at fault
But keep on admonishing them, for admonition is beneficial to the true believers
We have not created jinns and mankind except to worship Me
I require no sustenance from them, nor do I ask that they should feed Me
Surely it is Allah Who is the giver of all sustenance, the Lord of Power, the Invincible
Surely those who are wrongdoers, shall have their portion of torment similar to the portion of their predecessors; so let them not challenge Me to hurry it on
Woe then to the unbelievers, on that Day with which they are being threatened
By the mount Tur (where Moses was given the Torah)
and by the Book written
on a fine unfolded scroll
and by the inhabited House
and the elevated canopy (sky)
and the surging ocean
the torment of your Lord will surely come to pass
There shall be none to avert it
On that Day, heaven will shake violently
and the mountain will travel around
On that Day, woe be to the deniers of truth
who are engaged in their useless sports
On that Day they shall be driven to the fire of hell with violence
and it will be said to them: "This is the fire which you denied
Is this a magic, or do you not see
Now burn therein; it will be the same for you, whether you bear it patiently or do not bear it patiently. You are being rewarded according to your deeds
As for the righteous, they will be in Gardens and bliss
rejoicing in what their Lord has given them and their Lord shall shield them from the torment of hell
It will be said to them: "Eat and drink to your hearts content, this is the reward for your good deeds
They shall recline on couches arranged in rows; and We shall wed them with beautiful Huris (damsels)
We shall unite the true believers with those of their descendants who follow them in their faith, and shall not deny them the reward of their good deeds - everyone is responsible for his deeds
and We shall provide them fruits, and such meats as they desire
They will pass from hand to hand a cup of wine which shall cause no idle talk, nor sinful urge
and there shall wait for them young boys, exclusively appointed for their service, who will be as handsome as treasured pearls
They will converse with one another about their worldly life
and say: "When we were living among our kinfolk, we were troubled by many fears
But Allah has been gracious to us; He has delivered us from the fiery scourge
Indeed we used to pray only to Him. Surely He is the Beneficent, the Merciful
Therefore, O Prophet, keep up your mission of admonition. By the grace of your Lord you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman
Do they say: "He is but a poet! We are waiting for some misfortune to befall him
Tell them: "Wait if you will; I too shall wait with you
Does their faculties of reasoning prompt them to say this? Or is it merely that they are wicked people
Do they say: "This man has invented this Qur’an himself?" Nay! They do not want to believe
Let them produce a scripture like this, if what they say is true
Were they created without a Creator? Or were they their own creators
Did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay! They will never be convinced
Do they possess the treasures of your Lord? Or is it they who control them
Do they have a stairway to heaven by means of which they overhear Him? If so, let any of them who overheard Him, bring clear proof
Is He to have daughters and you sons
Do you ask them payment for your services, that they should fear to be overburdened by a debt
Do they have the knowledge of the unseen? Can they write it down
Do they intend to devise a plot against you? If so, the disbelievers themselves will be trapped in their plot
Do they have a god other than Allah? Exalted is Allah, far above those deities they associate with Him
They are such people that, even if they will see a part of heaven falling down, they would say: "It is but a mass of clouds
So leave them alone until they encounter that Day of theirs wherein they shall be made to swoon with terror
The Day when their designs will avail them nothing and none will help them
Surely for such wrongdoers, there is another punishment besides that, even though most of them do not realize that
Therefore, wait for the Judgment of your Lord with patience, We are surely watching over you. Glorify your Lord with His praises when you wake up
and glorify Him in a part of the night, and also as the stars fade away
By the star when it sets
your companion (Muhammad) is neither astray, nor misguided
nor does he speak out of his own desire
This Qur’an is but an inspired revelation
He is being taught by one who is mighty powerful (angel Gabriel)
the one free from defects who became stable in the view
He stood poised at the uppermost horizon
then he drew near, coming closer
within the length of two bows or even closer
and revealed to Allah's servant (Muhammad) that what he was supposed to reveal
His (Muhammad’s) own heart did not deny that which he saw
How can you, O unbelievers then, question what he saw
And he (Muhammad) saw him once again
near Sidra-tul-Muntaha (the Lote-tree at the farthest end of the seven heavens, beyond which none can pass)
Near it is Janna-tul-M’awa (the rest-house of paradise)
When that Lote-tree was covered with what covered it
his eyes did not turn aside nor did they exceed the limit
and he did indeed see some of his Lord’s greatest signs
Have you ever seen LAt and Uzza
and another, the third Manat (names of Arabian idols, claimed by the pagans of Mecca to be the daughters of Allah)
Are you to have sons, and He the daughters
This indeed is an unfair division
These (LAt, Uzza and ManAt) are nothing but names which you and your forefathers have invented, for Allah has vested no authority in them. The unbelievers follow nothing but mere conjecture and the whims of their own souls, even though right guidance has already come to them from their Lord
Or should man have whatever he wishes
Nay! To Allah belongs the hereafter and this present life
How many are the angels in the heavens; yet their intercession can avail none unless Allah gives them permission in favor of whom He wants and is pleased with
Those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the female names of goddesses
But they have no knowledge of it. They follow mere conjecture; and surely conjecture does not avail against the truth at all
Therefore, neglect those who ignore Our warnings and seek only the life of this world
This is the sum of their knowledge. Surely your Lord knows who have strayed from His path, and who are rightly guided
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth, so that He may requite the evildoers according to their deeds, and richly reward those who do good deeds
To those who avoid the major sins and shameful deeds and are guilty of only small offense, surely for them your Lord will have abundant forgiveness. He knew you well when He created you from earth and when you were just embryos in your mother’s wombs, therefore, do not claim piety for yourselves. He knows best who is really Godfearing pious
Have you seen the one who (Walid bin Mughirah, who was willing to embrace Islam, but upon someone’s promise to take the responsibility of getting the punishment on his behalf in lieu of certain amount of money, he) turned away
He gave a little from the promised amount then stopped
Does he possess the knowledge of the unseen that he could see reality
Or has he not been notified about what was in the scrolls of Moses
and of Abraham who always kept his word
That no soul shall bear the burden of another
that there shall be nothing for a man except what he strives for
that his striving shall be scrutinized
that he shall be fully rewarded for it
that to your Lord is the final goal
that it is He Who grants laughter and tears
that it is He Who ordains death and life
that it is He Who has created in pairs, the male and the female
from a drop of ejaculated semen
that it rests upon Him to grant the second life (the life of hereafter)
that it is He Who gives wealth and property
that He is even the Lord of the Sirius (dog star whom the pagans used to worship)
and that it is He Who destroyed the people of ‘Ad
then the people of Thamud, sparing no one
and before them the people of Noah, who were the most unjust and rebellious
And also destroyed the Mu’tafikah (Overthrown Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah)
who were smitten by the scourge that smote them
Then which of your Lord’s blessings would you doubt
This Warner (Muhammad) is just like the earlier warners
The ever approaching (the Day of Judgment) is drawing near
none but Allah can disclose it
Do you then wonder at this revelation
and laugh instead of weeping
Rather you are wasting your time
prostrate yourselves before Allah and worship Him while you can
The Hour of Doom is drawing near, the moon has split asunder; which is a clear proof that the same thing can happen to the earth
Yet when they see a sign, the unbelievers turn their backs and say: "This is an ingenious magic
They deny this and keep on following their own fancies. Ultimately every matter shall be laid to rest
There has already come to them the information of former nations containing enough deterrents
and profound wisdom to serve as a warning, but warnings are of no use to these people
Therefore, O Prophet, let them be. On the Day when the caller will call them to a terrible event
They shall come out from their graves, like swarming locusts, with downcast eyes
rushing towards the caller and the same unbelievers will cry: "This is indeed an awful Day
Long before them, the people of Noah disbelieved. They rejected Our servant, called him a madman and drove him out
After admonishing the people for 950 years, finally he cried out: "Help me, O Lord, I have been overcome
So We opened the gates of heaven with pouring rain
and caused the earth to burst with gushing springs, and the waters met to fulfill the decreed end
We carried him in an Ark built with planks and nails
which drifted on under Our care: a reward for him (Noah) who was denied by the unbelievers
We have left that Ark as a sign, so is there any who would take admonition
How terrible was My scourge and how clear My warning
We have indeed made the Qur’an very easy to understand the admonition: but is there any who would take admonition
Likewise the people of 'Ad did not believe then how terrible was My scourge and how clear My Warning
We let loose on them a tornado, on the day of their bitter misfortune
which snatched them off like trunks of uprooted palm-trees
How terrible was My scourge and how clear My warning
We have indeed made the Qur’an very easy to understand the admonition, so is there any who would take admonition
The people of Thamud disbelieved Our warning
saying: "Are we to follow a human who stands alone among us? That would surely be an error and madness
Was he the only person among us to receive this warning? Nay! He is indeed an insolent liar
To Our Messenger Saleh, We said: "Tomorrow they shall find out who is an insolent liar
We are going to send the she-camel as a trial for them. Therefore, watch them and have patience
Tell them that the water must be shared between them and the she-camel, and each will come to the water at its own turn
At last the people of Thamud called out to one of their companions, who took the responsibility and hamstrung her
Then how terrible was My scourge and how clear My warning
We let loose on them one mighty blast and they became like the trampled twigs used by a fence builder
We have indeed made the Qur’an very easy to understand the admonition, so is there any who would take admonition
Another example is the people of Lot who disbelieved Our warning
We let loose on them a stone-charged tornado which spared none except Lot’s household, whom We saved by early dawn
through Our grace. Thus do We reward those who give thanks
Lot did warn them of Our scourge but they doubted his warnings
They even sought to snatch away his guests from him but We blinded their eyes, and said: "Now taste My punishment and the result of disbelieving My warning
At daybreak they were overtaken by a lasting punishment
as if to say: "Now taste My punishment and the result of disbelieving My warning
We have indeed made the Qur’an very easy to understand the admonition, so is there any who would take admonition
My warnings also came to the people of Pharaoh
They disbelieved all Our signs. Consequently, We seized them with a seizure of the Mighty, Powerful
O Qureysh, are your unbelievers better than they were, or have you been granted an immunity in the Sacred Books
Or, do they say: "Acting together, we can defend ourselves
Soon will their multitude be routed and put to flight
Nay! The Hour of Judgment is the time promised to deal with them. That hour will be the most grievous and bitter
Yet, surely the wicked people persist in error and madness
On that Day when they will be dragged into the fire with their faces downwards, We shall say: "Feel the touch of hell
Surely We have created everything in perfect ordainment (destiny and purpose)
We command but once and Our will is done in the twinkling of an eye
O disbelievers, We have already destroyed many like you. Will you not take admonition
All that they do is being added to their record books
every action, small and big is being noted down
Surely the righteous will be in the midst of gardens and rivers
a place of true honor, in the presence of Almighty Sovereign
The Compassionate (Allah)
Who taught the Qur’an
created man
and taught him how to convey his feelings and thoughts
The sun and the moon move along their computed courses
The shrubs and the trees prostrate in adoration
He has raised the heaven on high and created the balance
don’t ever tamper with this balance
Therefore, you also establish weight with justice and do not give less measure
He laid out the earth for His creatures
with all its fruits and palms having sheathed clusters
and grain with husk and scented herbs
So, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
He created man from sounding clay similar to pottery
and created jinns from smokeless fire
So, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
He is Lord of the two easts and the Lord of the two wests
So, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
He has made the two oceans apparently meeting together
yet between them is a barrier which they cannot cross
So, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
He produces pearls and coral from both of them
So, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
His are the ships looming up like mountains on the sea
So, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
All that exists on the earth will perish
but the Face of your Lord will remain full of Majesty and Glory
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s glories will both of you deny
All who dwell in the heavens and the earth, implore Him for their needs, every moment He is busy in some mighty task
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s honors will both of you deny
O you, the two burdens (jinns and mankind)! Soon We shall find the time to call you to account
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
O you, the assembly of jinns and men! If you have the power to get away from the boundaries of the heavens and the earth (to escape from His punishment), then get away! You cannot get away except with Our Own authority
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s authorities will both of you deny
The flames of fire and molten brass will be unleashed on you both, jinn and men, and you will not be able to defend yourselves
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
When the heaven will burst and will become red like red hide
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
On that Day neither man nor jinn will need be asked about his sins
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Because the sinners will be recognized by their faces and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
It will be said to them: "This is the hell which the culprits denied
They shall wander to and fro between fire and hot boiling water
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s warnings will both of you deny
For those who fear the time when they will have to stand before their Lord there are two gardens
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Having shady trees with lush green branches
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Each of them will be watered by two flowing springs
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
In both of them there will be two pairs of every fruit
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
They will recline on couches upholstered with rich brocade while the fruit of the gardens will be within their easy reach
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Therein will be bashful virgins, whom neither any man nor jinn has touched before
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
So beautiful as though they were rubies and corals
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Could the reward for goodness be anything but goodness
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
And besides these two there shall be two other gardens
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Densely shaded with dark green trees
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
In both of them there will be two gushing springs
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Each planted with fruit trees, dates and pomegranates
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
In each of them, there will be chaste and beautiful virgins
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Huris (beautiful damsels) sheltered in their tents
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Whom neither man nor Jinn has ever touched before
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Reclining on green cushions and beautiful fine carpets
Then, O jinn and men, which of your Lord’s favors will both of you deny
Blessed be the name of your Lord, His Majesty and His Honor
When the inevitable event will come to pass
no one will be able to deny its coming to pass
then some shall be abased and some exalted
The earth shall be shaken with severe shaking
and the mountains shall be made to crumble with awful crumbling
and become like scattered dust
Then you shall be divided into three groups
those on the right hand - how blessed shall be the people of the right hand
those on the left hand - how damned shall be the people of the left hand
and foremost shall be the foremost
They will be nearest to Allah
in the gardens of bliss
Most of them will be from the former
and a few from the later generations
They shall have the jewelled couches
reclining on them facing each other
and there shall wait on them the eternal youths
with goblets, shining beakers and cups of pure wine
which will neither pain their heads nor take away their senses
They shall have fruits of their own choice
and flesh of fowls that they may desire
and dark eyed Huris (damsels)
as lovely as well guarded pearls
as a reward for their good deeds that they had done
There they shall not hear any vain talk nor sinful words
but only the greetings of "Peace be upon you! Peace be upon you
Those of the right hand - happy shall be those on the right hand
They shall be among the thornless lote trees
clusters of bananas
extended thick shades
constantly flowing water
abundant fruits
of unforbidden never ending supply
and will be reclining on high raised couches
We shall create their wives of special creation
and make them virgins
beloved by nature, equal in age
for those of the right hand
Many of them will be from the former
and many from the later generations
As for those of the left hand - how unfortunate will be the people of the left hand
They will be in the midst of scorching winds and in boiling water
in the shade of a pitch-black smoke
neither cool nor refreshing
For they lived in comfort before meeting this fate
They persisted in heinous sins
and used to say: "When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, shall we then be raised to life again
And our forefathers, too
Tell them: "Surely those of old and those of present age
shall certainly be brought together on an appointed time of a known Day
Then, "O the mistaken rejecters
you shall eat of the Zaqqum tree
and fill your bellies with it
and drink on top of it scalding water
yet you shall drink it like a thirsty camel
Such will be their entertainment on the Day of Reckoning
We have created you: will you not then testify about Our power of creation
Have you ever considered the semen you discharge
Is it you who create the child from it, or are We the Creator
It is We Who have ordained death among you and We are not helpless
in replacing you by others like yourselves or transforming you into beings that you do not know
You already know well your first creation, why then do you not take heed
Have you ever considered the seed that you sow in the ground
Is it you who cause it to grow or are We the grower
If it be Our Will, We could crumble your harvest into chaff, and you would then be left in lamenting
We are indeed left laden with debts
indeed we have been deprived from the fruits of our labor
Have you ever considered the water which you drink
Is it you who send it down from the clouds or are We the sender
If it be Our Will, We could turn it salty. Why then do you not give thanks
Have you ever considered the fire that you kindle
Is it you who grow the tree which feeds the fire or are We the grower
We have made it a reminder for man as to what would be the life without it, and a provision of life for the travellers of desert
So glorify the name of your Lord, Who is the Greatest
I swear by the setting of the stars
and it is indeed a mighty oath if you but knew it
that this is indeed a Glorious Qur’an
inscribed in a well-guarded Book
which none can touch except the purified (angels)
a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
Would you scorn a scripture such as this
and make it’s denying a means of your livelihood
Why is it not then that when you see a dying person’s soul come up to his throat
while you are helplessly watching
and at that time We are nearer to him than you, although you cannot see Us
Then why do you not - if you claim you are not subject to reckoning
restore to the dying person his soul? Answer this, if what you say be true
Then if the dying person is one of those near to Us
for him there is comfort and bounty, and a garden of bliss
And if he be one of the right hand
he is greeted with salutation: "Peace be upon you," from those of the right hand
And if he is one of the mistaken rejecters
he is welcomed with scalding water
and burning in hellfire
Surely this is an absolute truth
Therefore, glorify the name of your Lord, Who is the Greatest
All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; it is He Who gives life and causes death; and He has power over all things
He is the First and the Last, the Evident and the Immanent, and He has the knowledge of all things
It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods, then firmly established Himself on the throne of authority. He knows all that enters the earth and all that emerges from it, all that comes down from Heaven and all that ascends to it; and He is with you wherever you are. Allah is aware of all your actions
To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all affairs go back to Allah for decision
He causes the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night, and He has knowledge of the inmost secrets of your hearts
Believe in Allah and His Messenger and spend in charity out of what you have been made the inheritors of, for those of you who believe and spend in charity shall be richly rewarded
What is the matter with you that you do not believe in Allah, whereas the Messenger is inviting you to believe in your Lord, Who has indeed taken your covenant, if you are true men of faith
He it is Who sends clear revelations to His servant, so that he may lead you from the depths of darkness into the light. Surely Allah is Most Kind and Most Merciful to you
What is the matter with you that you do not spend in the Way of Allah, whereas to Allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth? Those of you who spent and fought in the Cause of Allah before the victory, shall receive higher ranks of honor than the others who spent and fought thereafter. Yet Allah has promised you all a good reward, and Allah is aware of all your actions
Who is the one that will give to Allah a goodly loan, so that He may increase it manyfold to his credit and give him a liberal reward besides it
On the Day of Judgment you shall see the true believing men and the believing women, with their light shining before them and on their right hands, and it will be said to them: "Rejoice today, you shall enter the gardens beneath which rivers flow, in which you shall live forever, and that is the highest achievement
On that Day the hypocrite men and hypocrite women will say to the true believers: "Wait for us, that we may borrow some of your light." But they will be told: "Go away! Seek your light elsewhere." So a wall with a gate shall be set up between them. Inside there shall be mercy, and outside all along there shall be punishment of hell
They will call out to the believers, saying: "Were we not on your side?" "Yes," they will reply, "but you led yourselves into temptation, you wavered, you doubted, and were deceived by your vain desires until Allah’s command came, while the arch-deceiver (Satan) deceived you concerning Allah till the last moment
They will be told, "Today no ransom shall be accepted from you, or from the unbelievers. Your abode is the fire: which you have justly earned, and it is an evil refuge
Has not the time arrived for the believers to submit with fervent hearts to Allah’s warning and to the truth He has revealed, so that they may not become like those who were given the Book before this, even though their term was prolonged for them but their hearts became hardened? Today most among them are transgressors
You should know that Allah restores the earth to life after its death. We have spelled out Our revelations for you, so that you may understand
Surely the charitable men and the charitable women, and those who give a goodly loan to Allah, shall be repaid manyfold, and also be given a liberal reward besides it
Those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, they are the truthful and the true witnesses in the sight of their Lord; they shall have their reward and their light. But those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations; they shall be the inmates of hellfire
You should know that the life of this world is only play and amusement, a show and boasting among yourselves, a quest for greater riches and more children. Its similitude is that of vegetation that flourish after rain: the growth of which delights the tillers, then it withers and you see it turn yellow, soon it becomes dry and crumbles away. In the hereafter there will be either severe punishment or forgiveness from Allah and His good pleasure. The life of this world is nothing but an illusion
Therefore, earnestly strive for the forgiveness of your Lord and for the paradise which is as vast as the heaven and the earth, prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers. Such is the grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom He pleases, and Allah is the Owner of mighty grace
No affliction can happen on earth nor to your souls, which is not recorded in a Book, before We bring it into existence; surely that is easy for Allah
This is done so that you may not grieve for the things that you miss, or be overjoyed at what you gain; for Allah does not love any vainglorious boaster
nor those who, being stingy themselves, enjoin others to be stingy also. He that gives no heed should know that Allah is free of all needs, worthy of all praises
Surely We sent Our Messengers with clear signs, and sent down with them the Book and the Scales of Justice, so that men may conduct themselves with fairness. We also sent down Iron, with its mighty strength and diverse uses for mankind, so that Allah may know those who will help Him, though unseen, and help His Messengers. Surely Allah is All-Powerful, All-Mighty
We sent Noah and Abraham, and bestowed among their descendants Prophethood and the Book. Some of them adopted the right guidance, but most of them were transgressors
After them We sent other Messengers, one after the other, and followed them with Jesus the son of Mary. We gave him The Gospel, and put compassion and mercy into the hearts of his followers. As for monasticism, they instituted it themselves - for We did not enjoin it on them - in order to seek the good pleasure of Allah, but they did not observe it as it should have been observed. Yet We rewarded those among them who were true believers, but most of them are transgressors
O believers! Fear Allah and believe in His Messenger (Muhammad, peace be upon him). He will grant you a double share of His mercy, provide for you a light to walk with and forgive you your sins. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
You should adopt this way so that the people of the Book may know that they do not have the sole right to the grace of Allah, and that His grace is entirely in His own hands, which He bestows on whomever He wills: and Allah is the Owner of mighty grace
Allah has indeed heard the words of the woman (Khawlah daughter of Tha‘labah, who had been divorced by calling her: ‘‘You are to me like my mother" which was an acceptable practice for divorce among pagan Arabs), who pleaded with you against her husband and made her complaint to Allah, and Allah has heard what you said to each other. Allah hears all and sees all
Those of you who divorce their wives by ZihAr (calling them to be like their mothers) should know that they are not their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave birth to them. Surely the words they utter are absurd and false. Allah could punish them for this but He forgave them, surely Allah is All-Pardoning, All-Forgiving
Those who divorce their wives by ZihAr, then wish to retract the words they uttered, shall have to free a slave before they touch each other. This is enjoined as a penalty for doing so. Allah is well-aware of all your actions
He that has no slave, shall fast two consecutive months before they touch each other. He that cannot fast, shall feed sixty poor people. This is enjoined so that you may have faith in Allah and His Messenger. These are the limits set by Allah, and the violators shall have a painful punishment
Those who resist Allah and His Messenger, shall be humiliated as were those before them. We have sent down clear revelations; the disbelievers shall have a humiliating punishment
On the Day of Judgment Allah will raise them all back to life, then inform them about what they have done. Allah has kept full record of their deeds even though they may have forgotten, for Allah is a witness over all things
Are you not aware that Allah knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth? It cannot be that three persons converse in secret and He is not the fourth of them; or five persons converse in secret and He is not the sixth of them; whether fewer or more, wherever they may be, He is with them. Then on the Day of Resurrection He will inform them of what they have done, surely Allah has knowledge of all things
Have you not seen those who, though forbidden to hold secret counsels, persistently do what was forbidden? They hold secret counsels among themselves for sin, hostility and disobedience to the Messenger. Yet when they come to you, they greet you in words which Allah does not greet you with, and say to themselves: "Why does Allah not punish us for what we say?" Hell is enough for them, they shall burn in its flames, what an evil destination
O believers! When you confer together in private, do not talk about sin and hostility and disobedience to the Messenger; but to counsel about virtue and piety, and fear Allah, before whom you shall be brought together
Conspiring in secret is the work of Satan, who means to vex the believers; but he cannot harm them at all except as Allah permits; so in Allah let the believers put their trust
O believers! When you are asked to make room in your meetings, make room, Allah will make room for you in the Hereafter. And if you are told to rise up, then rise up: Allah will raise to higher ranks those of you who have faith and knowledge. Allah is aware of all your actions
O believers! When you want to consult the Messenger in private, offer something in charity before your consultation, that is best and purest for you. But if you lack the means, know that Allah is Oft- Forgiving, Most Merciful
Do you hesitate to give out in charity before your private consultation with him? If you cannot afford it - Allah will forgive you - so establish Salah and pay Zakah, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah is well aware of all your actions
Have you not seen the ones who have befriended those people who are under the wrath of Allah? They are neither on your side nor yet on theirs and they knowingly swear to falsehood
Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment; evil indeed is what they are doing
They use their oaths as shields, and debar others from the Way of Allah. They shall have a humiliating punishment
Neither their riches nor their sons shall avail them anything against Allah. They shall be the inmates of hell and live there forever
On the Day when Allah will raise them all to life, they will swear to Him as they now swear to you, thinking that their oaths will help them. By no means! Surely they are the liars
Satan has gained possession of them, and caused them to forget Allah’s warning. They are the party of Satan. Beware! Surely it is the party of Satan that shall be the loser
Those who resist Allah and His Messenger will be among the most humiliated
Allah has decreed: "It is I and My Messengers who will most certainly prevail." Surely Allah is All- Powerful, All-Mighty
You will never find any people who believe in Allah and the last Day on friendly terms with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even though they be their fathers, their sons, their brothers or their relatives. It is they in whose hearts Allah has inscribed faith and has strengthened them with a spirit of His own. He will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever. Allah will be well pleased with them, and they will be well pleased with Him. They are the party of Allah. Beware! Surely it is the party of Allah that will be successful
All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah, and He is the Almighty, the All- Wise
It is He Who drove the disbelievers from among the People of the Book (reference is to the Jewish tribe of Banu Al-Nadir) out of their homes at the first banishment. You did not think that they would ever go out; and they thought that their fortresses would defend them from Allah, but the wrath of Allah came to them from where they never expected - which cast such terror into their hearts - that they destroyed their homes by their own hands as well as by the hands of the believers. So learn a lesson from this example! O people of insight
Had Allah not decreed exile for them, He would certainly have punished them in this world, and in the hereafter there shall be the punishment of the fire for them
because they set themselves up against Allah and His Messenger; and he that sets himself up against Allah should know that Allah is stern in retribution
Whatever palm-trees you cut down or left them standing on their roots, was by the leave of Allah, so that He might humiliate the transgressors
As for those spoils of theirs which Allah has bestowed on His Messenger, you spurred neither cavalry nor camelry to capture them: but Allah gives authority to His Messengers over whom He pleases, for Allah has power over all things
Whatever spoils from the dwellers of the township Allah has bestowed on His Messenger, shall belong to Allah, His Messenger, Messenger's relatives, and to the orphans, the needy and the travellers in need; so that it may not become the property of the rich among you. Whatever the Messenger gives you, take it and from whatever he forbids you, refrain from it. Fear Allah; for Allah is stern in retribution
A share of the spoils shall be given to the indigent immigrants who were driven out of their homes and their possessions, and are seeking Allah’s grace and His good pleasure and who want to help Allah and His Messenger: such are indeed the true believers
A share of the spoils shall also be given to those who made their abode in Medina (the Ansar) and believed even before the arrivals of the immigrants and love those who migrated to them and entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to them, and prefer those immigrants over themselves, even though they themselves are poor. In fact those who are saved from the greediness of hearts, are the ones who will achieve true success
And it is also for those who came after them and say: "Our Lord! Forgive us and our brothers who embraced the faith before us and do not leave any malice in our hearts towards the believers. Our Lord! Surely You are the Kind, the Merciful
Have you not observed the hypocrites? They say to their fellow unbelievers among the people of the Book: "If they drive you out, we will go with you. We will never obey anyone who seeks to harm you. If you are attacked we will certainly help you." Allah bears witness that they are lying
If the People of the Book are driven out, they will never go with them, nor, if the people of the Book are attacked, will they help them, and even if they help them, they will turn their backs; leaving them with no help at all
In their hearts there is greater dread of you than of Allah, because they are a people devoid of understanding
They will never fight against you together except in fortified townships and from behind walls. Strong is their valor amongst themselves; you think of them united whereas their hearts are divided. This is because they are a people devoid of wisdom
Their example is like those who have tasted, a short while before them, the evil consequences of their deeds. They shall have a painful punishment
Their parable is like the Satan who says to man disbelieve, but when man becomes a disbeliever, he says: "I have nothing to do with you; I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds
The end of both will be that they will be tossed in hell and remain there forever. Thus shall be the reward of the wrongdoers
O believers! Fear Allah and let every soul see what it is sending for the morrow (Hereafter). Fear Allah, surely Allah is aware of all your actions
Be not like those who forgot Allah, as a result Allah caused them to forget themselves, it is they who are the transgressors
The companions of hell and the companions of paradise are not equals, of course the companions of paradise are far superior
If We had sent down this Qur’an on a mountain, you would have seen it humble itself and split asunder from the fear of Allah, We are citing this example for mankind, so that they may take heed
Allah is He, besides Whom there is no god, the Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Compassionate, the Merciful
Allah is He, besides Whom there is no god, the King, the Holy, the Giver of peace, the Granter of security, the Guardian, the Almighty, the Irresistible, the Supreme: Glory be to Allah! He is far above the shirk they commit (by associating other gods with Him)
He is Allah, the Creator, the Evolver, the Modeler. His are the most beautiful names. All that is in the heavens and the earth declares His glory, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
O believers! Do not make friendship with those who are enemies of Mine and yours. Would you show them friendship, when they have denied the truth that has come to you and have driven the Messenger and yourselves out of your homes, simply because you believe in Allah, your Lord? If it was indeed to strive in My way, and to seek My good pleasure that you left your homes, how can you befriend in secret? I know all that you conceal, and all that you reveal. Any of you who does this, he indeed has gone astray from the Right Way
If they overcome you, they would behave to you as enemies and stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil, and they wish to see you become unbelievers
On the Day of Resurrection, neither your relatives nor your children shall avail you. Allah will judge between you, and He is observing all your actions
You have an excellent example in Abraham and his companions. They said to their people plainly: "We are clear of you and your gods, whom you worship besides Allah. We renounce you. Enmity and hate shall reign between us forever until you believe in Allah, the One and Only God." But do not emulate what Abraham said to his father: "I will pray for your forgiveness, although I have no power to get anything for you from Allah." Their collective prayer was: "Our Lord! In You we have put our trust, to You we turn in repentance and to You is our final goal
Our Lord! Do not expose us to the plots of the unbelievers. Forgive us, our Lord! You are the All-Mighty, the All- Wise
Truly, in those there is an excellent example for everyone who puts their hopes in Allah and the Last Day. He that gives no heed should know that Allah is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
It may well be that Allah will put love between you and those with whom you are now at odds because of the order which is given to you, for Allah is All-Powerful, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
Allah does not forbid you to be kind and equitable to those who had neither fought against your faith nor driven you out of your homes. In fact Allah loves the equitable
Allah only forbids you to make friendship with those who fought you on account of your faith and drove you out of your homes and backed up others in your expulsion. Those who will take them for friends are indeed the wrongdoers
O believers! When the believing women seek refuge with you, test them. Allah best knows their faith. If you find them true believers, do not send them back to the unbelievers. They are not lawful to the unbelievers, nor are the unbelievers lawful to them. Return to their unbelieving husbands what they have spent on them. There is no blame on you if you marry such women, provided you give them their dowers. Do not hold on to your marriages with unbelieving women. Demand what you have spent on them and let the unbelievers do the same. This is the order of Allah which He has decreed between you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise
If you do not get back the demanded amount that you have spent on your disbelieving wives from the unbelievers, and your turn comes, to pay the demanded amount of Muslim wives to the unbelievers, you can offset the amount and pay those whose wives have fled the equivalent of the amount they have spent on their disbelieving wives. Fear Allah, in Whom you believe
O Prophet! When the believing women come to you to take the oath of allegiance , take their pledge: that they will not commit shirk with Allah, that they will not steal, that they will not commit adultery, that they will not kill their children, that they will not give any cause for scandal which they may invent between either their hands or legs (a woman accusing another woman of having an illicit relationship with a man and spreads such stories - or - a woman carrying an illegitimate child and makes her husband believe that it is his), and that they will not disobey you in any just matter, then accept their allegiance and pray to Allah for the forgiveness. Surely Allah is Oft- Forgiving, most Merciful
O believers! Do not befriend those who have incurred the wrath of Allah. Indeed they despair of the Hereafter, just as the unbelievers despair of those buried in the graves
All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. He is the All-Mighty, the All- Wise
O believers! Why do you say something which you don’t do
It is very hateful in the sight of Allah that you say something which you don’t do
Indeed Allah loves those who fight for His Cause in battle array as if they were a solid wall
Remember what Moses said to his people: "O my people! Why do you vex me while you know that I am the Messenger of Allah towards you?" But in spite of this when they adopted perverseness, Allah let their hearts be perverted. Allah does not guide those who are transgressors
And remember when Jesus the son of Mary said: "O children of Israel! I am the Messenger of Allah towards you, confirming the Torah which came before me, and to give you good news of a Messenger that will come after me whose name shall be Ahmed (another name of Muhammad, meaning ‘The praised one’)." But when he (Muhammad) came to them with clear signs, they said "This is plain magic
Who could be more wrong than the one who invents falsehoods against Allah while he is being called towards Islam? Allah does not guide those who are wrongdoers
They seek to extinguish the Light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah will perfect His Light, much as the unbelievers may dislike it
It is He Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth so that he may proclaim it over all religions, much as the Pagans may dislike it
O believers! Should I tell you of a bargain that will save you from a painful punishment
It is to believe in Allah and His Messenger and strive your utmost in the cause of Allah with your wealth and your persons. That is best for you, if you but knew it
He will forgive you your sins and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow, and will lodge you in beautiful mansions in the gardens of Eden, which will be a supreme achievement
And yet another blessing which you love: help from Allah and a speedy victory. So O Prophet, give this good news to the believers
O believers! Be the helpers of Allah, just as Jesus the son of Mary said to his disciples: "Who will be my helper in the cause of Allah?" And the disciples responded: "We will be your helpers in the cause of Allah." Then a group from the children of Israel believed in him (Jesus) and another group disbelieved. We aided the believers against their enemies, so they became victorious
AL-JUMU’AH - FRIDAY In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the merciful All that is in the heavens and earth declares the glory of Allah, the King, the Holy, the Mighty, the Wise
It is He Who has raised among the unlettered people a Messenger of their own, who recites to them His revelations, purifies them, and teaches them the Book and Wisdom, though prior to this they were in gross error
he is also sent for others of them who have not yet joined them (become Muslims). He is the Mighty, the Wise
That is the grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom pleases. Allah is the Lord of mighty grace
The example of those who were charged with the Torah, but failed to carry out their obligations, is that of a donkey who is carrying books and does not know what is in those books. Bad is the example of those who deny the revelations of Allah. Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
O you, the Jews! If you claim that you are the favorites of Allah to the exclusion of other people, then wish for death if what you say is true
But, because of what their hands have sent before them for the hereafter, they will never wish for death. Allah knows these wrongdoers very well
Tell them: "The death from which you are running away, will surely overtake you: then you will be sent back to Him Who knows the unseen and the seen; and He will tell you all that you have been doing
O believers! When the call for Salah (prayer) is made on Friday (the day of congregational prayers), hasten to the remembrance of Allah and cease your business. That is better for you if you but knew
When you finish the Salah, then disperse through the land and seek the bounty of Allah (go back to your normal business). Remember Allah frequently, so that you may prosper
Those who are still weak in ImAn (faith), when they see some bargain or some sport they rush to it and leave you standing. O Prophet declare to them that what Allah has in store for them is far better than any sport and bargain, and Allah is the best provider
When the hypocrites come to you, they say: "We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah." Allah knows that you are indeed His Messenger, and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are liars
They use their faith as a disguise, and thus debar others from the Way of Allah. Evil is indeed what they do
This is because they believed and then renounced their faith. Their hearts are sealed, therefore, they are devoid of understanding
When you see them, their good stature pleases you; and when they speak, you listen to what they say. Yet they are as worthless as hollow pieces of propped up timber. Every shout they hear, they think it to be against them. They are your enemies, so guard yourselves against them. May Allah destroy them! How perverse they are
When it is said to them: "Come, the Messenger of Allah will pray for your forgiveness," they shake their heads and you see them turning away with arrogance
It is the same, whether you pray for their forgiveness or not, Allah is not going to forgive them. Surely Allah does not guide the transgressors
They are the same people who say: "Do not give anything to those who follow the Messenger of Allah until they have deserted him." To Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth; but the hypocrites cannot understand
They say: "When we return to Medina, the honorable ones will soon drive out the mean ones." But the honor belongs to Allah, to His Messenger and to the believers; but the hypocrites do not know
O believers! Let neither your riches nor your children divert you from the remembrance of Allah. Those who will do so, it is they who shall be the real losers
Spend, in charity and in the Cause of Allah, out of the sustenance which We have bestowed on you before that time when death will come to anyone of you, and he shall say: "O my Lord! If only you would reprieve me for a little while then I would give out everything in charity, and be among the righteous
But Allah reprieves no soul when its term comes to an end. Allah is well aware of all your actions
All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. To Him belongs the kingdom and to Him is due all praise, He has power over all things
It is He Who has created you; yet some of you are unbelievers and some are believers. Allah is observant of all your actions
He created the heavens and the earth to manifest the truth. He shaped you and shaped you well, and to Him you shall all return
He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth. He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and Allah knows what is in your breast
Have you not heard of those who disbelieved before you? So they tasted the evil result of their deeds, and in the Hereafter there shall be a painful punishment for them
That is because, when their Messengers came to them with clear revelations, they said: "Are human beings going to guide us?" So they disbelieved and paid no heed. Allah has no need of such people. Allah is free of all needs, worthy of all praise
The unbelievers claim that they shall not be raised to life again. Tell them: "Indeed, by my Lord, you shall surely be raised to life again! Then you shall be told of all that you have done, and that is easy for Allah
Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messenger, and in the Light which We have revealed. Allah is well aware of all your actions
The Day when He will gather you all will be the Day of Assembly, which shall be the Day of mutual loss and gain among the people. Those who believe in Allah and do good deeds, He will remove from them their sins and admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever, and that will be the supreme achievement
As for those who disbelieved and deny Our revelations, they will become the inmates of hell, wherein they shall live forever, and that is an evil abode
No affliction can ever befall except by the leave of Allah. He that believes in Allah, his heart is guided to the Right Way. Allah has knowledge of all things
Obey Allah and obey His Messenger; but if you pay no heed, then you should know that Our Messenger’s responsibility is nothing but to convey the message plainly
Allah! There is no god but Him, therefore, in Allah Alone let the believers put their trust
O believers! Surely among your wives and your children there are some who are your enemies: so beware of them. But if you pardon, overlook and forgive their faults, then know that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Your wealth and your children are but a trial. It is Allah with Whom is the greatest reward
Therefore, fear Allah as much as you can, listen to His message attentively, be obedient, and be charitable, this is for your own good. Those who are saved from the covetousness of their own souls, it is they who are truly successful
If you lend to Allah a goodly loan, He will pay you back manifold, and will forgive you your sins. Allah is Appreciative and Forbearing to those who are grateful
He has the knowledge of the unseen and the seen, He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
O Prophet! If you and the believers divorce your wives, divorce them at the end of their prescribed periods, and count their prescribed periods accurately. Fear Allah, your Lord. Do not expel them from their homes during their waiting period, nor they themselves should leave, unless they have committed an open lewdness. These are limits set by Allah; he that transgresses the limits of Allah will wrong his own soul. You never know, Allah may, thereafter, bring about some new situation of reconciliation
Then when their waiting period ends, either keep them honorably or part with them in an honorable way. Call to witness two honest persons among you, and O witnesses, bear witness equitably for the sake of Allah. This advice is being given to all who believe in Allah and the last Day. He that fears Allah may be provided a way out by Him
and given sustenance from the sources he could never imagine: for Allah is all sufficient for the person who puts his trust in Him. Surely Allah brings about what He pleases, and Allah has set a measure for all things
If you have any doubt concerning those of your wives who have ceased menstruating, then you should know that their waiting period will be three months, and the same will apply to those who have no menstruation due to young age or a disease. As for those who are pregnant, their waiting period will end with delivery. Allah will ease the hardship of those who fear Him
This is the command of Allah which He has sent down to you. He that fears Allah, will have his sins removed and his reward enlarged
Let those women, during their waiting period (‘Iddat), live where you yourselves live according to your means. You shall not harass them so as to make life intolerable for them. If they are pregnant, maintain them until their delivery: and if, after that, they suckle your offspring, compensate them and settle the matter of compensation with mutual consultation and in all fairness. But if you cannot bear with each other then let another woman suckle the baby for you
Let the rich man give according to his means, and the poor man give according to what Allah has given him. Allah does not charge a man with more than He has given him; soon Allah may bring ease after hardship
How many townships have rebelled against the commandments of their Lord and His Messengers! Stern was Our reckoning with them and exemplary was Our punishment
So they tasted the fruit of their misdeeds, and the fruit of their misdeeds was perdition
Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment. Therefore, fear Allah! O men of understanding and faith. Allah has indeed sent down to you an admonition
a Messenger reciting to you the revelations of Allah containing clear guidance, so that he may lead the believers who do good deeds from the darkness to the light. He that believes in Allah and does good deeds, shall be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever; and Allah has prepared an excellent provision for them
It is Allah Who has created seven heavens, and earths as many. His commandment descends through them, so that you may know that Allah has power over all things, and that Allah encompasses all things in His knowledge
O Prophet! Why do you make something unlawful, which Allah has made lawful to you in seeking to please your wives? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah has already given you absoLotion from such oaths. Allah is your Master and He is the Knowledgeable, the Wise
When the Prophet confided a secret to one of his wives, she disclosed this secret to another and Allah informed him about it, the Prophet made known to the said wife a part of it and avoided mentioning the rest. So when he told her about this disclosure, she asked: "Who told you this?" He replied: "I was informed by Him Who is All-Knowing, All-Aware
If you both (Hafsah and Aeysha) turn in repentance to Allah - for your hearts have sinned - you shall be pardoned; and if you back up each other against him (the Prophet), then you should know that his protectors are Allah, Gabriel and all righteous believers, furthermore the angels too are his supporters
It may well be that, if he divorces you all, his Lord will give him in your place better wives than yourselves, submissive, faithful, obedient, penitent, worshippers and keepers of fasting; be they previously married or virgins
O believers! Save yourselves and your families from hellfire, whose fuel is men and stones, in the charge of fierce and mighty angels who never disobey Allah’s command and who promptly do what they are commanded to do
They will say to the unbelievers: "O unbelievers! Make no excuses for yourselves this Day. You are being rewarded according to your deeds
O believers! Turn to Allah in sincere repentance. It may well be that your Lord will remove from you your sins and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow. On that Day Allah will not humiliate the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their light will shine in front of them and on their right, and they will say: "Our Lord! Perfect our light for us and grant us forgiveness, for You have power over all things
O Prophet! Make Jihad (Holy War) against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and deal sternly with them. Hell shall be their home, and that is an evil abode
Allah has set an example to the unbelievers in the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were married to two of Our righteous servants, but they betrayed them. In no way could their husbands protect them from Allah. Both of them were told: "Enter the fire, along with those who enter
And for the believers Allah has set an example in the wife of Pharaoh, who said: "My Lord! Build for me a house as a special favor from You in paradise, deliver me from Pharaoh and his misdeeds, and save me from the wicked nation
Another example is in the life of Mary, the daughter of `ImrAn, who guarded her chastity, and into whose womb We breathed of Our spirit, who testified to the words of her Lord, and His scriptures, and was one of the obedient
Blessed be He in Whose hands is the Kingdom of the universe and has power over all things
The One Who created death and life, so that He may put you to test, to find out which of you is best in deeds: He is the All-Mighty, the All-Forgiving
The One Who created the seven heavens, one above another, you will not see any flaw in the creation of the Compassionate. Look once again, do you see any flaw
Then look still another time, yet again your sight will come back bewildered, and feel exhausted
We have decorated the heaven of this world with lamps and We made them as missiles for pelting the Satans and thus prepared for them the scourge of flames
As for those who disbelieve their Lord, there will be the punishment of hell, which is an evil abode
When they will be plunged into its fire, they shall hear its roaring and boiling
as though bursting with rage. Every time a group is plunged therein, its guards will ask: "Did not a Warner come to you
They will answer: "Yes indeed, a Warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said, Allah has revealed nothing - you are merely in gross error
They will further say: "Had we only listened or used our intelligence, we would have not been among the inmates of the blazing fire
Thus shall they confess their sin; so away from the mercy of Allah will be the dwellers of hell
As for those who fear their Lord, although they have not seen Him, shall have forgiveness and a great reward
Whether you speak in secret or aloud, surely He is aware of all that is in the breasts
Would He, Who has created them, not know? He is the Knower of finest mysteries, and aware of everything
It is He Who has made the earth subservient to you, to walk through its tracts and eat of His provided sustenance. To Him is the return at resurrection
Do you feel secure that He Who is in heaven, will not cause the earth to cave in beneath you and start shaking suddenly
Or do you feel secure that He Who is in heaven will not send against you a violent tornado, then you shall know how was My warning
Those who have gone before them likewise disbelieved, then see how terrible was the way I rejected them
Do they not observe the birds above them spreading their wings and folding them? None could hold them except the Compassionate (Allah), surely it is He Who watches over all things
What force is there that can help you besides the Compassionate? In fact, the unbelievers are suffering from delusion
Or who is there that can provide you if He withholds His provision? Yet, they persist in rebellion and aversion from the truth
Just think, who is rightly guided: he who walks with his face bent down, or he who walks properly on an even path
Say: "It is He Who has brought you into being, gave you the faculties of hearing, seeing, feeling and understanding: yet you are seldom thankful
Say: "It is He Who has multiplied you in the earth, and before Him you shall all be assembled
They ask: "When will this promise be fulfilled, if what you say is true
Tell them: "Allah Alone has the knowledge of that; my mission is only to warn you plainly
But, when they shall see it close at hand, the faces of the disbelievers will turn black with gloom, and it will be said to them: "This is which you were calling for
Further say: "Have you ever considered that even if Allah destroys me as well as those with me or bestows His mercy on us; who will save the disbelievers from a painful punishment
Say: "He is the Compassionate: in Him we have believed, and in Him we have put our trust. Soon you will find out, which one of us is in the manifest error
Say: "Have you ever considered that if all the water you have, sink down in the ground, who is it, that will bring you the clear-flowing water
Nun. By the pen and what they write
By the grace of your Lord you are not a madman
and you shall have a never ending reward
You are of the highest noble character
Soon you will see - as they will see
which of you is afflicted with madness
Surely it is your Lord Who knows those who have strayed from His Way, as He knows best those who are rightly guided
So do not yield to the unbelievers
They desire you to compromise a little, so they too would compromise
Neither yield to any mean oath-monger
mischief making slanderer
opponent of good, transgressor
wicked oppressor, and above all, ignoble by birth
though he be possessing wealth and children
When Our revelations are recited to him , he says: "They are nothing but the tales of the ancients
Soon We shall brand him on the snout
Surely We shall try them as We tried the owners of the garden when they swore that they would pluck its fruit the next morning
without adding any reservation ( such as God willing)
So a calamity from your Lord came down upon it while they slept
and by the morning it lay as if it had been already harvested
At daybreak they called out to one another
saying: "Go out early to your crop, if you want to pick its fruit
So they went, whispering to one another
Let no needy person enter upon you in the garden today
Thus they went out, fixed in their stingy resolve (not to give any fruit to the poor people, as if they had the full control over harvesting the fruit)
But when they saw the garden, they cried: "Surely we must have lost our way
Nay, we have become destitute
The most upright among them said: "Did I not tell you to glorify Allah? Why did you not glorify Him
Then they said: "Glory be to our Lord! Surely we were unjust
and they started blaming one another
Finally they said: "Woe to us! Surely we had become rebellious
It may be that our Lord will give us in exchange a better garden than this: surely to our Lord do we make our humble petition
Such is the punishment in this life; but the punishment in the Hereafter is even greater, if they but knew it
Surely the righteous will be rewarded with gardens of delight by their Lord
What do the disbelievers think? Shall We treat the Muslims as We treat the guilty
What is the matter with you? What kind of Judgment do you make
Or do you have a Book in which you read
that you shall be given whatever you choose
Or do you have a sworn covenant - a covenant binding on Us till the Day of Resurrection - that you shall have whatever you demand
Ask if any of them will vouch for that
Or do they have other gods who could help them against Allah? If so, let them produce their other gods if they are truthful
On the Day of Judgment, when the dreadful events shall be unfolded, and they shall be asked to prostrate themselves, they shall not be able to do so
They shall stand with eyes downcast, utterly humbled; because during their safe and sound earthly life they were called upon to prostrate themselves but they refused to do so
O Prophet, leave to Me those who reject this revelation. We shall lead them step by step to their ruin, in ways that they cannot perceive
I shall even put up with them for a while; for My plan is fool proof
Or have you, O Prophet, demanded a compensation from them, that they are overburdened with debt
Or do they have the knowledge of the unseen and they are writing it down
So wait with patience for the Judgment of your Lord and be not like the man of the fish (reference is to the Prophet Jonah who was swallowed by a whale), who cried when he was in distress
Had his Lord not bestowed on him His grace, he would certainly have been cast off on the naked shore, while he was condemned
But his Lord choose him and included him among the righteous
The unbelievers would almost trip you up with their eyes when they hear Our revelations (The Qur’an), and say: "He (Muhammad) is surely crazy
This (The Qur’an) is nothing but a Reminder to all the people of the world
The Haqqah
What is the Haqqah
And what will make you understand what the Haqqah is
The Thamud and the ‘Ad people denied the striking calamity
As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the Thunderbolt
As for 'Ad they were destroyed by a furious windstorm
which He let loose on them for seven nights and eight successive days. Had you been there, you would have seen them lying prostrate as though they were hollow trunks of the palm-trees
Now, do you see any of them alive
Pharaoh and those before him, and the inhabitants of the overthrown cities also committed similar sins
and disobeyed the Messengers of their Lord, so He gripped them with a tight grip
Just consider the great flood of Noah, when the water rose high, We carried you (O mankind) in the floating Ark
that We may make that event a warning for you so that all attentive ears may retain its memory
As for the dooms- day, it shall come, when the Trumpet will be blown with a single blast
and the earth with all its mountains will be lifted up and crushed into pieces with a single stroke
On that day the Great Event will come to pass
heaven shall split asunder, and the day shall seem flimsy
The angels will stand all around and eight of them will be carrying the Throne of your Lord above them
That shall be the day when you will be brought before your Lord, and none of your secrets shall remain hidden
Then he, who will be given his Book of Deeds in his right hand, will say: "Here it is, read my Book of deeds
I knew that I would certainly face my reckoning
So he will have a life of pleasure
in a lofty garden
with clusters of fruit within his reach
We shall say to him: "Eat and drink to your heart's content; this is a reward for what you did in the days gone by
While he, who will be given his Book of Deeds in his left hand, will say: "Woe to me, would that I had not been given my Book of Deeds
nor known what my account was
Would that my death had ended all
My wealth had availed me nothing
and my authority has gone away from me
We shall say: "Seize him and put a chain around his neck
then cast him in the blazing fire
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long
For he did not believe in Allah, the Most High
nor did he care to feed the poor
Today he neither has a true friend here
nor any food except the pus from the washing of wounds
which none but the wrongdoers eat
Nay! I swear by all that you can see
and all that you cannot see
that this is the word of a noble Messenger
It is not the word of a poet - little is it that you believe
nor is it the word of a soothsayer - little admonition is that you take
This is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
Had he (Muhammad) invented false statements concerning Us
We would certainly have seized him by his right hand
then cut off his main artery
and none of you could prevent it
Surely this Qur’an is a reminder to the Godfearing
We know that there are some among you who deny it
and for such disbelievers it is indeed a cause of despair
Yet surely it is the absolute truth
So glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High
A questioner asked you about the punishment which is bound to happen
It is for the disbelievers and there is none to avert it
It will come from Allah, the Owner of the Ways of Ascent
The angels and the Spirit ascend to Him in a Day the measure of which is fifty thousand years
Therefore, endure with graceful patience
They see it (Day of Judgment) to be far-off
but We see it quite near
On that Day, the sky shall become like molten brass
and the mountains like tufts of wool
even a close friend will not ask of his friend
though they will see each other. To save himself from the punishment of that Day, the culprit (disbeliever) will wish to give his children
his wife, his brother
his relatives who gave him shelter
and all that is in the earth, in ransom to save himself
By no means! It will be the fire of hell
eager to pluck out his skull
it will be calling all those who try to escape and turn their back
who collected wealth and withheld it
Indeed, man has been created impatient
when evil befalls him, he becomes despondent
but when blessed with good fortune, he becomes stingy
with the exception of those who offer the Salah (prayer)
remain steadfast in their Salah (prayer)
set aside a due share in their wealth
for the beggars and the deprived
accept the truth of the Day of Judgment
dread the punishment of their Lord
for none is secure from the punishment of their Lord
and guard their private parts
except from their wives and those whom their right hands possess, for in their case they are not blameworthy
As for those who seek to go beyond this, they are transgressors
Those who keep their trusts and honor their promises
who stand firm in their testimonies
and strictly guard their Salah (prayers)
It is they who shall live with honor in paradise
What is the matter with the disbelievers that they are rushing towards you
from the right and from the left, in groups
Are they each seeking to enter the garden of bliss
By no means! Surely, We have created them out of that what they (unbelievers) know
But nay! I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests, that We have the power
to destroy them and replace them with others better than them, and nothing can hinder Us from doing so
Therefore, leave them to plunge in vain talk and blunder about until they face that Day of theirs which they are being promised
The Day when they shall rush forward from their graves, as if they were racing towards a goal, with downcast eyes and countenances distorted with shame
Such will be the Day, which they are being promised
We sent Noah to his people, saying: "Give warning to your people before there comes to them a painful punishment
He said: "O my People! I am sent towards you as a plain Warner
Worship Allah, fear Him and obey me
If you will do so, He will forgive you your sins and give you respite for an appointed term. The fact is that when the term given by Allah arrives, it cannot be deferred. If you could understand
After exhausting all his efforts Noah said: "O Lord! I have pleaded with my people night and day
but my plea has only added to their aversion
Each time I called on them to seek Your pardon, they thrust their fingers in their ears and drew their cloaks over their heads, persisting in sin and puffing themselves up with insolent pride
I have called them aloud
appealed them openly in public and secretly in private
saying: "Seek forgiveness of your Lord, He is ever ready to forgive you
He will send abundant rain for you from heaven
help you with wealth and sons, and provide you with gardens and the flowing rivers
What is the matter with you that you do not regard the greatness of Allah
when He has created you in gradual stages
Can you not see how Allah created the seven heavens one above the other
placing in them the moon as a light and the sun as a glorious lamp
Allah has caused you to grow as a growth from the earth
He will return you to the same earth and then raise you back to life again on the Day of Resurrection
Allah has made the earth for you as a wide expanse
so that you may walk in its spacious paths
Finally, Noah submitted: "O Lord! My people have disobeyed me, and followed those chiefs whose wealth and children have added to them nothing but loss
They have devised an outrageous plot
and said to each other: 'Do not leave your gods; especially Wadd, Suwa, Yaghus, Yauq and Nasr (the names of their idols)
They have already misled many, so O Lord, do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but deviation
Because of their wrong doings they were drowned in the great flood and made to enter the fire. They found no one besides Allah to help them
As Noah had prayed: "O Lord! Do not leave a single unbeliever on the surface of the earth
For if You spare any of them, they will mislead your servants and beget none but wicked unbelievers
O Lord! Forgive me, my parents and every true believer who seeks refuge in my house, and all believing men and believing women. As to the wrongdoers, grant them increase in nothing but destruction
O Prophet say: "It has been revealed to me that a band of jinns listened to the Qur’an, then returned to their folk and said: ‘We have heard a wonderful Qur’an
which guides to the Right Way. We have believed in it and henceforth shall worship none besides Our Lord
Surely our Lord's Majesty is exalted: He has neither taken a wife nor a son
Some who are foolish among us have been uttering atrocious lies about Allah
and we had presumed that no man or jinn could tell a lie concerning Allah
Indeed, some individuals among mankind used to seek protection with some individuals among the jinns, so they caused such jinns to become more arrogant
as a result, they presumed as you presumed that Allah would not appoint anyone as a Messenger
We searched the heaven, and found it filled with stern guards and shooting stars
Before this we used to find a seat in heaven for eavesdropping, but now eavesdroppers find shooting stars lying in ambush for them
We did not know whether an evil was intended for the dwellers of the earth or whether their Lord intended to guide them
There are some among us who are righteous and some to the contrary; we have sects following different ways
We know that we can neither frustrate Allah in the earth nor frustrate Him by flight
As for us, when we listened to the guidance, we believed in it; so he that believes in his Lord shall have neither the fear of loss nor of injustice
Surely there are some among us who are Muslims and some who are deviators from the truth. Those who have adopted Islam have found the way to salvation
and those who have deviated from the truth will become the fuel for hell
O Prophet, say: "If they (the Meccans) had steadfastly followed the Right Way, We would have certainly vouchsafed them abundant water
and thereby put them to test. He that gives no heed to the warnings of his Lord, shall be made to undergo severe punishment
Mosques are built for Allah’s worship; therefore, invoke not anyone along with Allah
Yet, when Allah’s servant Muhammad stood up to invoke Him, they (unbelievers) were ready to attack him
O Prophet, say: "I pray only to my Lord and worship none besides Him
Say: "I have no control to cause harm or bring you to the Right Way
Say: "If I were to disobey Him, no one can protect me from Allah, nor can I find any refuge besides Him
My mission is only to deliver what I receive from Allah and make His messages known. As for those who disobey Allah and His Messenger, they shall be put in the fire of hell to live therein forever
When they shall see the punishment that they are being threatened with, then they shall find out whose helpers are weak and whose supporters are fewer in number
Say: "I do not know whether the punishment that you are threatened with is near or whether my Lord has set for it a distant term
He Alone knows the unseen. He does not reveal His secrets to anyone
except to the Messenger whom He may choose for that purpose, and then He appoints guards, who march before him and behind him
so that He may know that they have indeed delivered the messages of their Lord. He also encompasses all their surroundings and keeps a count of each and everything
O Muzzammil (folded in garments - one of the nick names of the Prophet Muhammad)
Stand in prayers at night, but not the whole night
half of it or a little less
or a little more; and recite the Qur’an with measured tone
Soon We are going to send you a weighty message
Surely the getting up at night for prayer is most effective for controlling the self and most suitable for reciting the Qur’an as well
because, during the day you are hard pressed with worldly affairs
Remember the name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him exclusively
He is the Lord of the east and the west: there is no god but Him, therefore, take Him as your Protector
Bear patiently with what they say and leave their company in a polite manner
Let me deal with rejecters who are enjoying the comforts of this life, so put up with them for a while
We have in store for them heavy fetters and a blazing fire
choking food and a painful punishment
On the day when the earth with all its mountains will be in a violent commotion, and the mountains will crumble into heaps of shifting sand
O mankind, We have sent towards you a Messenger, to bear witness for you or against you, as We sent a Messenger towards Pharaoh before you
Pharaoh disobeyed Our Messenger; so We seized him with a firm grip
If you persist in unbelief, how will you save yourselves on that Day which shall turn the children grey-headed
the heaven shall split asunder, and His promise shall be fulfilled
Surely this is but a reminder, so let him who wills, take the Right way to His Lord
Surely your Lord knows that you stand in prayers nearly two- thirds of the night, and sometimes one-half or one-third of it, so do others among your companions. Allah has the measures of the night and the day. He knows that you will not be able to keep it up, so He has turned to you in Mercy, therefore, read from the Qur’an as much as you easily can. He knows that there may be some sick people among you, and some others who travel through the land to seek Allah’s bounty; and yet some others fighting for the cause of Allah. Therefore, read as much of the Qur’an as you easily can. Establish the Salah (five time daily prayers) and pay the Zakah (poor due), and give to Allah a goodly loan. Whatever good you will send forth for yourselves, you will find it with Allah, which will be much better and greater in reward. Seek Allah’s forgiveness, surely Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
O Muddaththir (the one enveloped - one of the nicknames of Prophet Muhammad)
Stand up and warn
Proclaim the greatness of your Lord
purify your clothes
keep yourself away from uncleanliness
do not favor others to expect a gain
and be patient for the sake of your Lord
When the Trumpet will be sounded
that Day will be a very difficult Day
not easy for the disbelievers
Leave Me and the one (Walid bin Mughirah, a staunch opponent of the Prophet) whom I created, alone
I gave him abundant resources
thriving sons
and made his life smooth and comfortable
Yet he hopes that I shall give him more
By no means! Because he has stubbornly denied Our revelations
Soon I shall make him suffer mounting calamities
surely he pondered and devised a plot
May he perish, how he plotted
Again, may he perish, how he plotted
He looked around
frowned and scowled
then he turned his back in scornful pride
and said: "This is nothing but a magic from the old
this is nothing but the word of a human being
Soon I shall cast him into Saqar
What will make you understand, what Saqar is
It is burning fire which leaves nothing and spares none
It shrivels human flesh
It is guarded by nineteen guards
We have appointed none but angels as wardens of the fire; and We have made their number a trial for the unbelievers, so that the People of the Book may be convinced and the faith of the true believers may be increased, and that no doubts will be left for the People of the Book and the believers, and that those in whose hearts there is a disease and the disbelievers may say: "What could Allah mean by this parable?" Thus, Allah leaves to stray whom He wills and guides whom He pleases. No one knows the forces of your Lord except Himself, and this (Qur'an) is nothing but a reminder to mankind
Nay! By the moon
by the departing night
and by the coming of dawn
surely this hellfire is one of mighty scourge
a warning to mankind
to any of you who chooses to go forward or to lag behind
Every soul is held in pledge for its deeds
except the people of the right hand
who shall be in paradise. They will ask
from the culprits
What brought you into hell
They will answer: "We did not use to offer the Salah (prayers)
we did not use to feed the poor
we used to join those who wasted their time in vain talk
and we used to deny the Day of Judgment
until death overtook us
On that Day, no intercession of any intercessors shall profit them
Then what is the matter with them that they turn away from this admonition
Like frightened donkeys
fleeing from a lion
Nay, each of them wants a scripture of his own to be unrolled before them
But no! The fact is that they do not fear the Hereafter
But no! Surely this Qur’an is an admonition
Let him who wills take heed
But none takes heed except by the will of Allah. He Alone is worthy to be feared and He Alone is worthy to forgive those who fear Him
I swear by the Day of Resurrection
and I swear by the self reproaching soul
Does man think that We shall not be able to put his bones together
Why not? We are able to put together, in perfect order, the very tips of his fingers
But man wishes to keep on doing evil in the future as well
He questions: "When will this Day of Resurrection be
Well, it will come when the sight shall be dazed
the moon will be eclipsed
and the sun and the moon will be brought together
on that Day man will ask: "Is there any way to escape
Nay! There will be no refuge
On that Day, the refuge will only be towards your Lord
On that Day man shall be told about all his deeds, from the first to the last
Indeed, man shall bear witness against himself
even though he shall plead with excuses
O Prophet, do not move your tongue too fast to memorize this revelation
It is Our responsibility to collect it in your memory, and make you recite it
and when it is recited, to make you follow it
and then it is Our responsibility to explain it
Nay, the fact is that you people love this fleeting life
and are heedless to the Hereafter
On that Day, some faces shall be bright
looking towards their Lord
And on that Day some faces shall be gloomy
thinking that some backbreaking calamity is about to be inflicted on them
Nay, when a man’s soul is about to leave and reaches to the throat
and those around him cry: "Is there any enchanter to help
Then man will conclude that it was the time of departure from this world
while one leg will twist around the other leg (agony will heap on agony)
that will be the Day of driving towards your Lord
But in this life he neither believed, nor offered Salah (prayed)
but on the contrary he denied the truth and turned away
Then he went to his kinfolk elated with pride
Woe to you, O man! Woe to you
Again woe to you, O man! Woe to you
Does man think that he will be left without any purpose
Was he not once a drop of emitted semen
Then he became a leechlike mass, then Allah created him and fashioned him in due proportion
and made him either of the two sexes, male and female
Has He not then the power to bring the dead to life
Has there not passed over man a period of time when he was nothing- -not even mentioned
Indeed, We have created man from the sperm drop, so that We may test him. Therefore, We gave him the faculties of hearing and sight
Then We guided him to the Way: either to be grateful or to be a disbeliever
For the disbelievers, We have prepared chains, fetters and a blazing fire
The righteous shall be in paradise drinking from a cup of wine mixed with Kafoor (camphorwater)
from a gushing spring at which the servants of Allah will refresh themselves, and shall be able to take out its channels from place to place at their will
They are those who keep their vows and dread the Day of widespread terror
who feed the poor, the orphan and the captive for the love of Allah
saying: "We feed you for the sake of Allah Alone; we seek from you neither reward nor thanks
for we dread from our Lord's torment of a very distressful Day
So Allah will deliver them from the evil of that Day, and bestow on them freshness and joy
and reward them, for their steadfastness with paradise and garments of silk
There they shall be reclining upon high couches; they shall feel neither the scorching heat nor the biting cold
The trees of paradise will spread their shade around them, and their fruits will hang in clusters within their easy reach
They shall be served with silver dishes, goblets of crystal
and goblets made of crystal-clear silver, filled by their attendants in due measure
And they will also be given to drink a cup of wine mixed with Zanjabil (ginger-flavored water)
from a fountain, called Salsabil
They shall be attended by boys graced with eternal youth: when you see them, they would seem like sprinkled pearls
And which ever direction you will look, you will see blessings and the splendor of a great Kingdom
They (the residents of paradise) shall be arrayed in the garments of fine green silk and rich brocade, and adorned with bracelets of silver, and their Lord will give them pure wine to drink
O believers, that’s how you will be rewarded, and your endeavors appreciated
Surely, it is We Who have sent down this Qur’an to you through gradual revelations
therefore, await with patience the command of your Lord and do not yield to any sinner or disbeliever from among the unbelievers
Glorify the name of your Lord morning and evening
prostrate before Him at night and glorify Him during the long hours of night
These unbelievers love the transitory life of this world and neglect the heavy Day that is coming ahead
It is We Who created them and made their joints strong; but if We please We can replace them with others like them through a change
This is indeed an admonition, so let him who will, adopt The Way to his Lord
but you cannot will, except by the will of Allah. Surely Allah is All-Knowledgeable, All-Wise
He admits to His mercy whom He wills, and for the wrongdoers He has prepared a painful punishment
By the emissary winds, which are sent forth one after another
By the raging hurricanes
By the winds that lift up and scatter the clouds to their distant places
then separate them one from another
By those who bring down the reminder
either to remove the excuse or to convey the warning
Surely, that which you are being promised, shall be fulfilled
It is going to be fulfilled when the stars will lose their light
heaven will cleft asunder
the mountains will crumble into dust
and when the Messengers will be brought together at the appointed time
For what Day has all this been deferred
For the Day of Judgment
And what will explain to you, what the Day of Judgment is
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Did We not destroy the former generations for their evil deeds
And We shall do the same to later generations who will follow them
Thus do We deal with the guilty
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Have We not created you from an unworthy fluid
which We placed in a secure resting- place (womb)
for an appointed term
We have estimated its term - how excellent an estimator We are
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Have We not made the earth a home for both
the living and the dead
set on it lofty mountains, and given you sweet water to drink
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
On the Day of Judgment it will be said to the disbelievers: "Walk on to hell which you used deny
Walk on to the shadow of smoke ascending in three columns
giving neither coolness nor shelter from the flames
throwing up sparks as huge as castles
as if they were yellow camels
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
On that Day, they shall not be able to speak
nor be given permission to offer their excuses
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Such will be the Day of Judgment. We shall assemble you and your past generations
Now if you have a plot, use it against Me
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
Surely the righteous shall dwell amidst cool shades and springs
and shall have whatever fruits they desire
We shall say to them: "Eat and drink to your heart’s content, this is the reward for your good deeds
Thus shall We reward the righteous
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
O culprits! Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while. Surely you are culprits
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
When they are asked to bow down before Allah, they do not bow down
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
In what statement after this Qur’an, will they believe
About what are they asking
About the mighty event
the theme of their disputes
Very soon they shall come to know
We repeat, very soon they shall come to know
Is it not true that We have spread the earth like a bed
and the mountains as pegs
created you in pairs
provided you rest in sleep
made the night a mantle
made the day to work for earning your livelihood
built above you seven firmaments
placed therein a shining lamp
sent down abundant water from the clouds
bringing forth grain, vegetation
and gardens of luxurious growth
The Day of decision is already fixed
On that Day, the Trumpet shall be sounded and you shall come forth in multitude
The sky shall be opened as if there were doors
The mountains shall vanish as if they were a mirage
For sure, the hell shall lie in ambush
to become a home for the transgressors
There they shall live for ages
in it they shall taste neither refreshment nor drink
except scalding water and decaying filth
a fitting recompense for their deeds
For they never expected to be accountable
and wittingly rejected Our revelations
But We had recorded everything in a Book
It will be said: "Taste the fruits of your deeds! You shall have nothing but increase in punishment
On that Day, the righteous will certainly achieve their Heart’s desires
beautiful gardens, vineyards
and young women of their own age
and overflowing cups
they shall hear no vanity, nor any falsehood
a recompense from your Lord and a gift beyond their account
from the Compassionate, Who is the Lord of the heavens, the earth and all that lies between them; before Whom no one shall be able to speak
On that Day, the Spirit (Gabriel) and the angels shall stand in their ranks; none shall speak except the one to whom the Compassionate (Allah) shall grant permission to speak, and he will speak straight to the point
That Day is a sure reality. Let him who desires, seek a way back to his Lord
Indeed We have forewarned you of an imminent punishment which lies close-at-hand, on the Day when man shall see what his hands have sent forth and the unbeliever will cry: "I wish! I could remain merely dust
By those angels who violently pull out the souls of the wrongdoers
and those who gently draw out the souls of the righteous
and those who glide about swiftly through space
then speed headlong to carry out the commands of Allah
and those who regulate the affairs of the world
The Day on which the quake shall cause a violent commotion
which will be followed by another violent commotion
and on that Day, hearts shall be pounding with terror
and sight shall be downcast
The unbelievers say: "Shall we really be restored to our former state (life)
when we shall have become hollow bones
They further say: "It would then be a fruitless restoration
They should know that it shall be only a single shout
and they will be back to life in open plain
Have you heard the story of Moses
When His Lord called him in the sacred valley of Tuwa
and said: "Go to Pharaoh for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
and tell him, `Have you the desire to purify yourself
If so, I shall guide you towards your Lord, so that you may fear Him
Then Moses showed Pharaoh the mighty sign
but he denied and disobeyed
Then he quickly turned back
assembled his people and made a proclamation
I am your lord, the most high
Consequently, Allah seized him for punishment, both in the Hereafter and in this life
Surely in this there is a lesson for the Godfearing
O mankind, is your creation harder than the heaven that He built
He raised its canopy and fashioned it to perfection
He gave darkness to the night and brightness to the day
After that He spread out the earth
then from it He brought forth its water and its pasture
set its mountains
and made them beneficial for you and your cattle
When the great disaster will strike
the Day when man will call to mind all that he had striven for
When hell shall be placed in full view of all
then he who had rebelled
and preferred the life of this world
shall have his abode in hell
But he who had feared standing before his Lord and curbed his evil desires
shall have his home in paradise
They ask you about the hour: "When will it come
But it is not for you to know or tell its timing
Only your Lord knows when it will come
You are but a Warner to him who fears it
On that Day when they shall see it, they shall feel as if they had stayed in this world only one evening or one morning
He (the Prophet) frowned and turned away
when there came to him the blind man (Ibn Umme Maktum, who came to the Prophet and interrupted his conversation with the chiefs of Mecca)
How could you tell? He might have sought to purify himself
or become reminded and might have benefited from Our reminder
As for him who is indifferent
to whom you were attending
you will not be held responsible if he would not purify himself
Yet to him who came to you with zeal on his own
and with fear of Allah in his heart
you gave no heed
It should not be so! Indeed, this is but an admonition
let him who wants, accept it
It is written in scrolls, which are honored
exalted, purified
and which remain in the hands of scribes
who are noble and virtuous
Woe to man! What a disbeliever he is
Out of what Allah has created him
Out of a semen-drop! Allah created him and then fashioned him in due proportion
then makes his way of life smooth for him
then causes him to die and stows him in a grave
Then He will surely bring him back to life when He pleases
By no means has he fulfilled the duty that Allah had assigned him
Let man reflect on the food he eats
How We pour down rainwater in abundance
and cleave the soil asunder
How We bring forth grain
grapes and nutritious vegetation
olives and dates
lush gardens
fruits and fodder
as a means of sustenance for you and your cattle
Finally when there come the deafening blast
on that Day each man shall flee from his own brother
his mother and his father
his wife and his children
For each one of them, on that Day, shall have enough concern of his own to make him indifferent to the others
Some faces on that Day shall be shining
smiling and joyful
And some faces on that Day shall be dusty
and veiled with darkness
These shall be the faces of the disbelieving wicked
When the sun will cease to shine
when the stars will loose their luster
when the mountains will be blown away
when the ten-month pregnant she-camels will be left unattended
when the wild beasts will be brought together
when the oceans will be set ablaze
when the souls will be reunited with the bodies
when the infant girls buried alive (here reference is made to the Pre-Islamic Arab custom of burying new born girls alive) will be questioned
for what sin she was killed
when the record will be laid open
when the heaven will be stripped bare
when hell will be set to blaze
and when the paradise will be brought near
then each soul shall know what it has bought with it
But no! I swear by the retreating stars
that run their course and hide
by the night as it dissipates
by the morning when it breaths again
surely this word (The Qur’an) is brought by a noble Messenger (Gabriel)
possessor of mighty power, having very high rank with the Owner of the Throne (Allah)
who is obeyed in heaven, and is trustworthy
O people of Mecca! Your companion has not gone mad
he (Muhammad) indeed saw him (Gabriel) in the clear horizon
and he is not stingy to withhold the knowledge of the unseen
This (Qur’an) is not the word of an accursed Satan
Where then are you going
This is but a Message to all the people of the world
to each one who wishes to follow the Right Way
Yet your wishes are of no avail unless Allah, the Lord of the worlds, pleases so
When the heaven will cleft asunder
when the stars will scatter
when the oceans will be torn apart
and when the graves will be laid open
then each soul shall know what it has sent forth and what it left behind
O man! What has lured you away from your gracious Lord
Who created you, fashioned you, proportioned you
and molded you in whatever form He pleased
Nay! In fact you deny the Day of Judgment
You should know that guardian angels have indeed been appointed over you
who are noble writers
they know all that you do
On that Day the righteous will surely be in bliss
while the wicked will indeed go to hell
they shall enter it on the Day of Judgment
and they shall not be able to escape from it
What will explain to you what the Day of Judgment is
Again, what will explain to you what the Day of Judgment is
It will be the Day when no one shall have the power to do anything for another: for, on that Day, Allah shall keep the entire command to Himself
Woe to those who defraud
who when, they take by measure from men, take the full measure
but when they give by measure or by weight to others, they give less than due
Do they not think that they will be raised to life again
on a Mighty Day
a Day when all mankind will stand before the Lord of the worlds
Indeed not! The record of the wicked is in Sijjeen (prison register)
what will explain to you, what the Sijjeen is
This is a written book of hell
Woe on that Day to the disbelievers
who deny the Day of Judgment
None denies it except the sinful transgressor
Who, when Our revelations are recited to him, says: "These are the tales of the ancient peoples
Of course not! In fact their misdeeds have caused a covering on their hearts
Indeed on that Day, they shall be debarred from the vision of their Lord
Then they shall be made to enter the hell
and told: "This is what you used to deny
But, surely the record of the righteous is in `Illiyeen (register of exalted ones)
and what will explain to you, what the `Illiyeen is
This is a written book
attested by those who are nearest to Allah (angels)
Surely the righteous will be in bliss
reclining on soft couches, looking all around
and you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss
Their thirst will be quenched with the choicest sealed wine
and the seal will be of musk. Those who wish to excel above others, let them endeavor to excel in this
That wine shall have a mixture of Tasnim
a spring, at which those nearest to Allah will drink
During their life on earth, the culprits used to mock at the believers
and wink at one another as they passed them by
When they returned to their own people they returned jesting
And when they saw the believers, they used to say: "These are the people who have surely gone astray
although they had not been sent as guardians over them
On that Day, the believers shall be laughing at the unbelievers
as they recline on couches and gaze at them
Have not the unbelievers been fully rewarded for what they used to do
When heaven will split asunder
obeying her Lord’s command as she ought to
When the earth will spread out
and cast out all that is within her and becomes empty
obeying her Lord’s command as she ought to
O mankind! Surely you must strive towards your Lord, a hard striving, then you shall meet Him
Then he who will be given his Book of deeds in his right hand
shall have a quick and easy reckoning
and shall return to his people rejoicing
But he who will be given his book of deeds from behind his back
shall soon be calling for death
and shall be made to enter a blazing fire
for he used to live happily with his kinfolks
and thought that he would never return to Allah for accountability
Yet, surely his Lord was ever watching
I swear by the glow of sunset
by the night and all that it gathers together
by the moon, when she grows full
that you shall gradually pass from one stage to another
What is the matter with the people that they do not believe
and when the Qur’an is recited to them, they do not prostrate
Nay! The unbelievers will deny
and Allah knows what they are hiding in their hearts
Therefore, proclaim to them a painful punishment
except those who embrace the true faith and do good deeds; for them there will be a never ending reward
By the heaven and its constellations
By the promised Day of Judgment
By the witnesses and that which is being witnessed
Doomed be the makers of the ditch
who lit the fuel-fed fire
and sat around it
to watch what they were doing to the believers
They tortured them for no other reason than that they believed in Allah, the All-Mighty, the Praise Worthy
the One to Whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and earth, and Allah is Witness to all things
Those who persecute the believing men and believing women and do not repent, shall receive the punishment of hell, wherein they shall have the punishment of conflagration
As for those who believe and do good deeds, they shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow; which will be the greatest success
Surely, the seizure of your Lord is very severe
Surely, He it is Who originates the creation of everything, and He it is Who will repeat it on the Day of Resurrection
He is the Forgiving, the Loving
the Owner of the Throne, the Glorious
and the executor of His own will
Have you not heard the story of the warriors
of Pharaoh and of Thamud
Yet the unbelievers persist in denying the truth
although Allah has encircled them from all around
Surely this is a Glorious Qur’an
inscribed on an Imperishable Tablet
By the heaven and by the morning star (visitant by night)
and what will explain to you what the visitant by night is
It is the star of piercing brightness
(Just as Allah Almighty is taking care of each star in the galaxies, similarly) over each soul there is an appointed guardian angel
Let man consider from what he is created
He is created from an emitted fluid
that is produced from between the loins and the ribs
Surely He, the Creator, has the power to bring him back to life
on the Day when the hidden secrets will be brought to scrutiny
then he will have neither power of his own nor any helper to save him from the punishment of Allah
By the sky which sends down rain
and by the earth which is ever bursting with new growth
surely this Qur’an is a decisive word
and it is no joke
These unbelievers of Mecca are plotting a scheme
and I, too, am plotting a scheme
Therefore, leave the unbelievers alone. Leave them alone for a while
Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High
Who has created all things and perfected them
Who has set their destinies and guided them
Who brings forth green pasture
then reduces it to black rubbish
Soon We shall make you recite Our revelations so you shall forget none of them
except what Allah wills. Surely He knows what is open and what is hidden
We shall make it easy for you to follow the easy way
Therefore remind, surely reminder does benefit
He who fears Allah will heed the reminder
and he who is unfortunate will avoid it
The one who will avoid, shall burn in the gigantic fire
where he shall neither die nor live
The one who will take admonition and purify himself shall be successful
who remembers the name of his Lord and prays
But O men! You prefer the life of this world
while the Hereafter is better and everlasting
Surely the same was said in the earlier scriptures
the scriptures of Abraham and Moses
Has the news of the over shadowing event of resurrection reached you
On that Day some faces shall be downcast
in hard labor, worn out
scorching in the blazing fire
given to drink from a boiling fountain
They shall have no food except bitter thorny fruit
which will neither provide nourishment nor satisfy hunger
While some faces on that Day shall be radiant
well pleased with their endeavors
in a lofty garden
Therein they shall hear no loose talk
Therein they shall have running springs
Therein they shall be reclining on raised soft couches
with goblets placed before them
silky cushions ranged in order
and fine carpets richly spread
Do they not look at the camels, how they were created
The heaven, how it was raised high
The mountains, how they were firmly set
And the earth, how it is spread out
So keep on giving admonition, for you are an admonisher
not a taskmaster over them
As for those who turn their backs and disbelieve
Allah will punish them with the mighty punishment
Surely to Us is their return
then surely it is for Us to take their account
By the morning
and the ten nights (first ten days of Dhul-Hijja)
the even and the odd
and the night when it departs
Is there not in these an oath (enough evidence) for those who use their common sense
Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with ‘Ad
The residents of Iram, the city of lofty pillars
the like of which had never been built in other cities
And with the people of Thamud who hewed out their dwellings in the rocks of the valley
And with Pharaoh the owner of stakes
They all transgressed beyond bounds in their cities
and committed great mischief therein
Therefore, your Lord let loose on them His scourge of torment
Surely your Lord is ever watchful
As for man, when his Lord tries him through giving him honor and blessings, he says: "My Lord is bountiful to me
But when He tries him through restricting his subsistence, he says: "My Lord has humiliated me
Nay! But you did not show kindness to the orphan
nor did you encourage each other in feeding the poor
Greedily you lay your hands on the inheritance of the weak
and you love wealth with all your hearts
Nay! You should know, when the earth will be pounded to powder
your Lord will come, with angels standing in ranks
hell shall be brought in sight. On that Day man will remember his deeds, but how is that remembrance going to profit him
He will say: "Alas! Would that I had sent forth some good deeds for this life of mine
None can punish as Allah will punish on that Day
and none can bind as He will bind
To the righteous soul it will be said: "O fully satisfied soul
Return to your Lord, well pleased with Him and well-pleasing to Him
Join My servants
and enter My paradise
I swear by this city
(where to assassinate) you (O Muhammad) have been made lawful in this city
And I swear by your father (Adam) and the children he begot (mankind)
certainly We have created man to be in stress
Does he think that none has power over him
He may boast: "I have squandered wealth in abundance
Does he think that no one observes him
Have We not given him two eyes to observe
One tongue and two lips to control it
Then shown him the two high ways (good leading towards paradise and evil leading towards hell)
Yet he does not attempt to tackle the Aqabah (steep path)
And what will explain to you what the Aqabah is
It is the freeing of a neck (slave) from bondage
or the giving of food in a day of famine
to an orphan relative
or to a needy in distress
besides this, he should be of those who believe, enjoin fortitude, encourage kindness and compassion
Such are the people of the right hand (going towards paradise)
But those who disbelieve Our revelations, they are the people of the left hand (going towards hell)
having fire all around them
By the sun and its brightness
by the moon, as she follows him
by the day, which shows its splendor
by the night, which draws a veil over it
by the heaven and Him Who made it
by the earth and Him Who spread it
by the soul and Him Who perfected it
and inspired it with knowledge of what is wrong for it and what is right for it
indeed successful will be the one who keeps it pure
and indeed failure will be the one who corrupts it
The people of Thamud denied the truth because of their arrogant transgression
when the most wicked man among them was deputed to kill the she-camel
The Messenger of Allah warned them, saying: "This is Allah’s She-camel do not molest her! Let her drink on her turn
They disbelieved him and hamstrung her. Therefore, for that crime, their Lord let loose His scourge upon them and leveled them to the ground
For He (Allah) has no fear of its consequences
By the night, when it covers with darkness
and by the day, when it spreads its brightness
By Him who created the male and the female
surely your efforts are directed towards various ends
So for him who gives in charity, fears Allah
and testifies to goodness
We shall facilitate for him the easy way
As for him who is a stingy and considers himself independent of Allah
and rejects the goodness
We shall facilitate for him the hard way
Just think! What benefit will he get from his wealth, if he himself is doomed
Surely it is for Us to give guidance
and surely to Us belong the end and the beginning
Therefore, I warn you of the blazing fire
in which none shall burn except the wretched
who deny the truth and give no heed
But the pious shall be kept away from it
the one who spends in charity for self-purification
not seeking any favor from anyone for which a reward is expected in return
except seeking the good pleasure of his Lord, the Most High
Such persons shall soon be well-pleased with Allah
By the morning day light
and by the night when it covers with darkness
your Lord has neither forsaken you, O Muhammad, nor is He displeased
Certainly the later period shall be better for you than the earlier
Soon your Lord shall grant you something with which you will be well-pleased
Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter
Did He not find you lost and gave you guidance
Did He not find you poor and made you self-sufficient
Therefore, do not treat the orphan with harshness
and do not chide away the beggar
and rehearse the bounty of your Lord
O Prophet! Have We not expanded your breast for you
and relieved you from the burden
which weighed down your back
and exalted your fame
Surely with every difficulty there is relief
Surely with every difficulty there is relief
Therefore, when you are free from your daily task, devote your time to the labor of worship
and turn all your attention towards your Lord
By the fig and by the olive
by the mount of Sinai
and by this city of peace (Mecca)
We have indeed created man in the best stature
then We abase him to the lowest of the low
except those who believe and do good deeds - for they shall have a never ending reward
So, what causes them to disbelieve you concerning the Day of Judgment
Is not Allah the best of all judges
Recite! (or read!) In the name of your Lord Who created
created man from clots of blood
Recite! Your Lord is the Most Gracious
Who taught by the pen
taught man what he knew not
Nay! Indeed, man transgresses all bounds
in thinking himself to be self-sufficient
although surely towards your Lord is his return
Have you seen the one (Abu Jahl) who forbids
Our servant from offering Salah (prayer)
Have you considered, if He was on the right guidance
or was enjoining true piety, why he would forbid someone from prayer
Have you considered, if he denies the truth and turns away, what will happen
Does he not know that Allah is observing all things
Nay! Let him know that if he does not stop, We will drag him by the forelock
a lying, sinful forelock
So let him call his supporters for help
We too shall call the guards of hell to deal with him
Nay! Do not obey him! Prostrate yourself and bring yourself closer to your Lord
Surely We have revealed this (Qur’an) in the night of Qadr
And what will make you understand, what the night of Qadr is
The night of Qadr is better than one thousand months
The angels and the Spirit (Gabriel) come down with every decree, by the leave of their Lord
that night is the night of Peace, till the break of dawn
Those who are unbelievers from among the people of the Book and from the Pagans were not going to desist from their unbelief until the clear proof came to them
that is, a Messenger of Allah reciting to them holy scriptures from purified pages
containing infallible books
Those who were given the Book before this (Qur’an) did not divide into sects until after there came to them a clear proof
Yet they were commanded nothing but to worship Allah, with their sincere devotion to Him, being True in their faith; to establish Salah ( prayers); and to pay Zakah (compulsory charity); and that is the infallible true Religion
Surely those who disbelieve from among the people of the Book and the Pagans shall be in fire of hell, to dwell therein forever. They are the worst of all creatures
Surely those who believe and do good deeds, are the best of all creatures
Their reward with their Lord shall be the gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. Allah shall be well pleased with them and they shall be well pleased with Him. That is for him who fears his Lord
When the earth will be shaken to her utmost convulsion
and the earth shall bring out all her inner burdens
man shall say: "What is happening to her
On that Day she shall report whatever had happened on her
for your Lord shall have commanded her to do so
On that Day men shall proceed in sorted out groups to be shown their ‘Book of Deeds.’
Then, whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall see it there
and whoever has done an atom’s weight of evil shall see it there
By the snorting war horses
dashing off sparks by the strike of their hoofs
making raids in the morning
and leaving a trail of dust
as they dash into the middle of the enemy troops
Surely man is ungrateful to his Lord
and surely he himself bears witness to it
and surely he is violent in his love of this worldly wealth
Is he not aware that when those who lie in the graves will be raised to life
and that what is in their breasts will be made known
surely their Lord on that Day shall have full knowledge about them
The Qariah
What is the Qariah
And what will explain to you what the Qariah is
It is that Day when men shall be like scattered moths
and the mountains like colorful carded wool
On that Day, he whose scale of good deeds is heavy
shall live a pleasant luxurious life
But he whose scale of good deeds is light
shall abode in Haviah
and what will explain to you, what it (Haviah) is
It is a blazing fire
O mankind, you have been distracted by the rivalry of piling up worldly gains against one another
You will never be satisfied until you get into the grave
Nevertheless, soon you shall come to know
Again, nevertheless, soon you shall come to know
Nay! Would that you knew through the real knowledge provided to you in this Qur’an and care about your life in the Hereafter
Because on the Day of Judgment when you shall see the hell
and see it with the certainty of your own eyes
you shall believe it, but that belief is going to do you no good because - on that Day, you shall be questioned about the blessings (faculties and resources that you were given in the worldly life - as to how you used them)
By the time through the ages
Surely mankind is in loss
except those who believe and do good deeds; exhort one another to the truth and exhort one another to patience
Woe to every slanderer and defamer
who amasses wealth and keeps on counting it
He thinks that his wealth will insure his status forever
By no means! He shall be thrown into Hotamah
What will make you understand what Hotamah is
It is the fire kindled to a blaze by Allah Himself
The one which will rise right to the hearts
closing in upon them from every side
in outstretched columns
Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with the Army of the Elephant (reference is made to Abraha, a Christian king of Yaman, who attacked Mecca with the army of elephants in the year of the Prophet Muhammad’s birth)
Did He not make their treacherous plan a flop
And send against them flocks of birds
which pelted them with stones of baked clay
thus rendered them like the chewed- up chaff
The privilege of protection enjoyed by the Qureysh
safe passage of their trading caravans in the winter and the summer (due to their being the caretakers of the House of Allah, and they know this fact)
So they should worship the Lord of this House
Who provided them food in the days of famine and made them secure against fear
Have you seen the one who denies the Day of Judgment
He it is who drives away the orphan with harshness
and does not encourage the feeding of the poor
So woe to those who offer Salah (prayers)
but are neglectful of their Salah (offer Prayers but disregard the very purpose of establishing Salah - to have the fear of Allah and be mindful to the needs of other people)
those who make a show of piety
and refuse to share the necessities of life
O Muhammad, surely We have granted you the Kauthar (countless blessings, plenty)
Therefore, offer Salah (prayer) to your Lord and sacrifice
Surely your enemy is the one who will be cut off from the root
Say: O infidels
I worship not that which you worship
nor will you worship that which I worship
I shall never worship those gods whom you worship
nor it appears will you ever worship Allah, whom I worship
to you be your religion, and to me mine
When there comes the help of Allah and the victory
you see the people entering Allah's religion (Islam) in multitudes
So glorify your Lord with His praises, and pray for His forgiveness: surely He is ever ready to accept repentance
Perish the hands of Abu Lahab! And perish he
His wealth and whatever he earned did not avail him anything
Soon he shall be burnt in a flaming fire (a pun on the meaning of Abu Lahab, "father of flames)
and his wife, the carrier of crackling fire wood
shall have a rope of palm-leaf fibre around her neck
Say: He is Allah the One and Only
Allah is the Self-Sufficient (independent of all, while all are dependent on Him)
He begets not, nor is He begotten
And there is none comparable to Him
Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of the dawn
from the mischief of all that He has created
and from the mischief of darkness when it overspreads
from the mischief of those who blow on knots (black magic)
and from the mischief of the envier when he envies
Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of the mankind
the King of mankind
the real God of mankind
from the mischief of the slinking whisperers (Satan and his workers)
who whisper into the hearts of people
from among the jinn or from the mankind
{
    "name": "eng-farookmalik",
    "author": "Farook Malik",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-farookmalik.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-farookmalik.min.json"
}