With the Glorious Name of Allah, the Instant and Sustaining Source of all Mercy and Kindness
All Praise is due to Allah, the Sustainer of the Worlds. (The marvels and the profound harmony in the Universe are the living witness that its Creator, Sustainer is truly worthy of all Praise)
He is the Instant and Sustaining Source of all Mercy and Kindness (as He showers His Bounties on all creation indiscriminately and without return)
He is the Absolute Owner of the Day when all creation shall have completed their journey of existence, evolution and action to the Ultimate Just outcome. And He is the Supreme Law-Giver to humans to enable them to live by the System of Life that He has ordained. People will be ultimately judged according to how well they tried to live by His Laws
(Realizing these facts), we affirm to obey Your Commands only and ask You to help us as we do that
Guide us to the Straight Path (by providing us with faculties that listen more than hear, observe more than see and analyze more than process)
This has always been the Way of those whom You rewarded. And not the path of those who had to face Your Requital (for blind following and arrogance), and not the path of those who faltered and deviated from the Straight Path
L.M. Alif. Laam. Mim. Allah, Aleem, the Knower, Hakim, the Wise, knows your prayer and understands your needs
Allah's Guidance is right before you in the form of this noble Book, recorded by the most honorable scribes appointed by the Messenger (80:13-16). The Almighty Himself guarantees the Truth of this Revelation, its explanation and its preservation. And you will find it free of all contradiction ((4:82), (10:37), (15:9), (29:49), (32:2), (52:2-3), (75:17-19)). Therefore, there is absolutely no question or any doubt about the authority and authenticity of this Glorious Scripture. And, you will soon notice as you proceed, that this Book leaves no lingering doubts in a seeking mind. If you remember that this is a Book of guidance, and hence, treat it as such, the hard fact will dawn upon you that this is The Path-finding Guide for all those who wish to journey through life in blissful honor and security
Those who wish to journey through life in blissful honor and security, are the ones who believe in the Law of Cause and Effect, though the stages of action and its reaction might be hidden from their senses
Hence, such men and women of understanding consider the Divine Revelation through you (O Messenger) a great favor and believe in it wholeheartedly ((7:52), (2:185)). Similar were the blessed people who believed in and followed the previous Scriptures
Those who approach the Book with an open mind are the ones who achieve Guidance from their Sustainer and walk on the right track ((23:1-11), (56:79)). To them belongs the Ultimate Success
As for those who have chosen denial in advance (because of blind following, arrogance, peer pressure and self-interest), it does not matter whether you admonish them or not
Allah has sealed their hearts and their hearing, and on their sight there is a veil. Theirs will be a tremendous suffering
(The line between belief and denial can be subtle in the sense that) among people are those who claim to believe in Allah and in the Last Day (or in the Law of Recompense, but their actions, which speak louder than words, contradict their claim). And they have indeed not attained belief
(Men and women of this psyche fall prey to the misconception that they can bypass the rock solid Divine Laws and) they deceive Allah and the believers. (Since reason is a faculty that has to be exercised and they have forsaken it) such men and women have little awareness that by this attitude they deceive no one but themselves
This negative attitude is a disease of the heart that reinforces itself according to the Divine Laws of human psyche. Deceiving one's own "Self" only ensures dire consequences for them since they used to belie the Realities of life
(By declining to submit to the Divine Values, every individual will formulate his own set of values. The obvious result would be corruption and chaos in the earth). When they are told not to cause corruption and disorder in the land, they say, "We are but reformers
Oh, verily, they are indeed corruptors, but they perceive it not
(Their arrogance and blind following hamper their power of reasoning.) When they are told to see the Truth as other men and women have seen, they retort, "Shall we believe as the fools do?" Oh, verily, it is they, they who are fools! But they know it not
Some of these people, when meeting those who have seen the Truth, say, "We have attained belief." But when they join their own rebellious folks, they say, "We are, of course, with you. We were only making mockery
Allah (His Eternal Law of Requital) turns their mockery upon them. They keep wandering in their arrogance to the point of no return
They have bought straying at the expense of guidance. Such trade has to go bankrupt because they have set their caravan in the wrong direction
Their example is that of a person who lights up a fire in darkness (without adequate fuel). As soon as brightness surrounds them, Allah (the Divine Law) takes away their light leaving them in darkness where they cannot see. (The Lasting Light is nothing but the Divine guidance)
Deaf, dumb and blind of Reason! They will not return to begin their journey in the right direction (until they use their faculties of perception and reasoning ((8:22), (16)
Or ponder a rainstorm from the sky in all darkness with thunder and lightning. They plug their ears with their fingers for fear of death. (But this will not make the storm disappear since denial is never a solution to any problems). And Allah encompasses the deniers of His Laws (Rejection cannot counter the Universal Laws. ((7:183), (29:54), (79)
People who reject the Divine Revelation and rely solely on their intellect, do not realize that Revelation is to the intellect what sunlight is to the human eye. It takes them out of darkness into Light (2:257)). They walk a few steps, as if in flashes of lightning, in a stop and go fashion. And when darkness prevails, they stand still. It is the Law of Allah that those who defy Reason eventually have the proper use of their perceptual senses, hearing and vision, taken away. Behold, Allah is the All-Powerful Designer of His Laws and He has Supreme Control over all things. ((2:201), (7:183), (11:15), (17:18-21), (29:54), (30:24), (42:20), (79)
O Mankind! Serve your Lord Who has created you and those before you so that you may journey through life in blissful honor and security
He who has made the earth habitable for you and the sky over it like a canopy. And brought down rain from therein so that fruits of His Bounty may spring forth for you as abundant provision. When you understand this simple fact, (insult not your intelligence and) equate not others with Allah
(For the real skeptic We have another reason-friendly offer.) If you are still in doubt concerning that which We have revealed unto Our servant (Muhammad), call and set up (a committee, commission, organization, association of the highest order) all your helpers besides Allah, and then produce just one Surah like this, if you are men of Truth. (Bring one Surah that would even come close to it in magnificence, eloquence, grandeur and wisdom ((10)
And if you fail to do it - and fail you will, (yet remain haughty and scornful, it should be easy to think of the outcome. You will live a life unlived since that is the natural consequence of persistent denial of the Reality). Then guard yourselves against the Fire that has been readied for those who remain bent on denying the Truth, and its fuel is the masses and their stonehearted leaders alike. (This Fire is generated in and engulfs the hearts (9:11)
(Now, see the other side of the coin.) And convey happy news to those who have chosen to be graced with belief, and have done acts of service to humanity. (For them will be a most pleasant reward. Call it Paradise in both lives. Try to understand it in your current vocabulary). Plush Gardens with rivulets flowing underneath! When they are provided with the delicious fruit of their deeds therein, they will say, "This is the provision we were given before." They had tasted some of the reward in this world. For, they will be given sustenance that will recall that past. The men and women will have pure companions therein, an everlasting happy family life. (Remember, this Paradise is not given away as charity. It has to be built in this life and then inherited (14:25), (2)
Behold, Allah does not shy away from citing any kind of allegory, even of an insect. (Men and women of intellect know that abstract phenomena are frequently well defined and understood in that manner). Since the believers exercise reason, (they appreciate this beauty of the Divine Wisdom and) they know that it is the Truth from their Lord. On the other hand, those who have chosen to disbelieve, try to ridicule by saying, "What could Allah mean to teach by this similitude?" Thus His Law of guidance lets go astray many and shows the Way to many. (But note) He never lets go astray except those who drift away from Reason
There is One Creator and likewise mankind is but one Community. This is such an indisputable truth that all men and women will eventually embrace it. (83:6)). Those who break this ratified Covenant of Allah ((1:4-5), (9:111), (13:21-25)) that He has enjoined upon them, and thus create disorder and corruption in the earth, these it is who are the losers in the long run. ((2:213), (10)
How can you disbelieve in Allah (knowing that) He it is Who gave you life when you were lifeless? Then He will cause you to die and bring you back to life again. And then, all of you will return unto Him. ((37:58), (40:11), (4)
He it is Who has created for you all that is in the earth. And He has applied His Design to the Sky and fashioned it as seven heavens. ((11:7), (53:31), (57:1-2)). And He alone is Knower of all things
He announced His Plan to the angels (the Universal physical Laws), "Behold, I am about to place a creation in the earth that will inherit it." They exclaimed, "Will you place on it such creation as will cause disorder therein and shed blood! Whereas we strive to establish Your glory in the Universe and make it manifest that You Lord are Impeccable!" He answered, "Behold, I know that which you know not." ((15:27), (16:49-50)). Human evolution: ((6:2), (7:189), (22:5), (23:12-13), (25:54), (32:7-9), (35:11), (37)
Then Allah endowed mankind with the capacity to attain knowledge (that the angels would never have). Then He showed the angels certain things and said to them, "Tell me if you have the capacity to learn about things in the Universe, in case what you say is true." (That this new creation is but vain)
They humbly said, "We only know the tasks assigned to us. Be Glorified! Verily, You alone are the Knower, the Wise
(Then) He said, "O Adam! Tell them some of your knowledge." And when Adam informed them of his capacity to learn, He (Allah) said to the angels, "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the heavens and the earth? And I know that which your endeavors are making manifest and the potentials that are latent within you
And when We said to the angels, "Humble yourselves and be subservient to Adam (the humankind) - They instantly humbled themselves except Iblis (Satan) who refused through pride, and so became a rejecter of the Divine Command
(With these propensities) We told (the early humans, male and female) Adam and his wife, "Reside in this land which is Paradise. Eat the fruit thereof as you please. But go not near this Tree (of discord)." If you branched off into parties, sects and groups, you shall replace your Paradise with Hell. ('Zulm' = To displace something from its rightful place. (2:213), (10:19),
But Satan caused them both to stumble therein and impelled them out of the happy state they were in. And so We said, "Degraded you are - With wedges of discord among one another! On the earth for you there shall be your station and livelihood for a while
(The solution to this catastrophe was beyond human intellect.) Then Adam received Words of guidance from his Lord and He accepted his repentance. Behold, He is the Acceptor, the Most Merciful. (Adam = Man. His wife = Woman. She also repented and Allah treated both of them equally)
We said, "ALL OF YOU have degraded yourselves. But behold, when guidance comes to you from Me, those who will follow My guidance, there shall come upon them no fear, nor shall they grieve." (Note here the plural, 'All of you' confirming that Adam and his wife are allegorical terms for the humankind. Incidentally the word EVE is nowhere mentioned in the Qur'an, once again pointing to Adam as mankind)
But those who reject Our Messages, such will be the rightful companions of the Fire. They will abide therein
(One example is that of the Israelites.) O Children of Israel! Remember My Bliss that I bestowed upon you (when you were following My Commandments). Fulfill your promise unto Me and I will fulfill My promise unto you. And of Me - of Me you shall be heedful
And believe in that which I reveal now. It confirms the Divine Origination of what you already have. Do not be the first ones to reject it. And trade not My Messages for petty gains. And, of Me, of Me, be mindful
Confound not the Truth with falsehood, nor conceal the Truth while you are well aware of it. ((2:159). News of the Arabian Prophet in Deuteronomy
And help establish the Divinely guided System in the society, and help set up the equitable Economic Order. And bow to these Commands as others have bowed
What! You preach righteousness to others and forget yourselves even though you read the Scripture! Don't you, then, use any sense
Rather, help yourselves with steadfast patience and establish the Divine System. This is a hard way, but it is made easy for those who are committed. (The System of equity and human equality strikes at the vested interests of the elite, and hence, it is hard for them to support it)
But the committed ones know that they are going to meet their Lord and that every step of theirs is moving toward Him
(Once again) O Children of Israel! Remember the Bliss I bestowed upon you and gave you distinction among the nations of your times (when you were faithful to My Commands)
And beware of the Day when all actions will encounter Absolute Justice (and contrary to your thinking) no person will avail another, and neither intercession, nor any compensation will be accepted. And no one will be helped (except by their own actions)
Also remember when We saved you from Pharaoh's people. They persecuted you to the extent that they killed your sons and spared your women. That was a great tribulation for you from your Lord's Law of Requital
Thus We parted the sea and rescued you and drowned the people of Pharaoh as you were watching. (This Exodus brought you to the safety of Sinai from the persecution in Egypt)
(Instead of being grateful, you did a weird thing.) While We summoned Moses for forty nights to reveal Our Commandments, you chose the calf when he had gone from you. You were once again relegating the Truth. ('Zulm' = Displace something from its rightful place)
Then, even after that, We pardoned you and gave you another chance to be practically thankful
For this purpose We gave Moses a Code of Law, and the Criterion for you to clearly distinguish between right and wrong that you might be led aright
When Moses returned, he said to his people, "My people! You have hurt your own 'Selves' (by worshiping the calf (7:152)). Turn in repentance to your Maker and kill your slavish mentality. That will be best for you in the Sight of your Maker." Thereupon He accepted your repentance. Verily, He is the Acceptor of repentance, the Merciful
And recall when you told Moses, " We won't believe in you until we see Allah face to face." (This happened because you had programmed your minds into the primitive ways of the "age of worship" when humans could only appreciate the tangible. At that level of intellect, humans come to fear natural phenomena). Thus, when you saw the lightening thunder (and the challenges of life) you almost fell dead in fright. (Losing your reason)
Then We revived you, and raised you from a dead to a living nation so that you might be practically grateful (by setting up the Benevolent Order)
(When you mended your ways, and established the Divine System) you saw the cool shade of Our Mercy and We bestowed upon you Our Bounties in abundance, the heavenly sustenance. "Partake of the decent things We have provided you." And they had done no harm unto Us - But they certainly had harmed their own 'Selves
Then We commanded you, "Enter this town (the sacred land of Palestine (5:21)) and enjoy the provisions - partake as you desire. But enter the gate humbly saying, HITTATUN (Our Lord! Pardon our misdeeds since we mend our ways). Then do what you say and We shall forgive you your faults and amply reward the doers of good
But, the transgressors altered the Word which had been instructed to them for another word and thought changing their attitude of humility. And so, We sent down upon the transgressors a heavenly Requital for their drifting away from the Commands. (You became shaky in your resolve losing courage and the Sacred Land became forbidden for you for forty years (2:61), (3:2)
(Remember the times when you were in the Sinai desert and there was shortage of water.) And Moses asked for water for his people, We said, "Smite the rock with your staff." (We guided him to rocks under which were hidden twelve springs of water ready to gush forth. Moses, with the strength of his conviction and with the help of his companions, unclogged those springs) And there gushed out twelve springs so that each of the twelve tribes found their respective source of fresh cool water. Moses said, "Eat and drink of what Allah has provided, and desist from creating inequity and disorder in the land
(At one stage you demanded Moses to provide you with a great variety of edibles, although you were living in the desert Sinai.) You said, "O Moses! We are weary of the same kind of food, so ask your Lord that He brings forth for us plant food such as herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils and onions." He said, "Would you exchange superior for the inferior? (Preoccupy yourselves with petty desires instead of higher goals). Go back in shame to Egypt and you will get what you demand." So humiliation and misery were stamped upon them and they had to face the Divine Requital. That was because they kept denying the Messages of Allah. And in the past they had opposed and even killed some Prophets in their transgression. They did all this, because they chose to rebel against the Divine Commands, and crossed the moral bounds
(That was a glimpse of the past). Behold, those who attain belief in this Divine Writ and call themselves Muslims, and those who are Jews, and Christians and the Agnostics - whoever truly believes in Allah and the Last Day and benefits humanity, surely their reward is with their Lord. For them shall be no fear from without, nor shall grief touch them from within
O Children of Israel! Recall the times when We made a firm Covenant with you in the Valley of Mount Sinai, letting the lofty mountain bear witness and commanded you to hold fast the Commandments We had given you, so that you may walk aright
Even then you turned away and were it not for the Grace of Allah and His Mercy, you would have been among the losers
And you are well aware of those of you who broke the Sabbath, whereupon We said unto them, "Be as apes despicable
And We made it a lesson to their times and for the future generations who would (learn from history and) choose to walk aright
And when Moses said unto his people, "Behold, Allah Commands you to sacrifice a cow" - (So that the belief in it as a deity could be dispelled (2:54), (7:152)) - They said, "Are you mocking us?" Moses said, "I seek refuge in Allah from being so ignorant
(Now, they started making excuses.) They said, "Ask your Sustainer on our behalf what kind of a cow it should be." Moses answered, "Allah says that she is a cow neither too old nor too young. She is between the two conditions - so do as you are commanded
They said, "Call for us unto your Lord that He make it clear to us of what color she is." Moses answered, "Well, she is a yellow cow. Bright is her color, pleasing to beholders
They said, "Pray for us unto your Lord that He make it clear to us what exactly she is. For cows are much alike to us; and if Allah wills, we may be led aright
Moses answered, "He says that the cow is such that has not toiled in plowing the land nor in watering the crops and it is sound without blemish." They said, "Now you bring the Truth." So they sacrificed her with great reluctance. Their hearts had been drenched in cow worship ((2)
And remember, when you killed a man and blamed one another for this although Allah will expose what you would conceal
And We said, "Apply this *Law to relevant cases of unsolved murder. This is how Allah gives life to the dead. (The Law that saves lives indeed gives you life (2:179). And He expounds His Messages for you to use your sense
Then, even after that, you persisted in a state of defiance that hardened your hearts like rocks, impermeable to reason. Or even worse, for behold, there are rocks from which springs gush forth, or which split asunder releasing moisture, or fall to softness according to the Divine Laws. They are more compliant to Allah's Laws than the hearts that defy reason. Allah is not unaware of what you do
Even now, believers hope in all sincerity, that their compatriots (the Jewish people in town) might join their ranks. But some of them, despite hearing and comprehending the Word of Allah (in Torah) have been distorting it knowingly
And when they meet with those who have attained belief, say, "We believe as you believe." But when they get together with one another, they say, "Do you inform them of that which Allah has disclosed to you, so that they might use it in argument against you? And all this before your Lord! Will you then not use your intellect
Do they not know that Allah is aware of what they conceal and what they reveal
Among them are the illiterate who do not know their Scripture except by hearsay and, therefore, depend on conjecture
Then, woe unto those (their scholars) who write the Scripture with their own hands and claim, "This is from Allah." They traffic with it for petty gains. (They distort the Scripture tampering with its verses to suit their designs and exploit those who are illiterate). Woe unto them for what their hands do write, and for the earning they make thereby
And, yet they say, "The Fire shall not touch us but for a few numbered days." (Because of their wishful thinking that they are the chosen ones). Say, "Have you taken any special pledge from Allah, which of course, He never breaks, or is it that you say things about Allah contrary to the august realm of knowledge
Nay, but whoever keeps disrupting the lives of others, and his faults upon faults surround him - such are destined for the Fire, therein to abide
And those who choose to be graced with belief, and help others - they are destined for the Paradise, therein to abide
(The Covenant We made with the Children of Israel was not of unconditional favors.) When We made a promise with the Children of Israel, (We said), "Serve none save Allah, and be kind to your parents, and to relatives, and to orphans, widows, and to the needy - those left alone in the society, and those whose income has stalled for any reason. And speak to people and treat them nicely, and establish the Divine System in the society, and set up the Just Economic Order (keeping your wealth open for the benefit of all)." Then, after that, you slid back, except a few of you, and you backslide even now
And, We made a Covenant with you saying, "Desist from feuds and mutual bloodshed, and do not expel your own people from your towns and dwellings. Then you agreed and you were witnesses thereof
Yet you it is who subdue and slay your own folk, and evict a weak faction among you from their homes. And you support one another in hurting the community and sowing the seeds of discord. And when these homeless people get enslaved by others and are brought to you, you ransom them, whereas it was unlawful for you to evict them in the first place. What! Do you wish to accept one part of the Scripture and reject the other? Think then, what the reward of such wrongdoing must be, nothing but disgrace in the life of this world - and on the Day of Resurrection the most grievous chastisement! For Allah is not unaware of what you do. (The verse is referring to the Jewish community of Madinah, but as is always the case in the Qur'an, the Commands have a wide historical applicability - in this case, to oppressive societies anywhere anytime)
Such are those who fall for instant gratification, buying the life of this world at the price of long-term gains and the Hereafter. Their punishment will not be lightened neither will they receive any help
And, verily, We had given the Scripture to Moses and We sent other Messengers in succession after him. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear evidence of the Truth and We strengthened him with Sacred Revelation. Yet is it not so that Whenever a Messenger came to you with something that was not to your liking, you became stubbornly arrogant, and some of them you called impostors, and others you killed? (Also, you have attempted to strike a deal with the Messengers in order to alter the Messages (10:15), (11:113), (1)
And they say, "Our hearts are bags of knowledge." Nay, but Allah has deprived them of His Grace for their persistent rejection of the Truth. Therefore, only a few of them will choose to be graced with belief
And when there comes to them the Book of Allah, confirming the authentic in what they have, they flatly deny it although before that they had been praying for a signal victory over those who denied all Divine Revelation. And whenever there came unto them something that they recognized as the Truth, they would deny it. Then, deprivation of Allah's grace is the lot of all those who thanklessly reject His Guidance and choose to live in darkness. ('Kufr' includes all the meanings given in the last sentence)
Miserable indeed is for which they sell their 'Selves' - that they deny that which Allah has revealed. (Grudgingly, they cannot get over the fact that Allah has chosen a Messenger who is not an Israelite). And that Allah should reveal His bounty to whomever He chooses among His servants. And so (for their discriminatory attitude) they have invited Requital upon Requital. And for all those who thanklessly deny the Guidance and choose to live in darkness, is a logical consequence of suffering that brings them low
And when it is said to them, "Be graced with belief in what Allah has revealed," they say, "We only accept that which has been handed over to us." And they deny that which comes after it, though it is the Truth confirming the authentic that is with them. Say, "Why then did you oppose and slay the Prophets of Allah, if you were indeed believers (in the earlier Revelations)
And indeed, Moses came to you with all evidence, yet you worshiped the calf in his absence, and you did behave wrongly
Recall again the Covenant We made with you in the Valley of the Mount Sinai, with the mountain towering over you, saying, "Hold firmly to what We have given you, and listen with your hearts!" They said, "We hear and we disobey". The desire to worship a tangible deity was so strong in them that their hearts were infused with the love of the calf, because of their persistent failure to see the Truth. Say, "If your faith teaches you to go back to the primitive ways of worship, then you are in a pitiable state of mind - if you are at all believers
Say, "If the Eternal Abode with Allah is reserved only for you (2:80) and not for others of mankind (2:111), as you claim, then long for death if you are truthful." (Why do you fear death rather than looking forward to it when you claim that you are the chosen ones of God? (5:18), (
But they will never long for it, for (they know) what deeds their hands have sent forth. And Allah is Aware of those who wrong their own 'Selves' by relegating the Truth
and you will find them greediest of mankind for life, even greedier than the idolaters. Each one of them would like to be allowed to live a thousand years. And to live long would by no means save him from the suffering. For, Allah is Seer of what they accomplish
They are displeased with Gabriel for he brought Revelation to a gentile Prophet (2:90).) Say, "Who is an enemy to Gabriel! He it is who reveals this (Qur'an) to your heart by Allah's leave - (and this Revelation) confirms the Divine Origin of the previous Scriptures. And it is a Guidance and glad tiding for those who accept it
Who is an enemy to Allah, and His angels and His Messengers, and Gabriel and Michael! Then, behold, Allah's Law is an enemy to such rejecters. (There is a wedge between Success and those who close their eyes to Universal Realities)
Verily, We have revealed unto you clear verses, and only those will deny them who drift away from reason
(This reflects in their daily lives.) Is it not so that whenever they make a pledge with others, a party among them breaks it (and others feel liberated from their collective responsibility)? Nay, indeed, most of them do not believe in the Permanent Values
And now when a Messenger has come to them from Allah confirming the Truth in what they have, a party among those who were given the Scripture before, cast the Scripture (Torah) behind their backs as though unaware (of what it says about the advent of the Messenger in Arabia (Deuteronomy)
(They followed conjecture in the past as well.) Some rebellious people spread a rumor in the Kingdom of Solomon. Solomon never disbelieved in the Divine Laws, but the rebellious ones did. They fabricated a story that two angels Harut and Marut had descended in Babylon and taught magic to people. That they used to warn people, "We are only a temptation, therefore be not oblivious to the rational Divine Laws." The rumor further stated that people learned magic from these two angels how to create discord between a man and his wife. (This entire story is nothing but falsehood. Magic, amulets, ghoul, demon-possession, exorcism, witchcraft, evil eye, fortune telling, astrology, palm reading, clairvoyance, voodoo are nothing but conjecture). These things can neither harm nor benefit anyone since they are contrary to the Divine Laws in Nature ((3:123-127), (6:73), (7:54), (45:22)). (Superstitions can harm people by becoming self-fulfilling prophecies). And that which they try to learn only harms them and profits not. They are well aware that any person indulging in this trade (of the so-called "Occult sciences") will be a loser in the long run, and shall have no portion in the Hereafter. And surely, evil is the price for which they (magicians, diviners, clairvoyants, fortunetellers and claimants to witchcraft) sell their humanity, if they but knew better
And if they had believed in the changeless Divine Laws and walked aright, the reward from Allah would be far better, if they brought their thoughts in the realm of knowledge
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not say (to the Prophet), "Listen to us." Instead, say, "Look upon us, or, grant us attention." And always be good listeners. There is a painful consequence for the rejecters of the Divine Commands. ('Ra'ina' also has another meaning to it, i.e. "Be our shepherd." Do not be vague and speak straight to the point (4)
The rejecters among the People of the Book and the idolaters do not wish to see any good thing sent to you from your Lord. But Allah showers His Grace according to His Laws (and chooses for His Revelation whom He wills (3:71), (16:30)). And Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty
We have not abrogated the old commands without replacing them with the everlasting Commands that are either similar or better than the previous ones ((5:48), (6:116), (15:9)). Do you not know that Allah is the Appointer of due measure for all things
Do you not recognize that the Dominion of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah? (He is fully Cognizant of your physical and mental needs, and knows the timing of His Revelation). And you have no Patron or helper besides Allah. (Systems of Life designed contrary to His Laws will keep collapsing)
Do you wish to demand of your Messenger that was demanded of Moses in the past? (People asked him vain questions in minor details and then disobeyed him (5:101)). But whoever changes his stand from the Light of conviction to the haziness of doubt, has already strayed away from the Even Way. ('Iman' and 'Kufr' translated according to the wider meanings and the context)
Many of the People of the Book wish to make you turn back to disbelief after you have attained belief. They do this because of their personal envy even though the Truth has become manifest to them. (Ethnic and nationalistic prejudices give rise to such feelings of envy (2:111), (5:18)). Pardon them and leave them with their ways until Allah issues His Command. ((5:13), (15:85), (73:10), (74:11)). Verily, Allah has Power over all things and all events take place within the framework of His Laws
Go ahead and establish the Divine System, and set up the Just Economic Order in the society. And whatever good you send forth to strengthen your 'Selves' in this manner will be stamped on your personalities and you will find it with Allah. (2:3). Behold, Allah is Seer of what you do
And they claim, "None will enter Paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian." This is nothing but their wishful thinking. Say, "Bring your proof if you are truthful
Nay, but whoever submits fully to Allah, and benefits people his reward is with his Sustainer. ((7:180-181), (41:40)). And there shall neither fear come upon them from without nor grief touch them from within
And the Jews say that the Christians have no basis, and the Christians say that the Jews have no basis. Yet both read the Scripture! This is how people oblivious to true knowledge have always behaved. Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in what they differ ((3:104), (11:118-119)). ('Qaul' = Utterance = Thought = Tenet = Attitude)
And who can be a greater transgressor than the one who forbids access to the Centers of the Divine System? - Lest His Name be Eminent in the earth (as it is in the rest of the Universe) - And strives to ruin them! It is not meet for their human dignity that they should enter them except in awe, respect and humility. ((9:17-19), (9:107)). Communities that fail to heed this warning will suffer humiliation in this world and a tremendous suffering in the Hereafter. (72:18). ('Masjid' = Mosque = Centers that administer the Divine System = Place of collective prostration with mind and body = Centers that the Islamic government will establish to implement the Qur'anic Commands in the society, and thus collectively submit to Allah)
And unto Allah belong the East and the West. (He transcends all boundaries and so is the Divine System that can be established anywhere on earth). Wherever you go, whichever way you turn, there is Allah's Countenance, and you remain in His Dominion. Behold, Allah is Transcendent, Knower of every site in the Universe
And they say, "Allah has taken unto Himself a son." Never! He is High Above what they say. Nay, unto Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Everything is subservient to Him
The Originator of the heavens and the earth! As soon as He decrees a thing, He says unto it, "Be" - and it is. (He originates and creates and does not procreate)
Those who do not explore the realm of knowledge say, "Why does not Allah speak to us directly, or a miracle come to us?" Even thus spoke those before them, as these speak. Their minds are alike. We have made clear Our Signs in the Universe (67:3), and in these verses, for people who wish to attain conviction
Certainly, We have sent you (O Messenger) with the Decisive Truth, a herald of glad tiding and a Warner. (You are not required to fulfill their demands of miracles. Your job is to convey the message with reason and sublime decency (13:40). For, you will not be questioned about those who lurk before the Insurmountable Barrier. ('Jahim' = The barrier to further development of the 'Self)
And the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor will the Christians unless you follow their own creeds. Say, "Behold, Allah's Guidance is the only True Guidance." (This is the updated, unadulterated Message from the same Creator who revealed the previous Scriptures). And, indeed, if you followed their desires after the Knowledge that has come unto you, then no ally nor helper would you have from Allah. ((7:3), (10:)
Those unto whom We have given the Book, who read it with the right reading (carefully study it beyond mere recitation), and then follow it as it should be followed - it is they who truly believe in it. And whoever does not believe in it this way - it is they, they who are the losers. ('Tilawat' = Recitation with understanding and then following it)
(The Children of Israel can easily relate to what has just been said.) O Children of Israel! Remember My Bliss with which I blessed you and how I gave you distinction over all other peoples of the time
And guard against a Day when no person shall avail another, nor will compensation be accepted from him, nor will mediation profit anyone, nor will anyone receive outside help
And remember when his Lord tried Abraham to uphold the Commands and he fulfilled them. (He took up the formidable challenge of a mighty priesthood, idolatry and a tyrannical autocracy in Mesopotamia). Then his Lord said, "Behold, I have appointed you an exemplary leader of mankind." He asked, "And of my generations as well?" He replied, "My Promise does not embrace those who harm others, and thus, harm themselves." (Being the offspring of a great man shall avail none)
And when We appointed the House (at Makkah) a focal point for mankind, and a safe sanctuary - We said, If you wish to stand at the honored station of Abraham, follow his example." We commissioned Abraham and his son, Ishmael to build this House saying, "Keep it clean from man-made dogmas for those who come and go and those who are called upon extra duty in establishing the Divine System. And to make it a training center for those who bow down and humble themselves before the Divine Commands ((2:143), (3:96), (5:97), (14)
Abraham prayed, "My Lord! Make this land peaceful and secure, and provide its people with fruits of Your Blessings. Provide for those who believe in Allah and in the Last Day." He answered, "I will also provide for him who thanklessly rejects the blessed guidance and let him enjoy life for a while. (But since he coveted instant gratification only and disregarded the long term), then, after that I will commit him to the suffering of Fire." And what a miserable destination it is after wandering through the journey of life! ((14:37), (17:18-20), (2)
As Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House (in Makkah) they were praying earnestly, "Our Lord! Accept from us our service. For, verily, You are the Hearer, the Knower
Our Lord! Make us true Muslims, submissive unto You, and of our descendants a community true Muslims, submissive to You. And show us how we can serve You best and grant Your attention to us. Verily, You, only You, are the Acceptor, the Merciful
Our Lord! And raise among them a Messenger from among them who shall convey unto them Your Messages - and through these shall teach them the Permanent Code of Values and Wisdom, and thus, enable them to grow in goodness. You, only You, are Almighty, the Wise." ((2:231), (17:39), (33)
And who forsakes the Creed of Abraham but he who befools himself? Indeed, We raised him high in this world. And, behold, in the Hereafter he will be among those who have perfected their personalities
When his Lord said unto him, "Surrender!" He said without hesitation, "I have surrendered unto the Lord of the Worlds
Abraham held fast to his pledge and enjoined upon his sons to do the same, and so did Jacob, saying, "O' My children! Behold, Allah has chosen for you the True System of Life. Therefore, do not let death overtake you except that you are truly Muslims
Were you present when death came to Jacob, when he said unto his children, "Whom will You serve after me?" They replied, "We shall serve your God, the God of your fathers, Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac - the One God - And unto Him we have surrendered, and for Him we are Muslims
They were a community who have passed on. Theirs is that which they earned, and yours is that which you earn. And you will not be answerable for what they used to do
And they say, "Be Jews or Christians, then you will be rightly guided." Say, "Nay, we follow the Creed of Abraham, the upright. He turned away from all that is false, and ascribed divinity to none but the One True God." (And he was neither a Jew nor a Christian)
(O Believers!) say, "We believe in Allah and the Revelation that has been conveyed to us, and in that which was revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob as well as their descendant Prophets (the tribal Israelite Prophets, known as the Patriarchs), and in that which was given to Moses and Jesus and to the other prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them (in that all of them were one in Purpose and they got their guidance from the One True God). And for Him, we are Muslims
So, if they come to believe like you believe, then they are rightly guided. But if they turn away, then they are in schism and opposition and Allah will suffice you against them. For, He is the Hearer, the Knower
The Hue of Allah! (Say that our life takes it color from Allah). And who can give a better hue to life than Allah? (We do our best to adopt the Divine Attributes in our human capacity such as: mercy, forgiveness, creativity, peace, care, truthfulness, justice, clemency, appreciation, trustworthiness, responsibility, kindness, compassion, independence, guidance, patience, giving, unity, strength, affection, courage, patience etc). "And He it is Whom we serve
Say (to the Jews and the Christians), "Do you argue with us about God, when He is our Lord and your Lord? We are responsible for our deeds and you are responsible for your deeds. And we are sincere in our Faith in Him
Do you still insist that Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob as well as the Tribal Israelite Prophets were Jews or Christians? Say, "Do you know better than Allah? And who could be more unjust than he who conceals a testimony that he has received from Allah? (You have received the testimony in your Scriptures). And Allah is not unaware of what you do, reveal or conceal
Nevertheless, these are a people who have passed on. They are responsible for their doings and you are responsible for your doings. (Keep this Law in mind). You will not even be asked of what they used to do
The people of little understanding will say, "What has turned them from the Center of Devotion (Jerusalem) which people formerly observed? Say, "The East and the West belong to Allah." He shows the Straight Path to him who wills to be shown it
And, thus it is: We have appointed you a middle and just Community that you would be watchers over all mankind and that the Messenger be a witness against you. (It will be your sacred duty to ensure that no people on earth will oppress others). So far as the transformation of the Center of devotion is concerned, it has distinguished between those who succumb to traditional and nationalistic preferences from those who see all mankind as one nation and follow the Messenger. And the Messenger is fulfilling Allah's Command for the Unity of Mankind. In fact it was a hard test except for those who have attained Allah's Guidance. Allah never lets your Faith go in vain. Verily, Allah is Compassionate and Merciful to all mankind
We know your eagerness O Messenger, to fulfill Our Command and to establish Ka'bah as the Center of Devotion for all humanity. Soon, you will happily administer the Sacred Masjid that is dear to you for its Sublime objective. Wherever each of you is, keep your focus on it as a symbol of pure Monotheism, and of your Ideological uniformity. Behold, those who have been given the Scripture know that your call is the Truth from their Lord. (They remain bent upon denial for blind following, prejudice and arrogance). Allah is not unaware of what they do
And even if you were to place all evidence before those who previously received the Scripture, they will not accept your Center of Devotion. Nor can you be a follower of their Center, and they do not follow the centers of others. Your job, in the meantime, is to remain sincerely committed to the Divine Plan and not be swayed by people's desires. If you heeded them after the right knowledge has come to you, you will be of those who deviate from justice
Those to whom We gave the Scripture before, recognize this Revelation as they recognize their own children but a group among them knowingly conceals the Truth
It is the Truth from your Lord, so be not you of those who waver
Each person pursues his goal of interest. But you shall race toward doing good to the community. (2:177). Every "Self" has the innate capability of self-actualization (83:26). Regardless of the directions you humans choose, Allah will ultimately bring you all together under One Ideology, and all of you together again on the Day of Resurrection. This Proclamation comes from Allah who has Power and Control over all things in Time and Space. ((57:20), (83:2)
And wherever you proceed, whatever you are occupied with, remain attentive to the Divine Ideology symbolized by the Sacred Masjid. Behold, it is the Truth from your Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what you do with your life
Again, regardless of where you are geographically and whichever way you are proceeding, you must keep in mind the Sacred Masjid as a symbol of the Divine Ideology, that is, unity of mankind. This will help the communities of believers around the world to coordinate their affairs. The opponents will, then, have no argument against you that you are not one in Purpose, except those who are bent on relegating the Ideals. Then, fear them not, but fear Me! So that I may perfect My Bliss upon you and that you may be guided to the Ultimate Success
Hence, We have sent unto you a Messenger from among your own who conveys to you Our Revelations and teaches you how to grow in goodness by helping people. And he empowers you with the Book of Allah, and the Wisdom therein, the knowledge you did not have before
Therefore, raise My Name and I shall raise your name! And be grateful to Me, and deny Me not by being practically ungrateful. ((2:186), (2:220), (2:177), (15:49), (21:10), (21:24), (23:70), (38)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Seek help in steadfastness and in diligent following of the Divine Commands. Surely, Allah is with those who are steadfast in ease as well as in adversity
(Establishment of the Divine Value System will meet with harsh opposition from people and nations with vested interests.) Say not of those who are slain in the Cause of Allah, "They are dead." Nay, they are alive, but you perceive it not. (While death is a prolonged state of sleep until the Resurrection Day, in their case emergent evolution of the "Self" takes place and they are instantly in a state of Bliss of the Hereafter, and they get honorable provision for mind and body from their Sustainer)
(Adversity is a great barometer of the strength of personality.) Fear, hunger, loss of wealth, loss of life and devastation of crops are examples of adversities that let you test your mettle. Our Law will let you try yourselves with such tribulations. Hence, give glad tidings to those who remain proactively steadfast
When a calamity befalls them, they do not waver. Rather, they say, "We are for Allah, dedicated to His Cause and every step of ours will advance in the Direction shown by Him
It is they whom their Lord supports and blesses with His Grace. And it is they, they who are guided to the most desirable destination. ((33)
There is no blame for a pilgrim of the House or a visitor in walking between the Mount Safa and the Mount Marwa. (They are historical relics of Allah since Abraham and Ishmael worked there to build the Ka'bah. Rites and rituals in themselves are not the end. They must be treated only as devotional means to a higher goal (22:28)). Therefore, do every good deed possible that will benefit the community. Allah is Appreciative and fully rewards such people. He is all Knowing
Allah has defined the objectives of the Pilgrimage to the Sacred Masjid in this Book (22:28).) Those who conceal the evidence and the Guidance which We have revealed and made clear for people in the Book - such are rejected by Allah and His righteous servants. (They conceal the sublime Purpose by making these assemblies mere rituals and thus deprive humanity of the blessings of the Divine System)
Except such of them as repent, and amend, and declare the Truth they had been hiding. They are the ones whose repentance I accept. And I am the Acceptor, the Merciful
Behold, those who reject the Truth and die as rejecters, for them is the rejection of Allah and the Universal Laws and of the human society combined. (Allah's Rule in the Universe is the Rule of Law. Hence, anyone who lives contrary to the changeless Divine Laws only harms himself)
Since the 'Self' survives after physical death, such men and women logically keep suffering relentlessly
And (remember that) your God is One God. There is no god but He, the Instant and Sustaining Source of all Mercy and Kindness. (And it is His Law alone that is operative in the entire Universe)
(Allah does not propose blind faith at all.) Behold, there are ample Signs for you in the Universe. In the creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation of night and day, the ships that roam the ocean for the benefit of mankind, the water that Allah sends down from the heights, thereby giving life to the land after it had been lifeless - and the variety of creatures that are dispersed on the earth, the currents of winds and the clouds they carry at various heights, are clear Signs for those who exercise their intellect. (The Universe is too organized to be the result of an accident)
Yet, among mankind are those who consider idols and saints to possess the Attributes of Power and Control like Allah does, and revere them as only God should be revered. But the true believers revere Allah more than all else. (7:3). Oh, that those who relegate the Truth could but see, as see they will when they are made to suffer! They will realize that all Power belongs to Allah alone and that Allah is Awesome in punishing. (Reverence or love of Allah, in the Qur'an, invariably denotes obeying His Commands)
(On the Day) those who were followed will disown those who followed them. And as soon as they see the doom, their mutual relations will collapse with them
Those who followed will say, "If a return were possible for us, we would disown them as they have disowned us." Thus it is: Allah will show their own doings as remorse for them, and they will not emerge from this Fire of Regret
O' Mankind! (In matters of eating and drinking, follow that the Qur'an is telling you, and not what people say). Eat of what is on earth, Lawful, clean, wholesome, decent and pleasing, and of your liking, and let not your selfish desire lead your reason and judgment, step by step into error. Behold, your rebellious desire (Satan) is an enemy that lays bare even your hidden imperfections. ('Tayyab' = Clean, decent, wholesome, pleasing, aesthetically good, of your choice)
This Satan teaches you to disrupt the lives of others - lewd behavior and stinginess - and that you say about Allah that which is outside the realm of your knowledge
And when it is said unto them, "Follow that which Allah has revealed", they say, " Nay, we follow that wherein we found our fathers." "What! Even though their fathers used no reason at all and journeyed through life without any light?" ((5:104), (10:78), (11:62), (11:87), (21:53), (34:43), (38:7), (43:23). 'Hudan' = Prominent and bright = Lighted = Visibly ahead = Leading = Guidance
The likeness of calling on those who reject the evident Truth is as the likeness of one who calls unto that which hears nothing but a shout and cry. Deaf, dumb, blind of reason -Hence, they fail to attain sense
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Partake of the clean, decent and aesthetically good things of your liking that We have provided for all of you. (2:168). And render thanks unto Allah if it is indeed He whom you obey
He has forbidden you only carrion (any animal that dies by itself), and blood, and swine flesh, and anything --- (not just meat) --- that has been dedicated to any other than Allah (be it any person, an ancestor, a saint, an idol or a tomb (5:3)). But, he who is compelled out of necessity, neither craving nor indulging in excess, it is not a dragging violation for him. Behold, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Verily, those who (start making their own lists of the lawful and the unlawful try to) conceal the Book of Allah - They purchase a small gain with it. They eat into their bellies nothing but Fire. Allah will not even address them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will make them grow to further evolution of the 'Self'. For them will be a painful doom (since they infringed upon the Divine Authority of Law-giving)
They are the ones who are buying error in exchange for Guidance, and buying torment in exchange for security. How constant are they in their strife to reach the Fire
This is so, because (they 'disable' the Qur'an although) Allah has revealed the Book in Absolute Truth. Behold, those who find excuses for disagreement in the Book, do so for their sectarian affiliations and thus create discord. ((4)
(One obvious result of sectarianism is their pre-occupation with rituals. This is because each sect leaves the Book aside and makes its own set of dogmas they call religion). No wonder, they forget that) Righteousness and exponential development of personality is not in that you turn your faces to the East and the West. But righteous is he who has conviction in Allah and the Last Day and the Angels and the Book and the Prophets. And he gives his wealth that he loves in reverence of Him, to: Family and relatives, Orphans, Widows, Those left helpless in the society, Those whose hard-earned income fails to meet their basic needs, Those whose running businesses have stalled, The ones who have lost their jobs, Whose life has stalled for any reason, The disabled, The needy wayfarer, son of the street, the homeless, the one who travels to you for assistance, Those who ask for help, and Those whose necks are burdened with any kind of bondage, oppression, crushing debts and extreme hardship of labor. They (the truly righteous) strive to establish the Divine System, and set up the Just Economic Order. They are true to their promises whenever they make a promise. They remain steadfast in physical or emotional distress and in times of peril. It is they that have proved to be practically true, and it is they, they that indeed journey through life in Blissful honor and security. (
(Security of life is the cornerstone of a civilized society.) O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! QISAAS (The Law of Just Recompense) has been prescribed for you in dealing with murder. If a free person has committed murder, that free person will face the Law. If a slave has committed murder, that slave will face the Law. And if a woman has committed murder, that woman will face the Law. (The status of the victim or that of the offender, whether they are free men and women or those in bondage, will have no bearing before the Justice System). If the victim's kin pardons the guilty, he must be appreciative and pay an equitable compensation to the kin in handsome gratitude. This pardon is a concession from your Lord and Mercy. Whoever, after this, trespasses this Law will have a painful doom (through the court of law and in the Court of Allah). (For full aspects please see (4:92-93), (5:32), (17)
And there is life for you in the Law of Just Recompense, O People of understanding, that you may journey through life in security! (Hence, Qisaas is a deterring safeguard for the community and not revenge)
(Regarding proper dispensation of property) it is ordained for you that before death approaches any of you, and he is leaving behind much wealth - that he prepares a will for parents and family in a decent manner. This is a binding duty on all those who wish to walk aright. (Any oversight or leftover from the will shall be distributed according to portions described in)
If anyone tampers with a will after hearing it, the guilt of altering befalls those responsible for such altering. (A will shall be heard and prepared in the presence of two trustworthy witnesses (5:106)). Behold, Allah is Hearer, Knower
(The one who makes a will, the testator, is likely to make errors of omission or commission.) So, if anyone, who has heard the will, fears from a testator some bias or diminishing of a due right, and then makes proper adjustments to bring about an amicable and acceptable settlement between the concerned parties, he will not be harming his own character. Verily, Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful. ('Ithm' = A dragging violation that harms the human personality or potential)
(Creating an ideal civilized society requires self-discipline, self-control and restraint among the individuals.) O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Abstinence is prescribed for you as it was prescribed to nations before you so that you benefit from this training, and get empowered to walk aright
Just a certain number of days. But, if any of you is sick or is traveling, the number of days should be made up later. For those who can go through Abstinence only with hardship, there is compensation, the feeding of an indigent. Any additional charity will mean additional reward. However, if you knew better, the training course of Abstinence is good for you
The month of Ramadhan has been chosen for your collective training because this is the month in which Revelation of the Qur'an began (with the most revolutionary and Benevolent Message ever). It is Guidance for mankind, and it clearly explains the 'why' of every Rule. And it is the Criterion of right and wrong. So, whoever is at home during this month should participate in the program. Whoever of you is sick or on a journey, let him do Abstinence later. Allah desires for you ease. He desires not hardship for you - and that you should complete the period. (Do not treat this program as just a ritual). The objective of this training is to establish the Greatness of Allah on earth for having placed you on a well-lighted road, and then being practically grateful by sharing His Bounties with others
(This training program has nothing to do with asceticism or self-denial in any way. The mystics think that enduring hardships and denying themselves the basic needs will bring them close to God). And if My servants ask you concerning Me, behold, I am indeed near. I respond to the call of whoever calls, whenever he calls unto Me. So let them hear My Call and let them trust in Me, that they may be led aright
(The Abstinence is only for the daytime. Eating, drinking, and going to your wives is not forbidden during the night). It is Lawful to go to your wives on the night of the Abstinence. They are your garments and you are their garments - close to each other, source of mutual comfort, complementing each other, trustworthy and keepers of privacy, reason for decor, and redressers of faults. ('Libas' embraces all the meanings given). Allah turns to you in Kindness and dispels and pardons your unworthy fears of disobedience at night. Freeing yourselves of misconceptions, keep seeking in life that Allah has decreed to be available for you. So, eat and drink until the white line of dawn becomes distinct for you from the black line of night. Then you shall be in Abstinence until night begins to fall. During this training program, some of you will be called on deputation in local Centers of the Divine Order. (This will be an assignment from the State. During that special duty you will learn, consult and plan the governmental and social affairs). So you will have to divert your attention from personal matters, even from intimately touching your wives. These are the limits imposed by Allah, so overstep them not. Thus it is that Allah explains His Messages to mankind that they may walk aright
(When you abstain from the Permissible during the annual training period, you empower yourselves to easily refrain from the forbidden.) So, devour not the wealth and property of one another unjustly, nor bribe the officials or the judges to deprive others of their possessions. Know that this kind of behavior drags down the individual and collective potential of the society
(The exhortation of righteousness must not be considered confined to the Month of Ramadan.) They ask you (O the Messenger) about the phases of the Moon. Say, "They should serve as signs to mark certain timings for people. And for Hajj." (Misconceptions and superstitions about the sun and the moon have nothing to do with righteousness). You attain righteousness by upholding the Commands in a straightforward manner. Exponential development of humanity cannot be achieved by entering the System through the back door of ritualism - just as you must not enter houses through the back doors (2:177). (Since there is no such thing as a part-time Muslim) you shall be mindful of Allah all the time in order to reap a rich harvest. ((2:)
Fight in the Cause of Allah those who wage war against you, but do not commit aggression. Behold, Allah loves not aggressors
(But if they keep on fighting), subdue them wherever you find them. And drive them out from where they have driven you out. For, oppression, cruelty and persecution are even more severely destructive than the killing in battle. And fight not against them near the Sacred House that is a Symbol of unified submission of all mankind to their Creator, unless they attack you therein. But if they attack you there, then fight against them. Such is the reward of those who refuse to acknowledge and then violate the sanctity of the Sanctuary of Peace for all humanity. (The Sacred Masjid in Makkah must be a safe Sanctuary and a source of peace and security for all mankind (2:144-148), (3:96), (5:2), (5:97), (9:18), (22:25-28), (40:19), (48:25). 'Qatl' = Kill = Bring low = Subdue = Fight = Attack = Slay
But if they stop, then, behold! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
And fight the aggressors until persecution is eliminated and there remains no compulsion or coercion in religion, the freedom that Allah has ordained (2:256). Anyone accepting the DEEN of Allah must do so freely and for His sake alone. ('Lillah' = For Allah's sake alone). And if the aggressors desist, then let there be no hostility except against those who displace peace with warfare. ('Zulm' = Displace something from its rightful place = Replace good with evil = Oppression = Relegation of the Truth = Violation of human rights = Doing wrong to oneself or others)
A violation of sanctity will activate the Law of Just Recompense. So, one who attacks you (during the Sacred Months), attack him to an extent no more that he has aggressed against you. And be mindful of Allah and know that Allah is on the side of those who walk aright
(It is impossible for a greedy, stingy, niggardly person to grow in goodness. Greed, stinginess and hoarding harm the individual and the society). Spend your wealth in the Cause of Allah, and let not your own hands throw you into destruction. Rather, be consistent in benefiting your fellow human beings. Behold, Allah loves the benefactors of humanity
And complete the Hajj or Umrah for Allah. If it so happens that you planned but could not execute your plan to visit, send in gifts that the congregation would utilize. Do not consider that by doing so you have relieved yourself of the burden of the duty from your head. Be with them at heart until all reach the destination. If someone is sick or has other compelling burdens on the head denying him sending the gifts, then Abstinence for a few days at convenience, or an act of charity or fulfilling someone's need shall be in order. If a person is present in the congregation but cannot afford gift sharing, one should exercise Abstinence for a total number of ten days, three days there and seven days after coming home. This is for him whose folk are not present in the Sacred Masjid (Makkah in the wider sense). This will help him feel no less devoted than others. Follow the Guidance of Allah. Remember the higher goal and be mindful of Allah. And know that Allah's Law of Requital is strict in pursuing and grasping
The Pilgrimage shall take place in the months made well known to mankind. Arrange it in a manner that people may get together from around the world and confer. Whoever participates in Pilgrimage shall refrain from intimate husband-wife relationship, misconduct and arguments throughout Hajj so that mutual consultation could take place in an amicable environment. Allah will acknowledge what you accomplish for the good of mankind. And do make provision for the entire number of days so that you don't have to ask people for help, rather be able to help them. But remember that the most important and best provision is your good conduct. Be mindful of Me, O Men and women of understanding
Allah is fully Cognizant of your economic needs. And the Pilgrimage is not a gathering of people who have renounced the world. Therefore, there is nothing wrong in seeking Allah's bounty by conducting business. Returning from the field of Arafat, remember Allah at the sacred relic of Muzdalifa. Remember Him as He has guided you, before you were of the straying
You have seen that Pilgrimage is not a ritual. It is intended to be a platform for achieving harmony among mankind through interactive dialogue and consultation. When the pilgrimage is over, return to your homes as simple ordinary people without pomp and pride, and stick to the program agreed upon there. Allah, through His Infinite Mercy, will make your efforts fruitful and procure security and protection for mankind through this program, like a helmet protects the head. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
When you have returned to your homes after completing the acts of devotion, the greatest change that should come in you is that you live your life according to the Commands of Allah rather than what you were doing before, i.e., following the ways of your forefathers. People, who look for short-term gains in blind following, forfeit the long term Eternal success
And among men and women are those who forsake not the Hereafter for this world, and forsake not this life for the Hereafter. They are the ones who insure themselves against Fire. They say, "Our Lord! Give to us in this world what is good, and in the Hereafter what is good, and guard us from the doom of fire
For those who seek good in both lives, is a decent portion they have earned. Allah's Law is swift at reckoning
The appointed days of Pilgrimage and Umrah are meant to remind one another of Allah's Commands. If a participant hastens his departure by a couple of days or delays it, there is no detriment in either case for those who walk aright. Walk aright and remember that all of you will be gathered before Him
Now there is a kind of man whose views on the life of the world dazzle you, and he even swears by God to what is in his heart. Moreover, he is exceedingly skillful in argument. (But he disregards the Eternal Values and the Hereafter)
If such people attain political power they create corruption in the earth. Their rule results in destruction of the produce of land and labor and the damage done by them affects generations. Allah loves not corruption and mischief
When he is advised to be mindful of Allah's Laws, his false pride plunges him further down in inhumanity. Hell will settle his account, a miserable abode
But there is also a kind of man who would willingly sell his "Self" for Allah's Approval. (He dedicates his whole life, and even is ready to sacrifice it in the Cause of Allah). And Allah is Compassionate to His servants
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Come, all of you, into submission to Him. Enter the System of Islam fully and collectively. Do not follow the footsteps of the Satan, your rebellious desire. Selfish desire that rebels against the Divine Values is your most ardent enemy. (Desire or emotion leads our actions while the intellect rationalizes them. Only the Divine Values given in the Qur'an can empower our higher control of the intellect)
(There will be attempts at beclouding the Profound Message of the Qur'an as happened in the case of earlier Scriptures. Certain man-made books will be created and promoted as if they were equivalent to or superseded the Qur'an). If you falter or backslide after these Clear Verses have been conveyed to you, know that Allah is Almighty, Wise. (You will then suffer the consequences in both lives for disregarding His Wisdom)
The opponents of the Clear Verses will make up weird stories, such that Allah would descend from one heaven to the other heaven and then into dark dense clouds, accompanied by winged angels. And then He would decree all matters. Nay! All matters of guidance have been expounded in this Book. Allah is Omnipresent and all actions return to Allah for judgment
O Messenger! Ask the Children of Israel how many clear Revelations We gave them. Whoever alters the blessed Message of Allah after it has come to him must know that Allah's Requital is Strong in grasping
Beautified seems the life of this world to the rejecters, and they ridicule the believers who uphold Permanent Values and look beyond instant gains. Those who live an upright life will be higher in degrees on the Day of Resurrection. Allah provides without stint to His creation according to His Law that does not discriminate between people. He is the Sustainer of all humanity
Mankind were one community. (Nature's provision was abundant and open for all (2:36). Then Satan, their selfish desire, divided them (10:19)) Allah sent Prophets as heralds of good news and as Warners. He sent down with them the Scripture with the Truth to judge among people in their differences. After the Prophet passed on, people started differing in the Scripture that was given to them with clear verses. And they did so in stubborn rivalry. Allah by His Will keeps the sincere believers guided in Truth concerning whatever differences arise among them. Allah guides people according to His Laws. (Using your faculties of listening, observing and reasoning will help you achieve guidance, while selfishness, arrogance and blind following will lead people astray (2:170), (6:56), (40)
Do you expect to achieve Paradise here and there without being tested as the previous generations were tested? They had to go through hardship and adversity such that they were shaken up. (Unity of mankind will not be easy to attain. The differences of race, ethnicity, creed, color, lineage, wealth and nationalism would be the barriers to surmount). The hardships in the way of this Benevolent Revolution have tasked the hearts and minds of Messengers and their believing companions till they said, "When will come Allah's help?" But, once this Revolution gets going, Allah's help is near
A crucial step toward the establishment of this Unified Order will be the equitable distribution of wealth. People ask you, O Messenger! "What should we spend in the Cause of Allah?" Say, "Although welfare of the entire society would remain the ultimate objective, begin this goodness with your parents, family and relatives, orphans, widows, and those who are left helpless, those whose hard earned income is insufficient to meet their basic needs, those whose businesses have stalled, and those who have lost their jobs, also the needy wayfarer, the homeless son of the street, and the one who has come to your town in a destitute condition." And whatever good you do, Allah is Aware of it
When establishing the Divine Order, you will meet aggression from those who wish to maintain the status quo for their vested interests. Therefore, fighting in the Cause of Allah is ordained for you, even though you dislike it. It may happen that you hate a thing that is good for you, and it may happen that you love a thing that is bad for you. Allah knows and you know not
During active warfare, mankind should agree upon one month of peacetime. This would serve as a cooling off period. They ask you about the Sacred Months and fighting therein. Say, "Fighting in the Sacred Months is a grave offense (2:194). However, repelling from the Path of Allah, rejecting His Command and the sanctity of the Sacred Masjid, and evicting its people, are greater offenses in the Sight of Allah. Persecution is a greater crime than killing." They will not cease from fighting against you till they revert you from your religion, if they can. Those among you who revert from their religion, and die as disbelievers, have nullified their works in this life and their rewards in the Hereafter. These are the companions of Fire; they will abide therein
Those who attain belief and those who emigrate in the Cause of Allah and struggle to establish the Divine Value System, can rightfully hope for the Grace of Allah. Indeed, Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful
They ask you (O Messenger), concerning alcohol, intoxicants, gambling, and easy money. Say, "There is great loss for men and women in these things and a little momentary gain. Their damage far outweighs their benefit. They drag down individual and collective potentials of people." And they ask you what they should spend on others. Tell them, "All that is beyond your needs." Thus Allah makes plain to you His Revelations, that you may reflect and understand the Wisdom behind each Command
Reflect that Allah's Commands can help you here and in the Hereafter. And they ask you about orphans, and those left helpless. Say, "Taking care of the development of their human potential, fulfilling their needs, and rearing them with good training and education is best. If they live with you, they are your brothers and sisters." Allah knows the person who is corrupt from the person who is equitable. Allah has bestowed upon you Guidance without which you would have carried the burdens of Ignorance. He wishes for you ease and not hardship (2:185). The Almighty, Wise Allah uses His Authority in Infinite Wisdom
(Family is the unit of any good society. Uniformity of Ideology between the husband and the wife is important to ensure a wholesome family life). Do not marry women who associate others with Allah, till they believe. Even if such women seem attractive to you, marrying a believing woman who toils in labor and might not seem as attractive, is better for you. Nor shall you give your daughters in marriage to men who associate others with Allah, till they believe. A believing man is better than an idolater, even if you like him. Clash of basic value systems creates a fiery atmosphere in the family and it carries on to the Lasting Abode. Allah, by His Leave, invites you to Paradise and protection against your imperfections. (A happy family life is a life of paradise). He expounds His Revelations for all humanity to ponder
They ask you about women's courses. Say, "It is an inconvenient condition. So keep away from intimacy with them during their courses. Once they are clear past it, you may approach your wives for intimate relations in the manner designed by Allah. Allah loves those who make mends and keep their minds and conduct clean
Remember, that women in the society are the guardians of your future generations, just as a garden keeps the seeds and turns them into flowering plants. So, whenever you meet with women socially, treat them with respect, keeping the aforementioned principle in mind. This conduct will go a along way to insure the betterment of the future generations. Send forth good today for tomorrow. Be mindful of Allah's Laws and know that you will, one day face Him. O Messenger! Give good news to the believers
Let not your senseless oaths in the name of Allah deter you from doing good to others, from being mindful of Divine Laws, and from making peace between people. Allah is Hearer, Knower
Allah will not task you for your senseless swearing. He holds you responsible for your intentional doings. Allah is Forgiving, Clement. (Therefore, a marriage will not be dissolved for senseless utterances of the husband or the wife)
Men who take an oath that they will not approach their wives shall have four months of grace. And if they go back on their oath during these four months, behold, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (They must rethink their decision during this grace period and circumstances might change. Similar rules apply for women, since they have rights and obligations as men have, and since no man is permitted to forcibly keep his wife in wedlock against her will as stated later in the Book ((2:228), (4:19), (4:21), (4)
If they decide upon divorce let them remember that Allah is Hearer, Knower. (They must bear in mind that since marriage is a Solemn Covenant (4:21), divorce can take place only in accordance with this Book of Law
After divorce, women shall wait three menstruations before remarriage. There is no waiting period for a woman who is divorced before intimate relations with her husband (33:49). And it is three months if they do not habitually menstruate (65:4). They shall not conceal pregnancy if they believe in Allah and in the Hereafter. In case of pregnancy, their waiting period shall be until delivery (65:4). And during this period their husbands would do better to take them back if both of them desire reconciliation. The husband and the wife have the right to reconcile during this waiting period of the wife. Women have rights similar to those of men in mutual kindness. Men, however, do not have a waiting period for remarriage for obvious physiological reasons. That is where men are on a platform different from them. ((2:228-234), (4:3), (4:19), (4:35), (4:128), (33:49), (58)
In a given couple's lifetime, a divorce is permissible twice. (The whole period of divorce i.e. three menstruations / three months, or until delivery can be taken back twice). Then the divorced woman must be retained in honor or released in kindness. She shall be allowed to live in the same home amicably, or leave it amicably. At or after divorce, it is not lawful for you to take back anything of what you have ever given to her. However, if both of you fear that you might (in waves of emotion) transgress the bounds set by Allah, there shall be no blame on either of you if the wife willingly gives back whatever she chooses. These are the Limits set by Allah; transgress them not. Whoever transgresses the bounds set by Allah, such are the wrongdoers
If a man divorces his wife on a third different time during their marital life, it shall be unlawful for him to remarry her. It may so happen that the woman marries another man, and those two do not get along, and the other husband divorces her. In that case, there is nothing wrong if both (the previous couple) decide to come together again, if they consider that they will be able to observe the Limits set by Allah. These Limits have been made clear to enable people to make use of the Divine gift of knowledge
When you have divorced women, and they have completed their waiting period, then retain them in kindness or release them in kindness. You shall allow them to live in the same home amicably, or let them leave amicably. Do not force them to stay against their will, as revenge. Anyone who does this wrongs his own "Self". Do not make the Revelations of Allah a laughing stock. Remember Allah's Blessings upon you and the Book and Wisdom He has sent down to you in order to enlighten you. Be mindful of Allah's Commands and know that Allah is Aware of all things
And when you have divorced women, and they have completed their waiting period, people in the society shall not place difficulties if both of them wish to remarry each other in kindness. And they shall not place difficulties if the woman decides to marry a different husband with their mutual agreement. This instruction is for all among you who believe in Allah and the Last Day. Following the Commands helps you develop your personality and stay clear of vice. Allah knows, you know not
If the (divorced) mothers wish to nurse their infants, the father shall provide for the mother's sustenance and clothing equitably up to two years of nursing. No human being shall be burdened with more than he or she is well able to bear. No mother shall be made to suffer because of her child, nor shall a father be made to suffer because of his child. If the father dies, his heir will assume these responsibilities. If both parents decide with mutual consent, there shall be nothing wrong in entrusting your children to foster-mothers. You shall mutually ensure, in a fair manner, the safety of the child you are handing over. Be mindful of Allah's Laws and know that Allah is Seer of all that you do
Those among you who die and leave wives behind, they shall wait four months and ten days before they remarry. Once they fulfill their interim, the society commits nothing wrong by letting them make amicable decisions about their future including remarriage. And Allah is fully Cognizant of all your actions
You do nothing wrong in announcing your engagement to women or keep it to yourselves. Allah knows that the community will think about getting them married. But, never make a secret pledge or contract with them. Speak with them honorably and in recognized words. Do not tie the wedding knot nor sign the martial contract until the waiting period has ended. Know that Allah understands human psyche, and that which is in your hearts. Take heed of Him and know that Allah is Forgiving, Clement. He does not wish to impose hardship on you. His Laws protect your society from harm by absolving your imperfections. (Allah, the Clement never gets enraged and His Rule is the Rule of Law)
And, there is no blame on you if you nullify the marriage before you have touched the women with whom you have signed the marital contract, and before you have appointed the marital gift. This would be an unexpected situation involving emotional trauma. Therefore, show compassion by giving her as generous a gift as you can afford. This would be an act of equity and it is a binding duty on all those who wish to be counted among the benefactors of humanity
And if unexpected circumstances lead you to divorce women before you have touched them, but after the marital gift has been fixed, give them half the amount unless they volunteer to forgo it. If the move for divorce originates purely from you, let her have the whole portion. If you men forgo it, it is closer to righteousness. O People! Never forget kindness among yourselves. This Command is from Allah Whose Law of Requital ever monitors your actions and the motives behind them
While describing some important marital Laws, it is reiterated that, your Central Duty remains the guarding of the System in which individuals and families can develop their potentials to the maximum. Stay alert in the obedience to Allah
Whether fear threatens you from without, or you are strolling, riding, relaxing in peace, rising, sitting, or recumbent ((3:190), (4:103)), keep in mind the Laws of Allah as He has taught you the Right and Wrong which you knew not
Men must testify in a written, legal will that, after their death, their widows will receive one year's maintenance without their being obliged to leave the house. But, if they leave on their own accord, there is nothing wrong in letting them do whatever they wish to do with themselves in a lawful manner. Allah, the Almighty, the Wise grants this permission
The widowed and divorced women must be provided for in kindness and equity. (65:6-7). This is a duty for those who wish to walk aright
Thus, Allah makes His Revelations clear for you. Now, it is up to you to use your intellect
The Ideal Society that you establish shall have sound socio-economic fabric and Rule of Law. That would enable you to thwart aggression from any quarters. You won't then, behave cowardly like those who were thousands in numbers, but when challenged by the enemy, they ran in droves leaving their homes behind. They feared death. Then they realized that the Divine Law of mortality is inescapable, hence the fear of death is vain. Soon, they stood up on their feet and defeated the enemy. They lived again. Allah's Guidance is a Bounty to mankind but the majority of the people do not realize and appreciate this fact
We had told them, "Fight in the Cause of Allah, and know that Allah is Hearer, Knower." Fight in self-defense, and against oppression and aggression
Who comes forward and gives a beautiful loan to Allah that He shall multiply it many times? The Divine Order in the society pays you handsome dividends. Add to this, the tremendous Reward in the Hereafter. The wealth of nations and individuals is not exempt from the Laws of Allah. Every step of the way you are returning to Him
Sustained commitment to the Divine Order with your lives and wealth is no easy undertaking. After the times of Moses, some leaders of the Israelites promised their Prophet (Samuel), "If you appoint a king for us, we will fight in the Cause of Allah." The Prophet said, "Is it your intention to refrain from fighting if it was decreed to you?" They said' "Why should we not fight in the Cause of Allah when we have been driven out of our homes with our children?" Yet when fighting was ordained for them, they turned away all but a few. Allah is Aware of the wrongdoers
Their Prophet said, "Allah has appointed Talut (Saul) as your king." They objected, "How can he have kingship over us when we are more worthy of kingship than he; he is not even rich?" The Prophet said, "Allah has chosen him over you, and has blessed him with wisdom and stature. Allah bestows His kingship according to His Laws. He is Infinite, Knowing
Their Prophet (Samuel) said, "The sign of his kingdom is that the Ark of the Covenant will be restored to you, reassuring you from your Lord, and the relics left by the house of Moses and the house of Aaron and preserved by natural laws of archaeology. This will be a convincing sign for the believers among you
The Commander Saul then marched along with his soldiers to face the armies of Jaloot (Goliath). They came upon a rivulet on their way. Saul, in order to create discipline among his soldiers and to test their resolve commanded them to refrain from drinking that water, save a sip out of the hand. But except for a few they drank it. Their behavior was hardly strange when they crossed the rivulet. They complained, "This day we cannot cope with Goliath and his armies." But those who were resolute and were convinced that they were marching forward in the Cause of Allah, said, "How often a small force has overwhelmed a big army since it is the Law of Allah that He is with those who are proactively steadfast
Thus praying to their Lord in full conviction in the Law of proactive steadfastness, they advanced toward the invading armies of Goliath
And, they routed the much bigger force by the Law of Allah, as David, who was one of the officers of Saul, slew the mighty commander, Goliath. Then Allah honored David with a powerful kingdom, along with wisdom and sound judgment, and commissioned him for the special Office of Knowledge. We have decreed that those who spend their youth in righteousness, i.e., benefiting humanity, shall be granted knowledge and wisdom ((12:22), (28:14)). The annihilation of the mighty armies of Goliath bears a historical lesson for mankind that if Balance in Nature were not one of the Laws, tyrants would ransack the earth and its inhabitants unopposed. But, oppression brings revolution and eventually, the oppressed overthrow the oppressors (22:39). Allah is Limitless in His Bounties to the Worlds
These are the Verses of Allah that We recite to you in Absolute, Guarded Truth. And (O Muhammad!) You are among Our Messengers
(All Messengers were one in Purpose). We have caused some of them to excel others. (They were assigned different strategies suitable to their times, locations and people. So they worked at diverse platforms and) Allah communicated to all of them in various ways. Jesus son of Mary was one of those Messengers to whom We gave clear signs of the Truth and We helped him with the Sacred Revelation. If Allah had created human beings like programmed robots, lacking free will, they wouldn't have differed and wouldn't fight among themselves in matters of belief. But, Allah planned that men and women be endowed with the ability to make choices, and that compulsion in matters of faith would never been ordained (2:256). Allah makes His Laws in the World of Command as He Wills, and then He implements them in the World of Creation (the Universe) and never changes His Laws ((7:54), (17)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Spend of Our Provision on fellow human beings, and for the betterment of the society. Do that before the day comes when no bargaining, friendship or intercession shall be of any avail. Those who reject such sensible admonition, do grave injustice to themselves
These directions, tidings and warnings come from Allah, the One True God. There is no god but He, the Living, the Originator of life, the Self-Subsisting Sustainer of all creation. Neither slumber, nor sleep overtakes Him. All that exists in the Highs and the Lows, in the Heavens and the Earth, belongs to Him alone. Who can intercede in His Court, except as a witness of Law? His Knowledge transcends time and space. No one can encompass a trace of His Knowledge but through His Laws. The Throne of His Supreme Control extends over the Highs and the Lows. No fatigue touches Him as He benevolently guards His Dominion and creation. He is the Glorious, the Supreme
(Although this Message has been sent down by the Almighty), there is absolutely no compulsion or coercion in religion. This Rule shall have no exception because Right has been made distinct from Wrong (3:4). Whoever rejects false gods such as the priesthood, and attains conviction in the Word of Allah, has grasped the Unbreakable Support. This assurance comes from Allah, the Hearer the Knower
Allah becomes the Guarding Friend of those who, after due reflection, have chosen to believe in His Word (12:108). He brings them out of darkness into Light (through the Qur'an). Those who deny the Divine System of Life, have devilish human "authorities" as patrons to lead them from Light into darkness. Such people have chosen Fire to be their eternal companion
Think of the one who adamantly argued with Abraham about his Lord because Allah had given him power (Nimrod Shaddad, the King of Babylon who used to proclaim divinity). Abraham said to him, "My Lord is He Who gives life and causes death." He answered, "I give life and cause death." (Being a tyrant king he could reverse or impose death penalty upon his subjects). Abraham said, "Allah makes the sun rise from the East; make it rise from the West." Thereupon the rejecter of the Truth remained dumbfounded. And Allah does not guide people who displace reality with falsehood
The similitude of this history is that someone passes by the ruins of a town and wonders if that town could ever come back to life again, and Allah causes him to die for a hundred years and then revives him. He thinks it was only a matter of a day or a part of it. He even finds his food, drink, and donkey standing beside him. Allah creates you in the wombs of your mothers, in bone and flesh. And when the matter became clear to him, he said, "I know now that Allah is Able to do all things
Abraham wanted to understand the Law of Revival of nations. Allah asked him if he believed that it were possible. Abraham said he believed but that he wanted a practical example to educate his heart and mind. Allah told him to take four birds and train them in a kind manner, and then to leave them far apart on each hilltop. And then call them; they will come in haste. (At one call of Abraham, those birds came flying back to him. This is how mankind can be brought to the Word of Allah with decent training, giving them a new life). Know that this Wisdom comes to you from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise
(In training their peoples, all Messengers of Allah advised them that) spending their wealth in the Cause of Allah is like sowing a seed that brings numerous shoots; each shoot with a hundred grains. This is how Allah's Law of Requital rewards men and women. Allah is Infinite, All-Knowing
Those who spend their wealth in the Cause of Allah, must remember that they have not obliged any persons. Therefore they do not afflict them with reminders of their generosity ((17:26), (30:38)). Their reward is with their Lord. (The society will return their generosity in this life as well). There will be no fear for them from without, nor grief will touch them from within
Kind words and respecting people's honor is better than charity coupled with injury. Allah, the Rich, the Clement, provides everyone without return or obligation
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Cancel not your charity by reminders of your generosity or by injuring the self-respect of the recipients; like those who spend their wealth for show-off. This kind of behavior contradicts the true belief in Allah and His Law of Recompense. Charity has been ordained to help individuals and not to hurt them (93:10), and Allah has promised you manifold reward. But, a seed won't grow on a dusty rock, upon which rain falls and washes it clean. Even Allah won't guide those who deny such simple realities
On the other hand, there are people who keep their wealth open for the society in sincere submission to Allah, not for show off, and not for putting anyone under obligation. They have joined hands with Allah in Purpose and have strengthened their "Self" (13:33). They have achieved self-actualization and made themselves truly worthy of immortality (20:76). Remember, that a "Self" that has not been developed by giving to community in wealth or labor, merely survives ((14:17), (43:77), (69:27)). Immortality is not a spontaneous gift from Allah; men and women are candidates for it (91:9-10). Such people are creating the Paradise of their own making that is ever-blooming; rain or shine. This glad tiding is relayed to you from Allah. Who can be a better Watcher and Guarantor of explaining the intricacies of your psyche and actions than the One Who created you
Would any of you wish that he had a beautiful, bountiful garden of dates and vineyards with rivulets flowing underneath it, but while age catches up on him and he has feeble offspring, a fiery tornado suddenly strikes and consumes it? This is how Allah wants you to reflect upon the Long Term. Your contribution to the society ensures you the Garden which neither a tornado, nor a hurricane dare take away from you
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Spend on others the good things you have honorably earned with hard work, whether it is from the product of industry or from the produce of the earth. Do not give away something that you won't like to receive except with closed eyes. Know that Allah, the Rich, Owner of Praise, provides you indiscriminately and without return
Satan, your selfish desire, scares you with poverty; that if you spent on others, you might become destitute. It teaches you stinginess to the extent of shame. Allah, the All-Embracing, All-Knowing promises you the protection of Forgiveness from Himself, and abundant Bounty. (And, In the Divine Order, the society would return to you more than you spend on it)
He bestows wisdom according to His Laws ((12:22), (28:14)). And whoever is granted wisdom has indeed been granted a great wealth. And only people of understanding remain mindful of what they learn. (Using their perceptual and conceptual faculties can help the humans attain wisdom)
Whatever you spend on others or whatever pledge you make, Allah knows it. Those who do wrong by withholding charity shall have none to help them
If you disclose your charities, it is well, but if you give in secret to the needy, it will be better for you. This kind of giving has the power of erasing the imprints of your ill deeds on your "Self". This Law has been decreed by Allah Who knows the interrelations of all your actions within and without your personality
Your responsibility (O Messenger!) is only to show them the Right Way (and not to make them walk it). He has established Rules for attaining Guidance.(4:88). (O People!) Whatever good you give benefits your own "Self" when you spend for the sake of Allah. Any charity you give will be repaid to you, without the least injustice
And give to the needy who are suffering in the Cause of Allah and cannot emigrate and those who are unable to go about the earth in search of livelihood. One, who is unaware of their condition, might think they are free from want, because they abstain from begging. But you can recognize them by the marks on their faces because they do not ask people insistently. Whatever good thing you spend on them, Allah is Aware of it
Those who spend their wealth on the needy, by night and by day, secretly or publicly, have their reward with their Sustainer. They shall have nothing to fear or regret
On the other hand are those who eat usury. In greed of money, they run around like someone who has been bitten by a snake. They claim that trade is like usury. This is not so. Trade is the return on labor that is permissible (53:39), while usury is the return on money. That is why Allah, in His Infinite Wisdom, has permitted trade and forbidden usury. One to whom the clear Admonition has come from his Sustainer, must abstain from taking usury forthwith. What he has taken in the past, he may keep and his judgment rests with Allah. (It is better for him to return the interest he has earned if possible, but the law shall not force him to do so). As for him who returns to usury, such are the rightful companions of the Fire to abide therein. (Satan=Serpent)
Allah blights usury and blesses charitable deeds with prosperity. Allah does not love those who defy His Laws and drag down the potential of the human society. (Mankind will eventually realize that the interest based economic system will have to be replaced with an equitable System. Allah's Laws of Economic Dynamics erase usury and nurture welfare)
Those who believe in Allah's Laws, do works beneficial to the society, strive to establish the Divine Order and the Equitable Economic System of Zakat, have their reward with their Lord. They will have nothing to fear and no reason to be despondent. (Zakat, where everyone spends on others more than he needs (2:219), and the government is responsible for setting up this System
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be mindful of the Divine Laws and give up what remains of your demand for usury, if you are really believers
And if you do it not, then know that you are at war with Allah and His Messenger. But, if you mend your ways, simply take back your capital sums. Inflict not injustice and you will not incur injustice
If a debtor is in difficult circumstances, let there be postponement to a time of ease. And if you give up the loan entirely as charity, it is better for you if you did but know
And be mindful of the Day when you will be returned to Allah and every "Self" will be paid what it has earned, and they will not be wronged
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When you transact a loan for any period, you shall write it down. An impartial scribe shall do the writing. No scribe shall decline to perform this duty, and write as Allah has taught him. The debtor, or in case he or she is incompetent, his representative shall dictate the document honestly and be mindful of his Lord, and diminish not the amount. There shall be two men among you to witness the transaction. If two men are not available, let there be one man and two women as witnesses. All witnesses should be such that their testimony is acceptable to all. The second woman will not be a witness in the court of law. She is there only to remind the first woman if she forgets. It is the obligation of the witnesses to testify when called upon to do so. Do not tire of writing the details, no matter how long, including the time of repayment. This is equitable in the Sight of Allah, assures better witnessing, and eliminates any doubts you may have. When it is actual merchandise that you transfer among yourselves from hand to hand, there is nothing wrong for you if you write it not, but have it witnessed. The scribe and the witnesses must be held harmless for their services. If you harm them, it would be wickedness on your part. If you follow Allah's Commands He will increase you in knowledge. These are the Injunctions of Allah Who is the Knower of all things; intentions, events and actions
If you are traveling and a scribe is not available, a collateral of some value may serve the purpose, or a bond shall be posted to guarantee repayment. If one is trusted in this manner, he shall return the collateral or the bond when due, and be mindful of Allah, his Lord. Do not withhold any testimony by concealing what you have witnessed. Anyone who withholds a testimony is noxious to his own sensitivity. Allah is Aware of all your actions
To Allah belong all things in the heavens and all things in the earth. Whether you reveal or conceal your intentions and actions, Allah will bring you to account for them. He has appointed Laws of forgiveness and retribution. Allah has Power over all things and events and He has appointed due measure for everything
The Messenger has full Conviction in what is revealed unto him from his Lord and so do the believers. Each one has full conviction in Allah, His angels, His Scriptures and His Messengers. They say, "We make no distinction between any of His Messengers" (since they were one in Purpose). And they say, "We hear and we obey, so grant us the protection of forgiveness, our Lord. We journey through life on Your Way
Allah tasks not and expects not from anyone more than his capacity. Any challenges that come your way, afford you a chance to expand your "Self". For the "Self" is what it earns and against it is only what it deserves. Pray, "Our Lord! Take us not to task if we forget or miss the mark! Our Lord! Do not place a burden on us as you did place on those before us. Our Lord! Impose not on us what we have not the strength to bear! Pardon us, absolve us, and bestow Grace on us, You are our Supreme Master, so help us prevail over those who reject the Truth
L.M. Allah Aleem, the Knower Whose Knowledge transcends Time and Space
Allah, there is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Subsistent Sustainer of the Universe proclaims that
He it is Who has sent down this Book to you (O Messenger) in Absolute Truth, confirming the authentic in what He has revealed before. He is the One who sent down the Torah and the Gospel
He has sent down guidance for mankind before, and now He has sent the Final Criterion between the right and the wrong. Those who reject the Revelations of Allah, theirs will be a strict retribution. Allah Almighty's Law of Requital carries all things and actions to their destination
Nothing in the Earth and in the Heaven is hidden from Allah
He it is Who shapes you in the wombs according to His Laws. There is no god but He. He is the Almighty, the Wise. (He uses his Power with wisdom and His Rule is the Rule of Law)
(The Book He has sent down bears an important Principle.) He it is Who has revealed to you (O Prophet) the Scripture. In it some verses are Literal, while some verses are Allegorical. The verses that pertain to Permanent Values have been presented literally. These verses, MUHKAMAT, are the Essence of the Divine Law. On the other hand, abstract phenomena, historical events, and the World of the Unseen are described in similes, metaphors and allegories for your understanding (MUTASHABIHAT). But those who are given to crookedness in their hearts pursue the allegories and try to give them literal meanings, thus creating dissension. None knows their final meaning (of such as the Essence of God, His Throne, His Book of Decree, the Eternity) but Allah. Those who are well founded in knowledge understand why the allegories have been used and they keep drawing lessons from them (74:31). They proclaim the belief that the entire Book is from their Lord. As the human knowledge evolves, many of the other allegories will unfold their literal meaning (41:53). But only the men and women of understanding will bear this fact in mind. (Each of the verses in the Qur'an is MUHKAM, Absolute Truth and you can understand which ones are to be taken literally and which ones are to be taken allegorically, by the context (11:1), (47:20). And each verse in the Book complements the other
They say, "Our Lord! Let not our hearts waver, now that you have guided us, and bestow upon us Mercy from Your Presence. You, only You are the Giver of Gifts
Our Lord! You will surely gather all mankind together on a Day about the advent of which there is no doubt. Allah never fails in His Promise
Those who reject Divine Guidance, neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against Allah's Law of Requital. They will be fuel for the Fire
Like Pharaoh's people and the ones before them, these people reject Our Revelations, and so Allah will seize them for their trailing behind in humanity. Allah's Law of Requital is strong in pursuing and grasping
(O Messenger) Say to the rejecters, "Soon you shall be overcome and then will be gathered together to Hell, a miserable bed to lie on
(Only recently at Badr), there was a Sign for you in the two armies that met in combat. One was fighting in the Cause of Allah, the other denying Him. With their own eyes the two armies saw each other as twice their number. (The believers in their motivation saw the manifold enemy just twice their own numbers, while the deniers saw the smaller opponents twice the size they actually were). But Allah strengthens people with His support according to His Laws. (Allah helps those who help themselves). This must be a lesson for people of vision for all times
Beautiful for mankind is love of the joys that come from women and children, and heaps of gold and silver, and branded horses, and cattle and well-tilled land. That is comfort of the life of the world. Allah! With Him is a more excellent abode. (Believers in the Divine Laws see this comfort as the means to a higher Goal --- Service --- Self-actualization --- Paradise)
(O Messenger) Say, "Shall I inform you of something better than these, with which those who walk aright will be rewarded by their Lord? Gardens with flowing streams beneath, where they will live forever with spouses of spotless character and the Blissful Approval of Allah. Allah is Seer of His servants
Those who say, "Our Lord! We have Conviction in You and Your Laws. Protect us from trailing behind in honor and save us from the punishment of Fire
They are proactively steadfast, truthful in word and action, ever submitting to the Commandments, keeping their wealth open for the society, and guarding themselves early against any forthcoming challenge
Allah Himself witnesses that there is no god but He and so do the Universal Physical Laws, and men and women of Science who research in the right direction (21:22). There is no god but He, the Almighty, the Wise
Indeed the System of Life approved by Allah is Al-Islam (Submission to His Will). The people of the Scripture differ for self-interest and envy, after the Knowledge has come to them. One who rejects Allah's Revelations will find that His Law of Requital is swift in reckoning
If they argue with you (O Messenger), tell them, "I have submitted to Allah; I and those who follow me." Say to the People of the Scripture, and to those who claim no scripture, "Would you submit?" If they submit, then they have been guided but if they turn away, then your duty is only to convey the Message. Allah is Seer of His servants
Those who reject the Message of Allah, and wrongfully kill the Prophets or their Mission by mixing Truth with falsehood, and kill the advocates of justice in the society, promise them grievous retribution
They are the people whose doings shall be nullified in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers at all
Have you noted those who were given guidance through the previous Scriptures? When they are invited to uphold this Book of Allah, to judge their disputes and apply it in their lives, a party among them declines and turns away
This is because they say that the Fire will not touch them but only for a few days. See, how that which they used to invent has deceived them in their own religion
How will they feel on the Day when We will gather them? The Day about the coming of which there is no doubt. And every person will be paid in full what he or she has earned. No injustice will be done to anyone
Say, "O Allah! Owner of all Dominion! You give power to nations according to Your Laws and You strip off power from nations according to Your Laws. You have established Rules for attaining honor and facing humiliation. All good emanates from Your Hand. You are all-Powerful and You have appointed due measure for all things in the Universe. Therefore Your Rule is the Rule of Law
We witness Your Laws in action throughout the Universe. You merge the night into the day and merge the day into the night. You bring forth the living from the dead and bring forth the dead from the living, and Your Laws sustain all creation indiscriminately
(Those who reject the Laws of such an Omnipotent Creator, will not support the Divine Ideology). Believers should not expect them to be their supporters in the establishment of the Divine System instead of their fellow believers. If a believer did that, he would have nothing to do with (the Cause of) Allah. Exempted are those who are forced to do this to avoid persecution. Allah warns you of His Law of Requital, and to Allah is the Journeying
Say, "Whether you hide your strategy or reveal it, Allah is fully Aware thereof." And He knows all things and events in the heavens and all things and events in the earth. Allah is all-Powerful and He has endowed everything with the potential to become what it is meant to be
On the Day of Reckoning every "Self" will confront all its doings, good and evil. Every "Self" would wish there might be a long distance between it and that evil. Allah cautions you in advance, for He is Compassionate to His servants
Say (O Messenger), "If you love Allah, follow me; Allah will love you and grant you the protection of forgiveness. He will save you from trailing behind in humanity and in the community of nations. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Say (O Messenger), "Obey Allah and the Messenger (as he conveys to you His Revelations and he is the Central Authority for establishing the Divine System on Earth). But if they turn away, Allah does not love the deniers of Truth since they choose to remain in darkness
(This is the Final Perfected Guidance for all humanity). But Allah has chosen people before to convey the Message. Adam, the first humans were chosen (to have free will apart from the animal kingdom). Then Noah, the family of Abraham and the family of Imran were chosen above other peoples of their times
In one lineage. Allah is the Hearer, Knower of all things and events. (Muhammad belongs to the same progeny of Abraham through Ishmael, and Jesus belongs to it through the family of Imran). Now is related to you the truth about Jesus son of Mary. History has made fiction of these two real great servants of Allah
The wife of Imran prayed, "My Lord! I have dedicated the baby in my belly to You entirely, (for the service of the temple). So accept from me. You are Hearer, Knower
When she was delivered she said, "My Lord! I am delivered of a female." Allah knew best what she delivered; the male is not the same as the female. (The male she had prayed for could have not been like the outstanding daughter she was granted). "I have named her Mary, I request Your protection for her and for her descendants from the rejected Satan." (Allah knew that this female would have a role, which no male could have, in breaking the shackles of asceticism. As a custom, nuns were allowed to marry only monks during those times)
And her Lord accepted her graciously. (Mary was dedicated to the Temple) and she grew up in beauty and purity, a gracious upbringing, under the guardianship of Zechariah. (He was a Prophet of Allah and a distant uncle of Mary). Whenever he entered the chamber of Mary, he found that she had food. Knowingly he asked, "O Mary! Where does this food come from?" (Mary's devotees were taking good care of her. Like all saints) she said, "It is from Allah. Allah provides according to His Laws and sometimes in unexpected ways
Seeing a lovely child grow before his eyes, Zechariah prayed to his Lord, "My Lord! Bless me by bestowing upon me a good child; You are the Hearer of prayer
While he was still praying in the chamber, angels announced to him, "Allah gives you the good news of a son, Yahya (John the Baptist) who would reiterate the Word of Allah, be outstanding among men, and a strict disciplinarian, and a Prophet among those who greatly contribute to humanity
Zechariah prayed to Allah, but then wondered, "My Lord! How could I have a son when old age has overtaken me already and my wife is barren?" He said, "So it will be, Allah does everything according to His Laws." The infertility in his wife was cured
Thankful, Zechariah asked, "My Lord! Give a message unto me." He said, "The Message unto you is that you shall not speak to people three days, except by signs. Remember your Lord much and keep striving in His Cause night and day." (Abstaining from speech would save the elderly couple from people's curiosity)
(Mary kept a spotless character as she grew up into a young lady). Angels told her, "Allah has chosen you, given you spotless character and given you distinction among the women of your times." (She guarded her chastity and built a strong character in very adverse circumstances. Many monks and devotees of temples used to see the nuns with evil intentions. She was the first revolutionary feminine voice against the exploitations of monasteries)
She was told by angels to gather courage, quit monasticism, submit to the Command of her Lord and join her family for normal life bowing to the design of life Allah has ordained for people
(O Messenger) We are revealing to you these events of history so that you may dispel conjecture and rumor. You were not there when the monks cast lots and contended with one another to take hold of (the young beautiful) Mary after Zechariah
Angels said, "O' Mary! Allah gives you the good news through a word from Him. His name would be Christ Jesus, son of Mary, held in honor in this world and among the ones close to Me in the Hereafter
Talking to people while very young and in ripe old age in good health
Mary exclaimed! "O My Lord, How shall I have a son when no man has touched me?" He said, "Just as Allah creates everyone according to His Laws (3:40). When Allah decrees a matter, it starts happening." (In the repressive society Mary had to keep her wedding confidential in the family)
And Allah will teach him the Scripture and the Wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel
And he will be a Messenger to the Children of Israel. He will say to them, "I come to you with Revelation from your Lord. If you follow me, I will raise you from dust to the heights of glory by the Command of Allah (7:176). The blind among you will begin to see the Truth. Those of you who are spotted with sin, I will heal them, and I shall grant real life to those who are just dragging on without purpose; all according to the Laws of Allah. I am here to establish justice and equity. I shall see to it how much you hoard in your houses and how much you spend on the community. My teachings are sufficient signs for you to believe
And I confirm the truth in the Torah before me and to make permissible to you some of what was forbidden. I have come with your Lord's Revelation; be mindful of His Commands and obey me
Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so obey Him. That is the Straight Path
This is what the angels had told Mary. When Jesus grew up He was commissioned to Prophethood. As he sensed their rejection, he called, "Who are my supporters towards Allah?" The disciples said, "We are Allah's supporters, we believe in Allah and bear witness that we are those who submit to Him
They said, "Our Lord! We believe in what You have revealed and we shall follow this Messenger, so count us among those who become living witnesses to the Truth
The opponents made some plans, but so did Allah. And Allah is the Virtuous of planners. (They schemed to arrest and crucify Jesus but Allah assured him)
O Jesus! I will cause you to die of natural causes and I will exalt you in honor in My Court and I will clear you of the slander of the disbelievers. I will cause those who truly follow you to dominate the rejecters until the Day of Resurrection. Eventually, all of you will return to Me, then I will judge among you about what you used to differ
Those who fail to understand and accept the Divine Laws operative in the Universe, My Law of Requital will cause them to suffer in this world and in the Hereafter. There is no help and there are no helpers for people contrary to these Laws
Those who practically believe in Divine Laws and help people, He pays their wages in full. Allah does not love those who displace reality with conjecture
(O Messenger) These are the Revelations that We convey to you, a wise Reminder
Verily, with Allah, the example or nature of Jesus is that of Adam (the other humans) who were initially created from dust and then evolved through different stages of life (22:5), (30:20)). He created mankind beginning from hydrated inorganic matter, then He said unto him, "Be! And he is." (The process of procreation of the humans goes on, "IS)
(O Messenger) This is the Truth from your Lord, so there is no room for you in this matter for argumentation
If anyone disputes with you regarding Jesus; after the correct knowledge has come to you, say, "Come! We will advise our families and followers and your families and followers, and ourselves and yourselves to maintain our respective beliefs and leave one another alone. Rejection of the Divine Truth deprives people of Allah's Grace." ('Bahl' = Leave alone)
Verily, this is the true account of Jesus. There is no god but Allah. This Proclamation comes from Allah, the Almighty Wise
If they turn away from the Truth, then Allah is Aware of the corruptors. (And His Law of Requital makes note of everything for due recompense)
Say, "O People of the Book! Let us come to a mutual agreement, that we shall worship and obey none but God. That neither shall we ascribe divinity to anyone beside Him, nor shall we take human beings as our lords beside God." And if they turn away, then say, "Bear witness that it is we who have surrendered ourselves unto Him
O People of the Book! Why will you argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until after him? Do you not use your intellect
You argued in matters of which you had knowledge (with Moses and about Jesus); why dispute in matters that you know nothing about? Indeed Allah knows and you don't
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was an upright man who had surrendered to Allah. He never ascribed divinity to anyone beside One True God
People most worthy of Abraham are those who followed him, and this Prophet and those who believe with him. And Allah is the Protecting Friend of the true believers
A party among the People of the Book wish to lead you astray. But, by doing so, they shall only lead themselves astray without knowing it
O People of the Book! Why do you deny the truth of God's Messages to which you yourselves bear witness? (Wasn't the Scripture revealed to you? And it foretells the advent of this Prophet)
O People of the Book! Why do you cloak the Truth with falsehood, and conceal the Truth that you are so well aware of
Some People of the Book say to one another, "Declare belief in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning, and reject belief in the evening so that the believers might waver and revert. Or let us declare belief in some part of the Revelation and deny the other to sound fair and cause confusion
And do not really believe in anyone who does not follow your own religion." Say (O Messenger), "The True Guidance is God's Guidance that has been revealed to this Prophet as it came to you before. Do you wish to contend about your Sustainer?" Say, "All Grace is in Allah's hand. He bestows His Grace of Revelation according to His Laws. Allah is all-Embracing, all-Knowing." And He has chosen a non-Israelite Prophet for this Grace
He selects for His Grace whom He Wills. Allah, the Possessor of infinite bounties knows the proper time, place and person for His Revelation
Among People of the Scripture are some who can be trusted with a treasure, and they will give it back to you. Others among them cannot be trusted with a single gold coin; they will not repay you unless you keep after them. This is because they say, "We do not have to be honest when dealing with the Gentiles." Thus, they attribute lies to Allah and they know it
Nay, the chosen of Allah is the one who fulfills his pledge and walks aright. Allah loves those who are mindful of His Commands
Those who trade away Allah's pledge and their oaths for worldly gains, will have no portion in the Hereafter. Allah shall neither speak to them nor look upon them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He make them grow their "Self". Development of the personality can only be accomplished in this life. They have incurred a torment of suffering
Among them are those who distort the Scripture with their tongues, that you may think that what they say is from the Scripture, when it is not from the Scripture. And they say, "It is from Allah", when it is not from Allah. They speak a lie concerning Allah, and they know it
Never would a human being, whom Allah has blessed with the Scripture, Wisdom and Prophethood, say to people, "Be servants of me instead of Allah." Instead he would say, "Become men of God by spreading the knowledge of the Scripture and the teachings you learn there from
Nor would he instruct you to take the angels and the Prophets for lords and patrons. Would he command you to disbelieve after you have surrendered to Allah
Allah made a Covenant with all the Prophets, and through them with their respective nations, that they would welcome each of the next Messengers in the process of Divine Revelations and support him. Allah said to the Prophets, "I give you the Scripture and Wisdom. Afterward there would come a Messenger who would confirm the Truth in your Scripture. You shall believe in him and help him." He said, "Do you agree and take this Covenant as binding on you?" They said, "We agree." He said, "Then bear witness, and I am with you among the witnesses." (This was the Covenant with their nations. The personal covenant made with each Messenger is mentioned in)
(The People of the Book must uphold this Covenant). Whoever after this shall turn away, has drifted away from the right path
Do they seek other than the DEEN of Allah, when all things in the heavens and the earth, willingly and unwillingly submit to Him, and to Him they will be returned. (All things in the Universe surrender to Allah, either by free will as the believers do, or through their innate nature such as animals, trees, stars, or the deniers in their physical as distinct from moral life etc)
Say, "We believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Prophets of the Israelite Tribes, and that which was given to Moses, Jesus and other Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction among any of them (See (2:253), (17:55)). Unto Him we have surrendered
Whoever seeks as religion other than Islam, it will not be accepted from him, and he will be a loser in the Hereafter. (This is because the religion, DEEN of the entire Universe is Islam i.e. submission to the will of God)
Even Allah will not guide those who go back to their old ways after experiencing the blessings of Faith, and after witnessing that the Messenger is true and after they have been given solid proofs. According to Allah's Laws those who choose conjecture instead of Realities of life, will not attain Guidance
The recompense of such people is the deprivation of the Grace of Allah and of the support of the angels (The physical Laws in the Universe), and of the support of the human society
They have chosen for themselves this deprivation in which they will abide without relief
But, If they repent and mend their ways, they will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful
But those who reject belief after attaining belief and go on adding to their defiance, their repentance will not be accepted (4:18). They are traveling in the wrong direction, so they cannot reach the destination
As for those who reject the Truth and die in that state, not the entire gold of the earth shall be accepted from them, if they could offer such ransom. They have incurred a painful doom upon themselves and there shall be no helpers for them
You will never attain exponential growth of your "Self" unless you keep spending on others what you love. Allah knows what you spend. Allah, the Knower of your "Self", reminds you that immortality and Paradise are for those who have attained self-actualization by giving
(Jews wonder how certain foods have been declared Permissible in the Qur'an, while they were forbidden for them!) All food was lawful to the Children of Israel, except what Jacob had forbidden for himself before the revelation of the Torah. And there were things that were forbidden to you as a punishment for your transgressions (4:160), (6:147). Say, "Produce the Torah and read it to show what, in the DEEN of Abraham, was contrary to the Qur'an concerning food. Read it unto us if you are truthful
Those who invent a falsehood after that, concerning Allah, will be wrong-doers
Say, "Allah speaks Truth. So follow the religion DEEN of Abraham, the upright that shunned all falsehood. He associated no partner with Allah
In fact, he erected the first Sanctuary appointed for humankind at Bakkah (later known as Makkah) a blessed Beacon of guidance for all people
Therein are clear signs, the place where Abraham once took stand and was bestowed with leadership of humanity (2:124-125). Anyone who enters it finds inner peace and security. Pilgrimage to this House is a duty owed to God by all those who are able to undertake it. People can realize the blessings of unity by rallying around this Center (22:28). As for those who deny the Truth, verily, Allah is Independent of all creation
Say, "O People of the Scripture! Why do you deny the Revelations of Allah knowing that Allah Himself is Witness to all your actions
Say, "O People of the Book! Why do you repel believers from the Path of God, seeking to make it crooked, even though you are witnesses to the Divine Guidance?" Allah is not unaware of what you do
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! If you obey a party of those who have received the Scripture before, they will make you disbelievers after your belief. (The very act of obeying others against the Messages of Allah is an indication that such believers have not understood the beauty in these Messages)
How could you choose the darkness of ignorance when Allah's verses are being conveyed to you and are being put into practice by the Messenger? Whoever holds fast to Allah, is already guided onto a Straight Path
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Walk aright being mindful of Allah's Laws as it is due to Him. Let this submission be your resolve all along your life till death
You shall hold fast, all of you together, to the Cable of Allah and be not divided among yourselves. The Cable of Allah is your conviction in the Qur'an which is an Unbreakable Support and gives you the noble Ideology (2:256). Remember Allah's Favor upon you how you were enemies and He made friendship in your hearts. You became brothers and sisters by His Grace. You were on the brink of the Pit of fire, and He saved you from it. Thus Allah makes clear His verses to you that you may be rightly guided
Among the world communities, let yours be the community who rises up and implements the Divine Value System. Advocate what the Book calls virtue, and forbid what the Book calls vice. Such are the people who are truly successful and will eventually prosper
Be not like those who separated and differed after the clear proofs of Truth had come to them. For such there is an awful doom since they cause divisions instead of unity
On the Day, the faces of those who convey the Word of Allah clearly, will be lit up by the Light, and the faces of those who becloud the Light with their sectarian beliefs, shall be portraits of gloom. This is because choosing a sect in DEEN is tantamount to disbelief. So taste a befitting chastisement for your disbelief
Those whose faces lit up shall dwell in the Grace of Allah, eternally
The Rules given in these Revelations determine the Rise and Fall of nations. This is the Rock Solid Truth. Allah has revealed these Rules because He Wills no injustice in the Worlds, and Wills not that the humans get caught off guard
Unto Allah belong all things in the Highs and all things in the Lows. You can see that His Laws govern the heavens and the earth. All things are moving and evolving towards what they are meant to be and all things go back to Allah as their Source
Since you have been empowered by the Qur'an, you are the best suited Community that has been raised up for the good of mankind. It is your duty to enjoin the Right and forbid the Wrong, since you accept the Final Word of God as the Criterion (3:4). The Qur'an clearly educates you on the Permanent Moral Value System and decrees authoritatively what the otherwise vague terms of 'right' and 'wrong', and 'good' and 'evil' might mean. Now if the People of the Scripture had attained this kind of belief, it would have been for their own good. But only few among them are believers, while most of them are drifting away from the Truth
If you truly become worthy of the title of "The Best Suited Community" your opponents would scarcely do a trifling harm and if they come to battle against you, they would flee quickly and find no help
Humiliated are they wherever they may be, unless they grasp a bond with God, and a bond with the people. They have incurred displeasure of God, and are committed to disgrace. This is because they have been rejecting the Divine Revelations and have been opposing the Messengers of God, even wrongfully killing some of them. All this, because they rebelled, and persisted in transgressing the bounds of what is right
Not all the People of the Scripture are alike. Among them are those who take a firm stand for the right cause, reflect upon the Revelations of Allah by night and fall in full submission
They believe in Allah as the One True God, and in the Last Day. They advocate what Allah has decreed as virtuous, and forbid what Allah has decreed as vice. They try to lead in acts of social benefit; such are the ones who augment the human potential
No benevolent actions of this kind shall go un-rewarded. Allah knows those who walk aright
The wealth and children of the deniers will not avail them against Allah. They will end up in Hellfire to abide therein. (The punishment to humans is built in, in their actions. Allah is not like human tyrants who punish out of anger or displeasure (3:182), (4:111), (20:15), (7:)
The likeness of what they spend in this life of the world is the likeness of a biting, frosty wind that destroys the harvest of a people who wronged their own "Self". Allah wronged them not, but they wronged themselves. (They spent their wealth on themselves although it was a trust given to them to share with fellow human beings)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not take as intimates others than your own folk. They will do all they can to harm you. They love to see you in distress. Many of them have already voiced their hatred and what they hide in their chests is far worse. We thus clarify Our Commands for you so that you use your intellect
You endear them though they endear you not. You believe in all the Scriptures. When they meet you they say, " We believe as you believe"; but as soon as they leave, they bite their fingers out of rage towards you. Say, "Die in your rage." Allah is fully Aware of what is hidden in your hearts
If something good happens to you, it grieves them but if a calamity befalls you, they rejoice at it. Remain steadfast and keep walking aright, and no amount of their plotting or cunning will harm you. Allah's Law Surrounds all that they do
(O Messenger) Recall, on the day of the Battle of Uhud, you left your household early to station the believers to their positions. Allah is Hearer, Knower of all that transpires
Two groups among you fell short of steadfastness, and your men suffered a temporary setback. And Allah was their Protecting Friend. In Allah believers put their trust
Recall the year before. At Badr, Allah granted you clear victory although you were few and under-equipped. (Your resolve and steadfastness had made the difference). Be mindful of Allah so that you are grateful in word and action
You told the believers, "Is it not enough that your Lord supports you with three thousand angels, sent down?" Fearlessness, determination and courage are the angels Allah sends down upon those who strive in the Cause of Allah (8:1)
Indeed if you steadfastly persevere and be mindful of Allah's Laws, and then the enemy attacks you suddenly, your Lord will support you with five thousand angels sweeping on
Allah gave the tiding allegorically only as a message of good cheer for you, and that your hearts might be at rest. Courage and steadfastness are Allah's angels. There is no victory contrary to the Laws of Allah, the Almighty Wise
He annihilated some disbelievers, or neutralized them and that they end up as the losers
It is not your concern (O Messenger), whether He forgives them or punishes them, for they are wrongdoers
Everything in the Universe and everything in the earth belongs to Allah. His Law of Requital deals with forgiveness and punishment in all fairness. The Forgiving, the Merciful Allah has designed His Laws
(The battle was about protection from the external threat. Your prime duty remains to preserve a benevolent society, to which usury is a big detriment). Usury is the return on money while trade is the return on labor (2:275). O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not eat up other people's money by way of usury that appears to you ever-increasing. But Allah's Law blights usury and flourishes acts of caring (2:276). Walk aright in the Way of Allah to attain true prosperity
And guard yourselves and the society against the Fire that has been prepared for the rejecters of the Divine Commandments
Follow the System of Allah that the Messenger has established. That is how you will achieve the development of your "Self". A benevolent society helps you to grow like a mother's womb nourishes the embryo
Move forward to the tranquil security that comes from your Lord when you follow His Guidance, and to the Paradise that transcends spatial boundaries, and it has been prepared for those who are mindful of Allah's Laws
The candidates to this Paradise keep their wealth open for mankind in favorable as well as in adverse circumstances. They divert and sublimate their anger and potentially virulent emotions to creative energy, and become a source of tranquility and comfort to people. They pardon people gracefully. Allah loves the benefactors of humanity
Such men and women quickly correct any wrong or indecency that has occurred from them, they remember Allah, and protect themselves from trailing behind in dignity. And who can absolve imperfections but Allah? They refrain from willfully persisting in error
Since they have worked sincerely, their reward is with their Lord in the form of magnificent Gardens with rivulets flowing underneath, wherein they will abide forever, a bountiful reward for sincere workers
Systems have passed away before you. (Man-made systems before you, and now before your eyes, are there to reflect upon). Do but travel in the land and see the outcome of nations that rejected the Divine Laws
This Qur'an is a declaration to the entire humankind, a Beacon of Guidance and Admonition for those who wish to journey through life in blissful honor and security
Do not ever lose heart, and grieve not, for you are bound to prevail if you are truly believers
If you suffer hardship, the enemy also suffers hardship. Such days of varying fortunes are governed by Universal Laws. Allah thus distinguishes the true believers, and blesses some of you with martyrdom. They have become witnesses to the power of Truth with their lives. Allah does not love those who displace courage with fear
The true believers emerge stronger from every challenge. On the other hand, the rejecters of Divine Laws wither away
Do you expect to enter Paradise without Allah distinguishing those among you who strive, and without distinguishing those who are steadfast
You used to long for death in the Cause of Allah before you faced it. Now you have faced it, right before your eyes. You understand that honorable life in this world belongs to those who have conquered the fear of death, and that death is the gateway to the Eternal life
Muhammad is but a Messenger. All Messengers before him have passed on. If he died or were slain, would you turn back on your heels? The System he has established is here to stay and to become a Beacon of Light for all humanity. If anyone turns away, he would not harm Allah. Allah will soon reward the appreciative. They will reap the fruit of the Benevolent System and then in the Hereafter
Allah's Law governs life and death. No one dies except by Allah's leave and at a term appointed per His Laws. Whoever seeks only the vanities of this world, We give him thereof, and whoever seeks the rewards of the Hereafter, We bless him thereof. The Qur'an shows you the Way to success in both worlds (24:55), (28:77). We will soon reward the appreciative
Many Prophets have fought in the Cause of Allah and with them a great many men of God, without wavering under adversity, nor did they hesitate nor became discouraged. Allah loves the steadfast
They only said, "Our Lord! Protect us from trailing behind, forgive our excesses, make our foothold sure, and give us victory over the rejecters of Truth
Allah gave them excellent reward in this world and in the Hereafter. Allah loves the benefactors of humanity
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! If you obey the (overt or covert) rejecters of the Divine System, they will make you turn back on your heels and you will become losers. (The Messenger will not be among you forever)
Remember, only Allah is your MAULA (Master) and He is the Best of helpers
Our Law removes fear and grief from the hearts of people who submit to the Divine Guidance alone. (2:38)) And causes fear in the hearts of those who are bent upon denying the Truth since they ascribe divine powers besides Allah. People and idols would have no authority against the Laws of Allah. Fire is their abode, a miserable resting place for the wrongdoers
Allah made good His promise to you when you routed them by His leave. But then you wavered, disputed among yourselves, and disobeyed after He had shown you the victory you wanted. You were winning the battle of Uhud, but then some of you were distracted by the spoils of the world, while others were concerned with the Hereafter. You disengaged from the enemy and were tested according to His Law. When you mended, Allah pardoned you. Allah is full of Grace for the true believers
You were climbing up the hill without looking around and the Messenger was calling you. You suffered according to Allah's Law of Requital. Grieve not about the loss and hardship you have suffered. Allah's Law has adequate provision to nullify the effects of your misgivings. Allah is Informed of all your actions
After the setback, He sent down upon you calm that pacified some of you. While another group was anxious with their own feelings and wrong assumptions about Allah due to ignorance. (They were hypocrites worried for their lives). They said, "Do we have any control?" Tell them, "All control belongs to Allah." You can control events only within the framework of His Laws. These hypocrites concealed within themselves what they did not reveal to you. They said, "If we had nothing to do with this battle and had stayed home we would not have been harmed." Say, "Had you stayed in your homes, those destined to be killed would have crawled themselves to the circumstance of death." Allah thus lets you test your real convictions. Allah is Aware of what is in the hearts
Those of you, who turned back on that day when the two armies clashed, it was their selfish desire which caused them to backslide. This happened because of their imperfections. Allah pardoned them (since their good outweighed their shortcomings). Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not be like disbelievers who grieve that if their brethren had stayed home with them, rather than going out traveling or defending, they wouldn't have died or been killed. Such attitude creates anguish in the hearts according to Allah's Laws. Fear of death takes away "life" out of life. Allah gives life and causes death and Allah is Seer of your behavior
If you are slain or die in the defense of the Divine System, you did not give your life in vain. You leave behind a legacy of steadfastness against adversity, and protection for the society. You become worthy of the Grace of Allah that is better than whatever human beings might amass
Whether you die or get slain, life goes on to its Destination; you will be gathered before Allah
It is a Mercy of Allah that you (O Messenger), are lenient and compassionate with people. If you were harsh and fierce of heart, they would have broken away from you. Pardon their imperfections, arrange their protection and consult with them about the conduct of affairs. Once you have taken a decision, put your trust in Allah. Allah loves those who do their best and then trust in Allah
When Allah helps you no one can overcome you. If He withdraws His help from you, who is there who can help you? If you ignore His Laws, His Laws forsake you. Believers put their trust in Allah (since He never changes His Laws)
No Prophet could ever act dishonestly. Anyone who acts dishonestly will have to account for it on the Day of Resurrection. That is when every "Self" shall receive the recompense and they will not be wronged
Is one who seeks the Approval of Allah the same as one who earned Allah's disapproval, and his destiny is Hell, the most miserable abode
They are at different levels with Allah. Allah is Seer of what they do. The ranks of all people are determined solely by their deeds, and your Lord is not unaware of anything they do
Allah verily has done a great favor to the believers. He has sent a Messenger from amongst them, who conveys and implements the Revelations of Allah. He shows them the way to grow in humanity, and teaches them the Book and Wisdom therein. Before the Messenger came to them, they were in flagrant error
Now that you have suffered a setback at Uhud, remember you inflicted twice as much on the enemy at Badr. You say, "How did this happen?" Say (O Messenger), "This is from your own selves." (3:152). Allah has appointed due measure for everything
If you suffered when the two armies clashed, it happened according to Allah's Laws. He made it a test for the believers to know their strength and weakness
And that He might distinguish the hypocrites from the believers. They were told, "Come fight in the Cause of Allah, or at least defend the city." They said, "If we knew that confrontation were forthcoming, we would have joined you." On that day they were closer to disbelief than belief. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts. Allah is best Aware of what they conceal
Those who sat back at home said that if their brothers who were fighting in the Cause of Allah, had listened to them they would not have been slain. Say (O Messenger), "Avert death from yourselves if you are truthful
Think not of those, who are slain in the Cause of Allah, as dead. Nay, they are alive! With their Lord they have provision
They are jubilant in the bounty that Allah has given them. And rejoicing for those believers whom they have left behind and who have not joined them yet in Bliss. They shall have nothing to fear or to regret
They rejoice because of the favor from Allah and the blessings - they have seen that Allah does not waste the wage of the believers
Those who respond to Allah and the Messenger even after being wounded or harmed in the battle, such of them have truly worked collective good and walked aright. Theirs is an outstanding reward. Responding to the call from Allah and His Messenger gives humans the real life
When people said to them, "A great army has assembled against you, so fear them." But the threat only increased them in their conviction. They said, "Allah suffices for us and He is the best Guardian
They marched forward with conviction and returned with Allah's favor and blessings, and no harm touched them in either case. They sought Allah's Approval, and Allah is of Infinite Bounty
It is only Satan, your selfish desire in different guises, that instills fear. Fear not them! You shall fear Me and violating My Commands, if you are indeed believers
Let not the conduct of those who rush to rejection, grieve you. They harm the Almighty Allah not the least bit. It is His Law that such people deprive themselves of any portion in the Hereafter. For them is an awful retribution
Those who trade denial at the cost of belief, harm Allah not the least. For them is a painful doom
Let not the rejecters imagine that the Law of Requital is unreal. We give reprieve to Our servants to rethink and mend their ways. Those who persist in actions that deplete the capacity of the society invite for themselves a humiliating chastisement
Allah will not leave the believers confounded. He will clearly distinguish the good from the bad, the right from the wrong, and the true believers from the hypocrites. It is not the Purpose of Allah to let you know the unseen that the hypocrites hide in their hearts. But Allah chooses His Messengers to receive knowledge of the unseen as He Wills. So believe in Allah and His messengers. If you believe and walk aright, yours will be an Immense Reward
Let not those, who withhold what Allah has given them from His bounties think that this hoarding is good for them. Nay, it is bad for them. Their hoarded possessions shall be their collar on the Day of Resurrection. Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth is the heritage of Allah. He bestows His provision to humanity for equitable distribution to all (55:10). And Allah is fully Informed of all your actions
Allah has heard the taunt of those who said, "Allah is poor and we are rich!" They say this since most of the first followers of the Messengers have been indigent (11:27). We will record everything they say, just as We recorded their killing of the Prophets unjustly. We shall say, "Now taste the punishment of burning
This, because of what you have earned with your own hands. Allah is never a tyrant over His servants
It is they (the Children of Israel) who say, "God has taken a promise from us that we shall not believe in any Messenger unless he brings us a burnt offering." (An animal sacrifice that a fire from the heaven shall consume, or that burning of the sacrifice shall be an ordinance). Say (O Prophet), " Messengers before me came to you with clear Revelations, and as you claim, with burnt offering. Why then did you slay them?" (I Thessalonians ii, 15 / Matthew xxiii)
If they reject you (O Messenger), remember they have rejected Messengers before you who came with clear signs, the Psalms and Divine Revelation giving Light
Every living being shall have to taste death. On the Resurrection Day you shall be paid in full what you have earned. Whoever is drawn away from the Fire, and gets admitted to Paradise, will have gained supreme triumph. Those who consider the life of the world as the end in itself should know that it is only a comfort of self-deception. The real success depends on striving for this world and for the Hereafter (2:201), (10:6)
O You who have attained belief! You will be tried in (establishing and defending the Divine System) in wealth, life, labor and resolve. You will be tested in your families, your people and in your character. You will hear much ridicule from those who were given the scripture before you, and from the idolaters. If you persevere and walk aright, this will be a confirmation of your determination
Allah took a Covenant from those who received the Scripture, "You shall convey the Message to people and never conceal it." But they flung it behind their backs, and traded it away for a little gain. What a miserable bargain
(And yet they exult in that!) Think not that those who boast about their works, and love to be praised for what they have not done -- Think not, they can escape chastisement. For them is an awful suffering
To Allah belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth. He has Power over all things and events
In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, there are signs for men and women of understanding
Men and women of understanding keep learning how Allah's Laws are operational in the Universe. While standing, sitting and on their sides, whatever state they are in, they observe and reflect upon the wonders of Allah's creation in the heavens and the earth, in the Highs and the Lows. They exclaim, "Our Lord! You did not create all this in vain, be You glorified! Save us from the retribution of the Fire." As the humans harness the Universal Laws, coupled with adopting the Divine Value System, they shall move away from hell and get closer to establishing a Paradise on earth
Reflecting on the Universe and upon their own role on the Planet, such people work for the betterment of humanity (13:17). They say, "Our Lord, whomever You commit to Hell, are the ones You have forsaken because they had forsaken You (59:19). For those who displace reflection with conjecture there are no helpers
Our Lord! We have heard a caller calling to Faith, "Believe you in your Lord!" (The caller being the Book of Nature to which these verses are drawing our attention). And we have believed. Our Lord! Grant us the protection of your forgiveness, save us from trailing behind in humanity, help us correct our inequities, and let us be among those who advanced their personality before they passed on
They also say, "Our Lord! Since we have believed in the Messengers and tried to translate this belief into action, grant us what You promised through them. Save us from humiliation on the Day when humanity will stand on its feet, in this world and in the Hereafter. Verily, You never break Your Promise
And their Lord has heard them, "I never let the effort of any worker, male or female, go vain. Men and women are from one another, so their Recompense shall be equal. Those who emigrated, or were driven out of their homes, and suffered harm in My Cause, and fought and were slain, I shall blot their inequities. The imprints of their misdeeds on their "Self" will be erased. I shall admit them into Gardens with rivulets flowing beneath." A Reward from Allah. And with Allah is the best Reward
(O Prophet) Let it not deceive you that the rejecters of the Truth seem to be able to do on earth as they please
It is but a brief enjoyment. Hell is their resting place; what a miserable bed to lie on! (They invested not in the Hereafter)
Those who walked aright as enjoined by their Lord, for them are scenic Gardens, with rivulets flowing beneath, a Gift of Welcome from their Lord. And the reward from Allah is the best for such people who have grown in humanity and eased the way for others
Among the People of the Book are some who believe in Allah, and in that which is revealed to you, and in what was revealed to them. They humble themselves before Allah. They trade away not Allah's Revelations for a little gain. Verily, their Reward is with their Lord and Allah is Swift in account
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be patient in adversity, outdo others in endurance, and remain united strengthening the bond of mutual brotherhood. Be mindful of your duty to Allah and be assured that your efforts will bear fruit
The noble goal of the development of human personality can be easier achieved in a benevolent society (9:111), (16:71), (43:32), (59:9). In this situation the individual and the society complement each other (14:34). At the outset, it is imperative for you, O Mankind, to know that all of you, men and women, have a common origin. Your Lord began the creation of life at the unicellular level. There was one life cell that divided into two, male and female (6:99). Evolution took place, as has been alluded to in this Book (16:8), (20:50), (21:30), (22:45), (30:20), (31:28), (51:49). Eventually, numerous men and women came into existence on the earth. Since all of you have this common origin, you must consider all mankind as one community (10:19), (57:25). Your first step in that direction is to strengthen your family relations. Be careful of your duty to Allah in Whose Name you expect rights from one another. Allah ever Watches over you
Orphans in the community are like your family members (33:5). Be vigilant in guarding their rights (4:127). Protect their property honestly, and give it to them when they have come of age. Exchange not their valuables with your worthless items, nor consume their property by combining it with yours; doing such would be a grave offense
If you fear that the society shall not be able to do justice with orphans, (as may happen in times of war and political turbulence, the government shall announce a state of Emergency). In order to accommodate widows and orphans, men of sound finances and character shall be encouraged to marry these widows; two, three, and four (4:127). If you fear that you shall not be able to deal justly, then you must not take additional wives, and may continue with what you already have (4:129). This will prevent injustice and financial hardship. (Second marriage during peace time is a FRANK violation of the Qur'an)
Upon marriage, give women their marital gifts, a generous portion of your property, unless they forgo it voluntarily. In that case you are welcome to accept it as rightfully yours
Do not let the immature orphans manage their property that Allah has entrusted with you as guardians, until they are able to make sound financial decisions. Feed and clothe them decently, take care of all their needs and interact with them kindly
Train and educate the orphans well. When they reach the age of marriage, and attain sound judgment, release their property to them. The marriageable age shall mean attainment of physical and mental maturity when one can legally make a solemn contract (4:21). Do not consume their property or let it be wasted. Nor hastily spend it fearing that they will come of age. If the guardian is well off, let him claim no compensation for the management of the property. But, if he is poor he may have a just and reasonable amount. When you are releasing the property to the orphans be sure to take witnesses. Remember that Allah is Competent in taking account
Men get a share of what the parents and near relatives leave behind. Women get a share of what the parents and near relatives leave behind. Women have the right to own property (4:12). Whether the inheritance is small or large, these shares have been ordained as a duty
If at the time of distribution of the inheritance, relatives, orphans, and the needy are present, give them from it and treat them kindly
The distribution of inheritance must be done responsibly and according to Law. Treat others, as you would like to be treated. You will never want injustice to be done to your children, if you leave them behind. In matters such as these, speak clearly and straight to the point
Those, who unjustly consume the wealth of orphans, are filling their bellies with fire and will be exposed to burning Flame
Preparing a will is a duty ordained (2:180). Allah decrees a will for the benefit of your children. (Since the sons have the responsibility to take care of the family, and daughters will be cared for by their husbands, or if unmarried, by other males in the family), sons get twice the share of daughters. If two, or more, daughters are the only inheritors, they get two-thirds. If only one daughter is left, she gets one-half. If the deceased has left any children, then parents get one-sixth each. If there are no children, and parents are the only heirs, the mother gets a third and the father gets two-thirds, since the male has the fiscal responsibility of the family. If the deceased has left brothers or sisters, the mother gets one-sixth and the father gets one third. Remember, this distribution shall take place after fulfilling the will if the deceased has left one, and after paying off all debts. As for your parents and your children, you know not which of them is more deserving of benefit from you. Such is the Ordinance from Allah. Verily, Allah is Omniscient, Wise
Additionally: If a couple had no children, the husband gets half of what the wife leaves behind. If they had children, the husband gets one-fourth. If they had no children, then the wives get one-fourth of what the husband leaves behind. If they had children then the wife gets one-eighth. If a man or a woman, whose inheritance is in question, was a loner, in the sense of leaving behind no ascendants or descendants, but leaves behind a sister and a brother, each of them gets one-sixth of the inheritance. If there are more than two siblings, they equally share one-third of the inheritance. For a deceased who has no living parents, see (4:176), (4:177) The above applies after fully satisfying the will, and after paying of all debts, so that no one's rights are infringed upon. This is the Will decreed by Allah who is All-Knowing, Clement
Protection of life, honor and property is the springboard of a vibrant social order. It is the pre-requisite for freedom, equality and character building to the point of self-actualization (4:24), (5:32), (13:24), (17:32), (38:52), (69:21), (89:27). Allah has drawn Boundaries of Law to help you safeguard this crucial pre-requisite. Those who refrain from trespassing these Boundaries are the ones who have obeyed the Divine System established by the Messenger. They shall be admitted to the everlasting Promised Garden that has all the aesthetic elegance that the human mind could ever imagine. That is the Supreme Success
Conversely, those who disobey Allah and the Messenger by going against the Divine System established by the Messenger, trespass the Boundaries of the Divine Law and they will be admitted into an everlasting Fire of humiliation and regret
Protection of honor and chastity for men and women, both, is the cornerstone of a virtuous society (17:32), (4:24). If any woman or a group of women spread sexual immorality or lewdness in the society, it is required that the appropriate court takes four honorable and reliable witnesses. If their testimony corroborates with other evidence (12:26), confine them to their houses, since immorality is as contagious as good conduct. This confinement would be for an indefinite period, unless such women seek the Way of Allah, such as repentance and amendment, or the singles among them get honorably married
If a couple spreads such immorality or lewdness in the society, both of them shall be punished by the appropriate court of law. If they repent and amend, leave them alone. Allah is the Acceptor of repentance, Merciful
Allah graciously accepts the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance, and then return quickly to the right conduct. Allah turns to them in Mercy. He is the Knower, the Wise
The forgiveness is not for those who commit transgressions until death comes to one of them and he says, " Behold, I repent now." (They have no time to make mends). Nor is the forgiveness for those who die as deniers of the Truth. We have prepared an awful suffering for them
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! It is not lawful for you to force women into marrying or holding on to them in marriage against their will. Pressuring women to remain in wedlock by threatening to take away the marital gift is forbidden. A wife could forfeit the right to the marital gift only if she has indulged in clear lewdness. You shall treat your wives nicely. Even if you dislike them, it may happen that Allah has placed much good in what you have failed to realize
If you wish to marry another wife in place of your present wife, and you have given her a great deal, you shall not take back anything. Would you take it back by way of slander, a transgression that shall sink your "Self" down
And how could you take the marital gift back from her after you have lived intimately with each other and after she has taken from you a very Solemn Pledge of the marital contract
Marry not women whom your fathers have ever married, except what has already happened in the Age of Ignorance. Doing such was a shameful and abominable custom indeed
The following women are prohibited for you in marriage: Your mothers, daughters, sisters, father's sisters, mother's sisters, brother's daughters, sister's daughters, foster-mothers who have ever nursed you, foster-sisters, your wives' mothers, your step-daughters unless you have divorced their mother without being intimate with her. Also forbidden are women who have ever been the wives of your sons. You are not allowed to keep two sisters in wedlock at one time except what has already happened in the past. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Also forbidden to you are women who are already married, except those women who have sought asylum with you against their disbelieving husbands at war with you (60:10). This is Allah's Ordinance binding upon you. All other categories are permitted for you in marriage, with mutual consent, as confirmed by giving her a generous marital gift or dowry. You shall seek them in honest wedlock and let marriage be a fortress of chastity for the husband and wife. You shall maintain morality and go not near adultery (17:32). You like to marry women for a better quality of life, so give them their portions as a duty. And there is nothing wrong in adjusting the sum with mutual agreement after the duty has been done. These Laws are given to you by Allah, the Knower, the Wise
As the Qur'an is being revealed to you (O Messenger), the emancipation of the slaves, male and female, is steadily taking place). A man among you who cannot find a free believing woman willing to marry him, should have no hesitation in asking the hand of a believing maiden from her guardian. Allah knows your beliefs and reiterates that all human beings are equal in the Sight of Allah (17:70). Pay them a generous marital gift in kindness. They shall maintain moral behavior, by not committing adultery, or having secret relations. Since their upbringing has been deficient in the environment of slavery, their punishment will be half that of the free women, if they commit indecency after marriage. The permission to marry a bonded woman is for him who fears to commit sin. The better recourse is freeing her first from bondage. Men and women must be patient and exercise self-control while waiting to get married. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah would explain to you and guide you by the examples of those who were before you, and turn to you (in Mercy). And Allah is Knower, Wise
Allah turns to you in kindness, while those who follow their desires want that you drift far away from the right path. (They would rather have no laws to constrain their desires)
Allah wishes to lighten your burden with His Guidance. The human being is created weak, having the tendency to fall victim to his own selfish desire (7:1)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Consume not one another's wealth wrongfully, not even in mutually agreed trade. Be just in your trade and cause not people to suffer losses. Do not destroy one another, and thus do not destroy your "Self". Allah is Merciful to you so you must be merciful to others." ("Illa" here means 'not even' and not 'except'). (2:)
After such clear Guidance, people and nations that indulge in transgressions and injustice, shall form a society that shall easily burn itself according to Our Law of Requital. And the eternal Fire is not far off either
If you refrain from the great transgressions against humanity that are prohibited in the Qur'an i.e. violation of human rights, We have room in Our Laws to remove the slight inequities in your society, and admit you through the gate of honor in this world and the Hereafter
Covet not the qualities bestowed upon others by Allah. Men shall earn what they do and women shall earn what they do. Men excel in some areas and women excel in some areas. Envy not one another but seek Allah's bounty to the best of your abilities. Allah is ever Knower of all things
We have ordained the writing of wills, and for each of you are the designated shares in the property left by the parents and the relatives (4:11) (4:12) (4:33) (4:176). As for those to whom you have solemnly pledged, give them in your life. Allah is Witness over all things and events
Men are the protectors and maintainers of women. They shall take full care of women with what they spend of their wealth. Allah has made men to excel in some areas and women to excel in some areas. Men must see to it that women are provided for, and that they are able to stand on their feet in the society. So, righteous women are obedient to Allah's Ordinances and guard their moral values even in privacy, the Values that Allah Commands to be guarded. If you experience rebellion from women, and they stand up against you, apprise them of possible consequences. Next, leave them in their resting places apart from you. And keep admonishing them with examples that they stop rebelling. If they pay heed to you, seek not a way against them. Allah is Most High, Great
(Families and communities must adopt a proactive approach regarding a husband and a wife in discord). If you fear a breach between a husband and wife, appoint two arbiters, one from his family and one from her family. If they decide to reconcile, Allah will help them get together. Verily, Allah is Knower, Aware. (2:228-234), (4:3), (4:19), (4:35), (4:128), (33:49), (
Obey Allah and associate no partner with Him. Treat kindly your parents, relatives, The orphans, And those who have been left alone in the society. Take care of the needy, The disabled, Those whose hard earned income is insufficient to meet their needs, And those whose businesses have stalled, And those who have lost their jobs. You shall treat kindly your related neighbors, And unrelated neighbors, Companions by your side in public gatherings, Or public transportation. Be generous to the needy wayfarer, the homeless son of the street, and the one who reaches you in a destitute condition. Be nice to people who work under your care. Allah does not love the proud and boastful
Those who are stingy and advise others to be stingy, and hide what Allah has given them of His Bounty, for such ungrateful disbelievers We have prepared a humiliating punishment
They give money to charity only to show off, and do not believe in Allah and the Last Day. Such people have taken Satan, their selfish desire, as their intimate companion. What a terrible companion indeed
What have they to fear if they believe in Allah and the Last Day and spend of what Allah has given them? Allah is ever Aware of them
Allah wrongs not anyone even the weight of an atom; and He multiplies a good deed, and from His Own Presence grants a great reward
How will it be with them when (on the Resurrection Day) We bring of every community a witness, their Prophet (10:47), and We bring you (O Messenger), a witness against these, of your community
On that Day, those who denied the Truth and paid no heed to the Messenger will wish that they were level with the ground. But not a single utterance or event could they hide from Allah
(Those who attain belief shall promptly establish the Divine System in the community, and the Masjid would assume the role of the community center. The believers will assemble in the Masjid for prayer, and to address social welfare and community action). O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Join not the Salat congregation if your mind is beclouded for any reason, until you understand what you utter, else you might say senseless words that disturb the assembly. Physical cleanliness contributes to moral purity. So, take a bath after ceremonial impurity. If you are traveling, or are ill, or coming from the privy, and cannot find water, take a little clean sand or earth and lightly rub your faces and hands, before entering the Masjid. (This will help you prepare psychologically for the assembly (5:6)). Allah pardons and absolves your imperfections
Have you noted those who were given a portion of the Scripture but they purchased error for petty gains. (They fell for man-made books). They desire that you do the same and thus stray from the Right Path
Allah knows your enemies. (He shows you the Way to protect and help yourselves). As such, Allah is Sufficient as a Protecting Friend and Allah is Sufficient as a Helper
Some of those who are Jews, distort words to give a different meaning. They say, "We hear and disobey," and "Your words are falling on deaf ears," and "Be our shepherd," and they twist their tongues to mock the DEEN. It would have been better and more upright for them to say, "We hear and obey," and "We hear you," and "Please watch over us and guide us." Instead, they have incurred deprivation from the Grace of Allah due to their denial of the Truth. Few of them will embrace belief
O You unto whom the Scripture was given! Reflect and believe in what We have revealed, that confirms the truth that you already possess, lest We efface your hopes and bring them to an end. Just as We rejected those people who broke the Sabbath. (You will lose your identity by getting scattered in the earth). Allah's Command is always done
Allah is the Sovereign in the Universe. Whoever ascribes partners to Allah, or divinity to any of His creation, has indeed invented a tremendous sin. Allah will forgive any transgression but SHIRK. Included in this category are those who worship their own desire (45:23), those who indulge in human worship and in sectarianism (30:31), (42:21), and those who follow man-made books in lieu of the Book of Allah (6:122), (6:137), and those who claim or believe in Revelation after the Qur'an, in any form, including claims of attaining Divine knowledge through mystical experience (6:62), (7:173), (7:191). And those who uphold Trinity (4:171), (5:72-73.) And those who claim that God has a son, and those who follow their religious leaders (9:31) Such people fall from the high station of humanity. Worshiping any entity other than Allah, sinks the human "Self" down to subhuman levels (22:31). But most of those who claim belief (and call themselves Muslims), indulge in SHIRK
Have you seen those who claim that they have purified their souls? Purification of "Self" i.e. development of the personality can only be achieved according to the Laws of Allah, by service to humanity and not through rituals or mysticism (2:177), (13:17). In the Court of Allah, men and women shall find full recompense for their doings without the least injustice
See, how the claimants to spiritual purity deceive people by inventing lies against Allah. That is sufficient to flagrantly drag them down in humanity
Are you not aware of those who after receiving their share of the Book (Qur'an) believe in JIBT (baseless mysteries, magic, future-telling, astrology, clairvoyance, evil eye, good and bad omens, amulets, dreams and prophecies, palm-reading, soothsaying, superstitions of all kind, jinn-possession of people, exorcism, blowing verses and senseless words on people or in food and drink, counting names on rosaries) and they believe in TAGHOOT (the evil humans who try to play God with their tyranny or with their religious exploitation as priests and monks, mullahs and sufis of any religion)? And then they claim that they, the deniers (of the Qur'an) are better guided than the believers in the Book
It is they whom Allah has rejected, and there is no one to help whom Allah rejects
Do the people who make claims of divination and clairvoyance have a share in the Divine Kingdom? But if they did, they won't give humanity the speck on a date-stone. (4)
Or do they envy other people whom Allah has given of His Bounty? But, Allah does not favor any nation arbitrarily. He is the Lord of all humanity (114:1). We gave the Children of Abraham the Scripture, the Law and Wisdom, and We gave them a great kingdom
Some of the Children of Abraham have attained belief in the Prophet while others turn away from him. And enough is Hell for a burning fire
Those who are rejecting Our Revelations and opposing the establishment of the Divine System, will soon burn in the agony of defeat. If they come with renewed preparation they will taste further chastisement. Allah is Almighty, Wise
Those who attain belief and translate their belief into action by helping people thus creating balance in the society, We shall soon admit them to the Gardens underneath which rivers flow. They will dwell therein forever. For them are virtuous companions, and We shall make them enter the pleasing shadows of Our Grace
Allah Commands you to entrust your offices to those who are capable, competent and sincere. They shall rule and judge equitably. Give your trusts to whom they belong. The Enlightenment from Allah is a blessing for you. He is Hearer, Seer of all that transpires in the Universe and in your society
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, the Central Authority of the Divine System, and those whom the System has appointed as office-bearers. If you have a dispute concerning any matter, refer it to the Central Authority. If you truly believe in Allah and the Last Day, this is the best approach for you, and more seemly in the end
Have you thought of those who claim that they believe in what has been revealed to you (O Prophet), as well as in what was revealed before you? Yet, they resort to TAGHOOT (priests and monks of any religion) for judgment in their differences. They had been commanded to reject them but their rebellious desire misleads them far astray
When they are told, "Come to what Allah has revealed and to the Messenger", you see the hypocrites shunning him completely
They feel ashamed when wrong decisions and judgments hurt them for their own doings. Then they come to you (O Messenger), swearing that they went to others with good and noble intentions
Allah knows what is in their hearts. Ignore their attitude, enlighten them and speak to them in plain terms with full understanding of their viewpoints
We have sent no Messenger but that he should be obeyed by Allah's leave. They are not sent with hypotheses, but to show people how they can establish an equitable society, in which people flourish individually and collectively. They attain personal development and become worthy of immortal life in the Paradise (89:29). If anyone hurts his or her "Self" by transgressing His Laws, or wrongs a member of the community, he or she must come to the Messenger, the Central Authority of the System, to make amends. Sitting back at home and praying in hiding won't help (9:102-105), (20:82), (5:10). The Messenger will then, decide the matter seeing if there is room for forgiveness in the Divine Law. Such is the Moral Order that the Messenger has inculcated in the hearts and in the society where one becomes the watcher over one's own "Self" (8:74-75), (9:100), (48:29), (59:8-9). Indeed, there is plenty of room for making amends, and for mercy in the Divine System. Allah is Acceptor of repentance, Merciful
By your Lord, They do not really believe unless they make you (O Prophet) a judge in all their disagreements. And then find no hesitation in their hearts in accepting your judgment, and submit with full submission
And if We had decreed for them, "Lay down your lives," or "Forsake your homelands," a few of them would do it. Although, if they did as was admonished, it would be for their own good, and a cause for strengthening themselves
And then, We would give them from Our Presence an immense reward
And would direct them straight to the Path of Paradise
Whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, belongs with those blessed by Allah: the Prophets, the first supporters of the Truth, the martyrs, and those who helped humanity. Ah! How beautiful is their company
Such is the Bounty from Allah. And sufficient it is that Allah knows all
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be fully prepared against danger. You shall remain alert to meet aggression. Take your precautions then mobilize in groups or all together as determined by your commander
Among you there is he who would rather lag behind. If a setback occurs he would say, "Thank God! I was not present among them
But if you attain the blessing of victory from Allah, he says, as if the love between you and him was beyond question, "Oh! I wish I had been with them and could be a part of such a great victory
Let them fight in Allah's Cause, all those who sell the life of this world for the other. Whoever fights in Allah's Cause, be he slain or be he victorious, We shall soon give him an immense Reward
What has happened to you that you fight not in the Cause of Allah? Defenseless men, women, and children are being oppressed and crying, "Our Lord! Rescue us from this town whose people are oppressors, and raise for us protectors and helpers." It is not the Law of Allah that He comes and fights in person, or sends His armies or angels physically
Believers fight in the Cause of Allah, that is, for the removal of tyranny and in self-defense (benign aggression). And the rejecters of the Truth fight in tyranny and for their selfish desire to oppress people (malignant aggression). So fight against those friends of Satan. Verily, Satan's plan is feeble because the selfish desire fails before the Divine Law of Requital
Have you seen those who have been told, "Curb your hands, and establish the Divine System and set up the just Economic Order?" But as soon as the Command came to fight, some of them feared men as they should have feared Allah, or even more. They say, "Our Lord! Why have You ordained fighting for us? If only You had granted us a little more delay!" Say, "Brief is the enjoyment of this world, whereas the life to come is the best for those who walk aright. None of you shall be wronged a hair's breadth
Wherever you may be, death will find you, even if you live in fortified castles. When something good happens to them, they say, "It is from Allah." And when affliction befalls them they say to each other, "This is from you O fellow-man!" Tell them, "All things happen according to Allah's Laws." What is amiss with these people, they understand not a thing
Allah never creates evil. Things and events have good and evil aspects. When you act according to the Law of Allah the results are pleasant, and when you act against the Law the results are unpleasant (42:30). So whatever good happens to you is from Allah, and whatever evil happens to you is from yourself. We have sent you as a Messenger to mankind and Allah is Sufficient as Witness
Whoever obeys the Messenger, automatically obeys Allah since he rules by the Book of Allah (5:44). But if they turn away, We have not sent you as a watcher over them
They express verbal allegiance to the System, "It is Obedience!" But when they go away from you a party of them spends the night in planning against the Belief System you preach. They discuss ways to corrupt the Message. Allah records what they plan by night. Ignore them, go ahead with your Program and trust in Allah (6:107). Allah is Sufficient as Guardian
Will they not then, try to understand this Qur'an? If it were from other than Allah they would surely have found in it much contradiction
The Book of Allah provides easy and practical social guidance. There are people who spread rumors pertaining to safety or fear. Those who hear rumors shall refer the matter concerning public safety and threat, to the Messenger and the government officials. Those who are engaged in obtaining intelligence will indeed know what to do with it. Had it not been for the Bounty of Allah and His Mercy, most of you would still be following the Satanic elements
O Messenger! Fight in the Cause of Allah. You are responsible only for your own actions. While conveying the Revelation is your prime duty, you also teach the believers wisdom, knowledge and self-development by serving humanity (2:151). Therefore, inspire the believers to overcome all fear of death. Allah may well restrain the fury of the unbelievers who are bent upon destroying the System. Allah is Strongest in Might, Strict in Restraining
Whoever rallies to a cause that benefits people shall have a share in its blessings, and whoever rallies to a cause that creates injustice, shall be answerable for his part in it. Allah is Watcher over everything
Good deeds that contribute to the well being of the society begin with kindness (2:177). When someone greets you, respond with similar or more courteous greetings. Allah reckons all things. Anyone who contributes towards peace and betterment of life, do as much or better for him
Allah! There is no god but He. He will summon all of you on the Day of Resurrection about the advent of which there is no doubt. Who can tell you a more reliable HADITH (saying) than Allah
How could you be of two minds about the hypocrites, seeing that Allah has disowned them because of their own guilt? Can you guide anyone against Allah's Law of Guidance? You can never find a way of enlightenment for those who violate the Divine Laws of Guidance: (Open mind, freedom from prejudice, arrogance, and blind following; use of the faculties of perception and reasoning (7:173), (7:179), (17:36), (27:80-81), (30:22), (37:113), (4)
These hypocrites wish that you reject Belief and become like them. Do not consider them friends unless they practically demonstrate that they have changed, and move along with you in the Way of Allah. But if they persist in their behavior of being with you in word, and against you in action, they are more dangerous than your open enemies. Then subdue them regardless of which group they belong to, and choose no friend or helper from among them
Fight not the hypocrites who join a people with whom you have signed a peace treaty. And fight not those who come to you wishing not to fight you or their believing relatives. Had Allah willed they could have fought against you. Therefore, if they leave you alone, and offer you peace, Allah has opened no way for you but the way of peace. Your prime duty remains the establishment and defense of the Divine Order in which there is no room for revenge
You will find others who desire peace for their people and make peace with you. But at the slightest opportune moment they come to fight against you. If they neither leave you alone, nor offer peace, nor hold their hands, subdue them regardless of which group they belong to. In their case, Allah has given you a clear authority to fight
It is not conceivable that a believer will slay another believer unless it be a mistake. If one kills a believer by mistake, there is the duty of freeing a believing person from bondage; may it be slavery, extreme poverty, crushing debt or oppression. And pay compensation to the victim's family unless they forgo it by way of charity. If case the victim was a believer, and belonged to a tribe who are at war with you, free a believing person from bondage. If the victim was a believer, and belonged to a tribe with whom you have a peace treaty, you should pay the compensation to his family in addition to freeing a believing person from bondage. For those who find this settlement beyond their means, two consecutive months of Abstinence, as in the month of Ramadan, are ordained by way of repentance from Allah. And Allah is the Knower, the Wise
Whoever slays a believer intentionally, his or her maximum punishment, considering the circumstances, is up to capital punishment (2:178), (5:32-33). His requital shall be Hell, therein to abide, and Allah will condemn him, and reject him and prepare for him awesome suffering. (Unjust killing of any human being, regardless of color, creed, religion or sex is a grievous offense that is tantamount to slaying the entire humankind (5:32). Hence, the offender shall be punished accordingly. Intentional murder of any human being is also a crime against the State, therefore, the State would be responsible for tracing, arresting and trying the offender in a court of law. QISAS = the duty of tracing an offender for just recompense
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When you go forth in the Cause of Allah (to meet the armed challenge), use your discernment. And do not say, out of a desire for the fleeting gains of this worldly life, to anyone who offers you the greeting of peace, "You are not a believer." For with Allah are abundant gains. Remember, once you were ignorant, and you were weak like the disbelievers are now. Allah has been Gracious to you, so be gracious to His servants (9:128), (90:17). Use your discernment. Allah is always Aware of what you do
Those believers who sit back, except for a disability, are not equal in ranks to those who strive with their wealth and person in the Cause of Allah. Allah has granted a grade higher to those who strive with their wealth and person than that granted those who remain passive. Although Allah has promised the ultimate good to all believers, yet Allah has exalted with immense reward those who strive, above the ones who sit back at home
The higher ranks come from Him, as well as forgiveness and Grace. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful
As for those who wrong their own "Self" by not striving until the angels (the Universal Laws of death) approach them, they are asked, "What kept you occupied?" They say, "We were weak and oppressed in the land." The angels say, " Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you to migrate?" As for such, their habitation will be Hell, a miserable destination
Exempted are the feeble, whether men or women, and children who are unable to devise a plan and to find a way out
There is room in Allah's Law for absolving their inabilities. Allah is indeed the Absolver of imperfections, Forgiver
Anyone who emigrates in the Cause of Allah, will find that Allah has placed refuge and abundance in the earth. Whoever forsakes his home, as 'An immigrant to Allah and His Messenger', and death overtakes him, his reward is then incumbent upon Allah. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful
When you are traveling through the earth, there is no blame on you if you shorten the congregations of prayers, if you fear that the rejecters of the Truth may attack you. Verily, the rejecters are an open enemy to you
O Messenger! When you are with them and establish the congregations of prayers for them, let some of you stand guard, and let them hold their weapons standing with you as you prostrate. Then let the other group who has not prayed take their turn praying with you, while the others stand guard and hold their weapons. The disbelievers wish to see you neglect your weapons and equipment, and ambush you once and for all. You commit no error, if you are hampered by rain or injury, by putting down your weapons. But always be fully prepared against danger. Verily, Allah has readied a humiliating suffering for those who deny the Truth
Be mindful of Allah's Commands whatever state you are in, standing, sitting or lying down. And when you are once again secure, establish the congregations of Salat. Joining the congregations of Salat at the times appointed by the Central Authority is a duty unto believers
Do not show weakness in pursuing the enemy. If you suffer hardship they too suffer hardship, but you have hope to receive Allah's reward that they cannot rightfully hope. Allah is the Knower, the Wise
We have sent down the Book to you (O Prophet) in Absolute Truth. Rule and judge among people according to what Allah has shown you (in this Revelation). You shall not advocate for those who are known to have violated their pledges and trusts and betrayed the works assigned to them
Pray to Allah that the betrayers and the hypocrites mend their ways and thus become worthy of forgiveness (4:81) Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
(You may pray for their guidance but) do not plead on behalf of the people who have betrayed their own "Self". Allah loves not one who drags down his own humanity by betraying his pledges, duties and trusts
They seek to hide from people and do not seek to hide from Allah! He is with them when they discuss and plot by night that which He dislikes. And Allah encompasses with His Knowledge all they do
You people contend on their behalf in this world. But who will contend with Allah for them on the Resurrection Day? Or who will be their defender
Anyone who transgresses against his or her own "Self", then seeks Allah's forgiveness, will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful. (The way to achieve Allah's forgiveness is repentance, taking corrective action and doing good deeds for others (4:)
Whoever earns a violation against the Permanent Values given in the Qur'an does it against, and drags down, his own "Self". Allah, the Knower, the Wise imparts this information to you
And whoever commits a fault or such violation, but throws the blame on the innocent, burdens himself with slander and a clear violation that drags the "Self" down
But for the Grace of Allah upon you (O Prophet), a party among them were bent upon diverting you, but they only misled themselves. They cannot hurt you at all. He has given you the Law and the Logic behind it. He teaches you that which you knew not. Contrary to blind faith, the use of Reason empowers you with Conviction (12:108). The Grace of Allah upon you is Infinite
There is no good in much of their secret conferences. Most meetings that take place behind closed doors are detrimental to humanity. However, whoever arranges meetings that discuss matters of social welfare, economic equity, human resource development, just legislation and reconciliation of conflicts seeking Allah's Approval, We shall bestow upon him / her a great Reward
One who opposes the Messenger, dissents and treads contrary to the way of the believers, after the Guidance has been made plain to him, We shall let him continue in his chosen direction, and expose him to Hell, a miserable destination
Allah will not forgive SHIRK (choosing authorities besides Him) though He may forgive other transgressions according to His Law of forgiveness. Whoever commits SHIRK, has wandered far astray
(Think how this attitude downgrades the human "Self".) Some of them stoop so low that they make seductive statues of females and worship them! In fact, they worship Satan, their selfish desire that rebels against the Divine Values
Allah has rejected Satan for saying, "Verily, of your servants I will take my due share." (A great many people follow their own Satans (45:23) and the clergy eats a portion from their wealth in the name of God; that is Satan's share
Satan (Iblis) in allegorical terms had said, "I surely will lead them astray, I will entice them, confound them." (2:34-36), (7:11), (15:30-32), (17:62), (18:50), (20:116), (38:74). According to Satan's promise, these representatives of his mislead men and women away from the Qur'an, and confound them with ritualism and superstitions, such as magic, dreams, astrology, amulets, numerology, ghoul, exorcism, and vain beliefs. Marking cattle's ears, choosing red cows or black goats for specific sacrifices, are superstitions that the clergy propagates. They try to present the Laws of Allah operative in the World of Creation in a distorted fashion. They assign miracles to living or dead "saints" ignoring the Law of Cause and Effect (4:51), (4:60). Whoever befriends this handiwork of Satan, has ignored Allah. Such a person is verily a loser and his loss is manifest
(You have seen how associating partners with Allah, and ignoring the Qur'an in favor of human dogmas, drag the "Self" down to subhuman levels.) You will find these agents of Satan dispensing paradise and hell to their followers in outright deception (false hopes and vain desires such as seventy two beauties etc)
These custodians of man-made dogmas and their followers will have their dwelling in Hell with no EXIT signs
On the other hand, We shall soon admit those who attain belief, and work to improve the lot of humanity, to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow. They will abide therein forever. This is the unwavering Promise of Allah; and who can be truer in word than Allah
(The clergy have borrowed many of their dogmas from the previous nations.) But neither your wishful thinking, nor the wishful thinking of some People of the Book shall be of any avail. Whoever lives contrary to the Divine Laws, will have the recompense for it. And he or she will find, besides Allah, no protector and helper
And whoever fulfills the needs of the people whether male or female, and is a believer, will enter Paradise. And not the least injustice will be done to them (not amounting to the 'speck on a date-stone' ()
Who has a better DEEN (System of Life) than the one who submits completely to Allah, and thus becomes a benefactor of humanity? Such a person is, in fact, following the Way of Abraham, the upright whom Allah chose for friend
Unto Allah belongs all that is in the Highs and all that is in the Lows; and indeed Allah encompasses all things
It is imperative to realize that women are no less a part of the society. Moreover, they are the custodians of the future generations like a garden that bears flowery plants (2:223)) They ask you to enlighten them further about the Laws concerning women (O Prophet). Say, "Allah Himself enlightens you about the Laws concerning them, and the Book which has been recited to you conveys the decree. (You shall be especially kind to women who are widowed, orphaned, or left helpless for any reason (2:83), (2:215), (4:3), (2:240), (8:41)) You shall restore the rights of the orphaned women to whom you give not what is ordained (their due marital gifts) when you wish to marry them. And Allah decrees about helpless children, and your duty to treat orphans in a most kind manner. And whatever good you may do, behold, Allah is ever Aware
If a woman experiences ill-treatment from her husband or fears that he might turn away from her, there should be no hesitation in taking corrective action and resolving the matter between them amicably. Conciliation is best. Selfishness is ever present in human psyche. And if you take care to benefit each other and be mindful of Allah, verily Allah is ever Aware of all you do. (Allah, the Cognizant shows you the best way (2:228-234), (4:3), (4:19), (4:35), (4:128), (33:49), (5)
Men who have been permitted a second wife for post-war exigencies (4:3) must understand that: You will not be able to deal equally between your wives however much you wish. But turn not altogether away from one, leaving her as if in suspense between having and not having a husband. Fulfill the rights of each one of them and be mindful of Allah. Verily, Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful. (Your effort is seen 53:40, and He is the Absolver of your imperfections)
If the couple separate, Allah will provide for each one of them from His Abundance. Allah is Infinite, Wise. (The Divinely Ordained System is versatile enough to accommodate all circumstances)
And to Allah belong all things in the Highs and all things in the Lows. We directed those who received the Scripture before you, and We direct you to be mindful of Allah's Laws (so that your society operates as smoothly as the Universe is operating). And if you reject the Truth, know that all things in the heavens and all things in the earth belong to Allah. Allah is Self-Sufficient, Owner of Praise
Unto Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. And Allah is Sufficient as Guardian (to carry through all affairs of the Universe)
If He wills, He can cause you to disappear O Mankind! And bring forth other beings in your stead. Indeed, Allah is Able to do that
Whoever desires the reward of the world, let him know that with Allah is the reward of the world and the Hereafter. Allah is ever Hearer, Seer. (Obedience to His Commands ensures success in both worlds)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Stand out firmly for justice, witnesses for Allah, even if it is against yourselves, your parents and your relatives, and whether the case is of a rich person or a poor person. Allah is nearer to them than you are; His Law comes first. Follow not your emotions lest you fall short of justice. If you distort your testimony or turn away from this Command, Allah is Aware of all your actions
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! (and call yourselves Muslims)! Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the Book He has revealed to His Messenger, and ( the fact that He revealed) the Scripture before. (Belief to the point of Conviction can only be attained through reason and not as a birth right (12:108)). One who denies Allah, and His Angels, and His Books, and His Messengers, and the Last Day, has gone far astray
Those who believe, then disbelieve and again believe, then disbelieve, and thus grow stubborn in denial of the Truth, Allah will not forgive them, nor will He intervene to walk them through to the Way
Give the tiding to such hypocrites that grievous suffering awaits them
Those who ally themselves with the rejecters of the Truth instead of the believers, do they seek honor among them? All Dignity, Honor and Power belong to, and come from, Allah (3:25), (
He has already revealed unto you in the Book that, when you hear the Revelations of Allah rejected and ridiculed, sit not with them unless they engage in some other conversation (4:63), (6:68). Otherwise you shall bear similar guilt as they bear. Allah will gather hypocrites and rejecters together, all of them, into Hell
(The hypocrites adopt the opportunistic attitude.) They watch you and wait. If a victory comes to you from Allah, they say, "Weren't we with you?" And if the rejecters get a portion of success, they say, "Did we not side with you and protect you from the believers?" Allah will judge between you all on the Day of Resurrection. Allah will not give the rejecters (of the Qur'an) any way of success against the true believers in the Qur'an
The hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but it is Allah's Law that such people deceive themselves (2:9). When they stand up for prayers, they do so reluctantly and only to be seen by people, and rarely do they think of Allah
Swaying between this and that, belonging neither to these nor to those. Anyone who strays according to Allah's Law of Guidance, you will not find a way for him (Law of Guidance)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not take the rejecters for your allies instead of the believers. Do you wish to provide a clear proof to Allah against yourselves
Verily, the hypocrites will abide in the lowest pit of the Fire and you will find no helper for them
Except those who repent by returning to the Right Path and make amends and hold fast to Allah's Guidance in all sincerity. Those are with the believers. Allah will soon grant the believers a reward of immense value
Why should Allah punish you if you are practically grateful in spending His Bounties on others and truly believe in His Laws? Allah is Appreciative, Knower
Allah does not love loud unpleasant speech except by one who has been wronged. Allah is ever Hearer, Knower
If you contribute to the society, whether openly or secretly, and pardon someone's fault, know that Allah is Pardoner, Powerful. He absolves your individual and societal imperfections, and He has appointed due measure for all things
Those who deny Allah and His Messengers, or seek to make distinction between Allah and His Messengers, and say, "We believe in some and reject some." (The first part of the verse refers to those who believe in God as the Creator, but not as the Law-Giver)
Such are the real disbelievers. And for deniers of the Truth We have readied a humiliating retribution
And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers, in word and action, and understand that all Messengers were one in Purpose, We shall soon give them their rewards. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful
(O Prophet) People of the Scripture ask you to bring a published book from the sky. They made a greater demand to Moses when they said, "Show us Allah face to face". And their psyche was such that when a bolt of lightning struck around them, they fell in fear (2:55). They had displaced the true belief with falsehood. After that, they chose the calf for worship although they had seen the Manifest Truth. Yet, We pardoned them and gave Moses evident authority (as a blessing for their guidance)
Then We made a Covenant with them at the raised Mount Sinai as a witness. We said to them, "Enter the gate of the town humbly (2:63)." And We said to them, "Do not violate the Sabbath." Indeed We had made with them a Solemn Covenant
They incurred condemnation for breaking their Covenant, rejecting Allah's Revelations, and killing the Prophets wrongfully. And for saying, "Our hearts are wrapped up; we have made up our minds." Nay, Allah's Law sets the seal on their hearts because of their persistent denial. They lost their faculties of reasoning. So they do not see the Truth, except a few
And for their disbelief to the extent that they brought a terrible charge against Mary
And for claiming, "We killed the Messiah Jesus son of Mary, Allah's Messenger." They never killed him and never crucified him. But it appeared so to them and the matter remained dubious to them. Those who hold conflicting views on this issue are indeed confused. They have no real knowledge but they are following mere conjecture. Very certainly, they never killed him
Nay, Allah exalted him unto Himself. (They had plotted thinking that crucifixion was a death of dishonor. But Allah raised him in honor). Allah is Almighty, Wise
Everyone among the People of the Book must believe before dying, in the truth just stated. Jesus will be a witness against them on the Day of Resurrection (that he was neither crucified nor raised to the heavens. God is not confined to the Heavens)
Due to the transgressions of the Jews We had forbidden them good things that were before allowed to them, and because of their consistent hindering from the Way of Allah
Their clergy made usury permissible although it was forbidden, and they devoured the wealth of people with falsification. We have readied for the rejecters grievous suffering
Among them (the Jews) are those who are well founded in knowledge. And have attained conviction in what has been revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you. They are supporters of the Divine System and of the Just Economic Order, believers in Allah and in the Last Day. We shall soon give them an immense reward. (Islam is for all humanity. Any prior affiliations are irrelevant (2:62), (3)
We have sent you the Revelation as We sent it to Noah and the Prophets after him. We sent Revelations to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and his progeny (the Tribes), Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon; and to David We gave the Psalms
We sent Our Messengers to all nations with a Uniform Message. We have told you the stories of some in the Qur'an, of the others We have not. (However, all of them were assigned a Common Mission). Allah spoke the same to Moses
All Messengers gave good news, as well as warning, so that humans won't have an argument against God, after the Messengers conveyed to them the Guidance. Allah is Almighty, Wise
Allah bears witness concerning what He has revealed to you. With His Own Knowledge He has revealed it. If you reflect on the Order in the Universe, you shall find that His angels, the Universal Laws, bear witness. And Allah is Sufficient Witness
Those who deny such obvious Reality and try to hinder from the Way of Allah, have wandered far astray
Those who indulge in such blatant denial and hinder people from Allah's Way, are wrongdoers. They are violating one of the basic human rights i.e. that of attaining knowledge (4:167). According to the Law of Requital, they block their own way to forgiveness and guidance
The only way the Divine Law leaves open for them is the way to Hell. And it is easy for Allah
O People! The Messenger has come to you with Truth from your Lord. If you believe in him, it is good for you. If you deny, know that to Allah belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. Allah is All Knowing, All Wise. (Following His Commands brings you to harmony with the Universe)
O People of the Scripture! Do not exaggerate in your religion. Say nothing about God except the truth. The Messiah Jesus son of Mary was a Messenger of Allah, the fulfillment of His Word to Mary, created according to the Laws of Creation and given free will from the Divine Energy (like all human beings (15:29), (32:7-9), (38:72)). Believe in Allah and His Messengers, and say not: "Three". Cease! It is for your own good. God is but One God. Far removed it is from His Supreme Majesty that He should have a son. Everything in the Highs and everything in the Lows belongs to Him. He is the Self-Sufficient Sustainer of the Universe
Never was the Messiah too proud to serve Allah, nor the angels nearest to Him shy from obeying Him. Whoever shuns His service and is proud, He will assemble all unto Him
Allah will give rewards and add of His Bounty on those who attain belief and contribute to the society. On the other hand, His Law of Requital will dispense an awful doom to those who were scornful and proud. And they will find no one besides Allah, to protect or help them
O Humankind! There has come to you a Convincing Proof from your Lord, and We have sent unto you a profound Beacon of Light
Allah will admit into His Grace those who believe in Him and hold fast to His Commands, and facilitate for them the Straight Road to Him
They ask you about the inheritance of a person who is survived by neither ascendants nor descendants. If one dies and leaves no children, and he had a sister, she gets half the inheritance. If she dies first, he inherits from her if she left no children. If there were two sisters they get two-thirds of the inheritance, if there are sisters and brothers, the brother would get twice the share of the sister for reasons already explained (2:80), (4:11). Allah clarifies the Laws so that you might not go astray. Allah is the Knower of all things
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Fulfill your pledges and obligations. Permitted for you is the flesh of every beast that eats plants, except what is specifically forbidden in the Book. Allah has ordained that all hunting is prohibited during Hajj. Verily, Allah Ordains as He deems fit
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not violate the symbols set up by Allah, nor the Sacred Months (2:194), nor the gifts, nor the camels for use as transport or sacrifice, nor the garlands marking them, nor the people who proceed to the Sacred Sanctuary, Ka'bah, seeking Allah's Blessings and Approval. When you have completed the Hajj, you are free to hunt. Let not your hatred of a people lead you into transgression, because they prevented you from going to the Sacred Masjid (48:25). Help one another in acts of collective benefit and in being mindful of Allah, and do not help one another in deeds that hurt humanity and in creating a wedge between people. Be mindful of Allah's Laws. His Law of Requital is strong in grasping
Forbidden for you (2:173) for dietary consumption are: Any Animal that dies of itself. Blood. The flesh of swine. And anything (not just meat) that has been dedicated to any other than Allah (such as an idol, grave or saint). Any Animal that has been strangled to death. Beaten to death. Dies by falling from height. Gored to death by horns. Animal eaten by a wild animal unless you are able to slaughter it while it is still alive. That which is sacrificed on altars (devotional stones or blocks in shrines considered sacred). Also forbidden is dividing the meat through raffling and games of chance (2:219), (5:90). This Day, the rejecting opponents have given up the hope of eradicating your DEEN, System of Life. Clear distinction in matters of the Lawful and the Unlawful draws a tangible line between their ways and your way. Fear them not but fear Me. This Day, I have perfected your DEEN for you, completed My favor upon you, and chosen for you Islam as the System of Life. (There is no hardship in Islam (2:185)). Therefore, if one is forced by hunger to consume the Unlawful, with no intention of exceeding the limits, Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful
They ask you (O Prophet) what foods are Permissible. Tell them all good things of life are Lawful to you. As for the hunting animals, the catch of your trained dogs and falcons, as Allah has taught you, is Permissible. Mention Allah's name thereupon. Always be mindful of Allah's Laws. His Law of Requital is swift in reckoning
This Day, all good food of your choice is made Lawful for you. The food of the People of the Scripture is Lawful for you. And your food is Lawful for them. You are permitted to marry chaste women of the People of the Scripture, (provided they do not indulge in SHIRK i.e. not associate anyone with Allah (2:221)). You are permitted to marry the virtuous, chaste women among the believers and the virtuous, chaste women of those who were given the Scripture before. You must give your brides a generous marital gift and live with them in honor, not in fornication as secret lovers. (It must be an honest wedlock (4:24)). Anyone who rejects belief, all his work will go vain and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When you congregate for Salat, wash your faces and your forearms, hands to the elbows. Lightly rub you heads and your feet to the ankles. If you are in a state of ceremonial impurity, bathe your whole body. But, if you are ill or traveling, or coming from the privy, or are in a state of ceremonial impurity and find no water, then take clean sand or earth and lightly rub your faces and hands. (This will help you prepare mentally for congregational prayer (4:43)). Allah does not wish to place upon you any difficulty, but to make you clean and to perfect His blessings upon you, that you be grateful
Remember Allah's Blessing (Guidance) upon you and His Covenant binding upon you when you said, "We hear and obey" (1:4-5). Be mindful of Allah. Allah is fully Aware of what is in the hearts
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be upholders of justice for the sake of Allah as witnesses to the truth. Let not the hatred of any people move you away from justice. Deal justly. That is closer to being upright. Be mindful of your duty to Allah. Verily, Allah is fully Aware of what you do
Allah promises the protection of forgiveness and a Great Reward to those who attain belief and do works that fulfill the needs of people and augment the well being of society
On the other hand are those who reject Our Revelations openly, or deny them in action. They are the companions of the Insurmountable Barrier. ("Selves" that fail to develop, are unfit to move up to the higher levels of existence, so they merely survive instead of achieving true immortality)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Remember the Blessing of Allah. There were people who had aggressive designs against you but He withheld their hands from you. (Due preparation against danger is a strong deterrent (4:71), (8:60)). Remain mindful of Allah's Laws. Then, in Allah let believers put their trust
Indeed Allah made a Covenant with the Children of Israel. We appointed twelve leaders among them. Allah said to them, "I am with you so long as you follow the Divine Commands, spend your wealth for the community, believe in My Messengers, assist them, and give a beautiful loan to Allah (that is paid back to you manifold in both lives (2:261)). I will absolve your imperfections, help you create balance in the society and admit you to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. But, whoever among you disbelieves after this, will go astray from the Right Path
When they broke their Promise, We rejected them and Our Law caused their hearts to harden. So, now they change words from their context and ignore a good part of the Message, forgetting what they were told to bear in mind. (O Prophet) You will not cease to discover betrayal from all but a few of them. Pardon them and forbear. Allah loves those who are kind, benefic
We also made a Covenant with those who say, "We are Christians." But they ignored a good part of the Message that was sent to them and forgot what they were told to bear in mind. As a result, Our Law has caused enmity and hatred among them till the Resurrection Day, when Allah will inform them of what they contrive. (Rivalry based upon Sectarianism and Nationalism, a natural consequence of deviating from the True Message, whether people call themselves Jews, Christians or Muslims)
O People of the Book! Now has come to you Our Messenger, to make clear to you much of what you have been concealing from yourselves and others. He ignores much of the irrelevant accounts and pardons much of your misdeeds. Now has come to you from Allah a Beacon of Light and a Clear Book
Through this Book Allah guides to paths of Peace, those who seek His Approval. He brings them out of darkness into the Light of His Grace, and guides them to the Straight Path
They indeed have denied the Truth who say, "God is the Messiah, son of Mary." Say, "Who could oppose God if He willed to annihilate the Messiah son of Mary, and his mother and everyone on earth, all of them?" Allah's is the Dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He creates all things according to His Laws. And Allah has Power over all things and events
Jews and Christians say, "We are God's children and his loved ones". Ask them "Why does He then, task you to retribution for your transgressions?" Nay, you are but human beings of His creating. He forgives and punishes according to His Laws. The Dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them, belongs to Allah. To Him is the Final Destination of all
O People of the Scripture! Our Messenger has come to you, to make the Truth clear, after an interval without Messengers. Lest you say, "No Messenger came to us to give good news and to warn." Now has come to you the giver of glad tiding and warning. Allah has Power over all things and events
Moses told his people, "Remember Allah's Blessings that He raised Prophets among you and made you your own masters. And He gave you what He had not given to any other peoples
Enter the Sacred Land that Allah has decreed for you as long as you hold fast to His Laws. But, if you turn back in flight, you will be overthrown to your own ruin." (Sacred Land = Canaan = Palestine, (2:125), (6:137), (12:58), (12:94), (21:71), (23:50), (26:59), (29:26), (30:3), (44:3), Introduction to Surahs
They said to Moses, "In this land are ferocious people. Never shall we enter it until they leave. If they leave, than we will enter
Then two men who feared violating Allah's Command, and whom Allah had blessed, said, "Enter the gate daringly, and you will be in command of the situation and will be victorious. Put your trust in Allah if you are believers." (The two men were Joshua and Caleb. Bible; Numbers xiv)
They said, "O' Moses! We shall never enter the land while they are in it. You and your Lord should go and fight, while we sit here
Moses said, "My Lord! I have power only over myself and my brother, allow us to part ways from those who keep drifting away from the Commands
Their Lord said, "This land will be forbidden for them for forty years. They will wander in the earth, bewildered. So grieve not over these people who keep drifting away from the Right Path
(O Messenger) Tell them the true story of the two descendants of Adam. Each of them made an offering, and they thought that it was accepted from one of them, but not from the other. The latter, out of jealousy, said, " Surely I will kill you." The former said, "Allah accepts every action of the righteous like an accepted offering
If you extend your hand to kill me, I won't extend my hand against you to kill you. I fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
I would rather have you carry two sins. First, of slaying me, and second, of slaying the person inside you, and be among the dwellers of the Fire. That is the reward for the wrongdoers
His ego led him into killing his brother. He killed him and became a loser
Allah then sent a raven scratching up the soil, to allude to him that he might have concealed and ignored the imperfections of his brother. He said, "Oh, I failed even to be like this raven to conceal my brother's imperfections!" Then he became full of regrets. ('Sauaat' = Imperfections, faults)
On that account, We decreed to the Children of Israel the Eternal Moral Ordinance for all humanity (2:178) that whoever kills a human being, unless it is in the course of justice for murder or bloody crimes on the earth, it shall be as if he killed all mankind. And whoever saves one life it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind. Our Messengers came to people with clear Truth, yet many of them continued to transgress in the earth
The just punishment for people who make war on Allah and His Messenger and commit bloody crimes on earth, is being dispensed by the Divine Law of Requital. They are being slain, crucified, immobilized in great numbers, or are being entirely banished from the face of the earth. Such is their disgrace in this world, and an awful suffering awaits them in the Hereafter. (The use of present tense in this verse indicates that it is not a decree of Law. In (7:124) the use of 'qat'a' pertains to a threat in the future tense, and then it emanates from Pharaoh, tyranny personified. Only the Divine System of life can ensure peace and security in the world (2:27), (2:257), (3:147), (4:)
Unless the corruptors repent before you become more powerful than they are. (Peace will prevail when you believers become more powerful than the criminals). Know that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be mindful of Allah and seek to come closer to Him by obeying His Commands, and strive hard in His Cause so that you may truly prosper
(Those who reject the Revelation, exclude themselves from taking part in the establishment of the Ideal Society). If the rejecters possessed everything on earth and twice as much, and offered it as ransom to spare them from the retribution on the Day of Resurrection, it will not be accepted from them. For them is a painful doom
They will wish to come out of the Fire, but they will not be able to come out of it. Theirs will be a lasting punishment
(Theft is a crime that steals away the sense of security from a society). A habitual thief, male or female, must have their ability (to steal) cut off. This is the reward for their doings, and a deterrent from Allah. Allah is Almighty, Wise
Whoever repents after the crime and makes amends, surely, Allah grants him pardon. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (If the hands are cut off, where are the making amends, pardon and mercy)
Do you not know that Allah's is the Dominion of the heavens and the earth? He is the Law-giving Authority. He punishes and forgives according to His Law of Requital. Allah has Control over all things and He has appointed due measure for all things
O Messenger! Let not those grieve you who run to disbelief, saying, "We believe," from their mouths, while their hearts do not believe. And grieve not about those Jews who listen only to fabricate lies. They listen and go to their folk who have never met with you. Then they distort the words out of context and tell others to accept only a part and reject a part. You can do nothing to help those who decide to go astray. Guidance and straying depend upon the Laws of Allah (4:88). Allah does not intervene to purify the hearts of such people. For those who go astray, there is disgrace in this world and an awful punishment in the Hereafter
They are upholders of falsehood and they make wealth by unfair means. They get bribed into spying. If they come to you asking to judge among them, the choice to accept or reject their request is yours. You have the right to disclaim jurisdiction since they have not yet accepted the Qur'an and they have the Torah. If you disclaim jurisdiction they cannot harm you at all. However, if you decide to judge among them, do so equitably. Allah loves the equitable
Why do they ask you to act as a judge among them when they have the Torah, containing Allah's Law and they disregard it? They are not believers
We did send down the Torah containing guidance and a light. By it the Prophets who always sincerely submitted to Allah, judged the Jews. And the rabbis and the priests judged according to Allah's Scripture as they were commanded to observe. For to them was entrusted the protection of Allah's Book, and they were witnesses to it. So, fear not people, but fear Me and do not trade away My Revelations for petty gains. Whoever does not judge and rule according to what Allah has Revealed, such are the disbelievers
For Jews, We had decreed in the Torah, "Life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, ear for ear, tooth for tooth, and equal injury for injury". If one forgoes retaliation by way of charity, it shall absolve his or her imperfections. Whoever does not judge or rule according to what Allah has Revealed, such are the wrongdoers. (The Final Revelation of Allah, the Qur'an has updated Laws for all humanity for all Times. Exodus in the Bible does not leave room for forgiveness on the subject)
And after them We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow in their footsteps, confirming the Divine Origin of what was revealed before him. We gave him the Gospel in which there was guidance and a light, and it confirmed the Divine Origin of what was revealed before it in the Torah, a guidance and admonition to those who wished to live upright
Let the People of the Gospel judge by what Allah has revealed therein. Those who fail to judge according to Allah's Revelation are drifters from the Right Path
To you (O Messenger) We have sent the Book in Sure Truth confirming the Divine Origin of whatever Scripture was before it. The Qur'an is the Watcher over the old Scriptures and guards the Truth in them. So, Judge between people by that which Allah has revealed to you and follow not their wishes away from the Truth that has come to you. Now has come to all of you the Divine Law, and a traced-out Way. If Allah had willed, He could have made all of you humans a single people. But, He decided to let you choose your own path after showing you the Truth, and thus test yourselves. Outdo one another in actions that serve humanity and thus grow your "Self". To Allah is your final Destination, of all of you. Then He will make you understand where you differ
Rule and judge between people by what Allah has revealed. Do not follow their desires giving in to their demands, lest they divert you from what Allah has revealed to you. If they turn away from the Ultimate Truth, know that Allah's Law of Requital is going to chastise them for trailing behind in attaining belief and for their previous transgressions. A great many people choose to drift away from the Right Path
Do they want to turn back to the Ways of Ignorance? Who can provide more equitable rules than Allah to a people who have attained Conviction in the Truth
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! (Since they deny the Final Revelation that is the Constitution of your state). Do not take the Jews and Christians as your allies. They are allies one to another. He among you who takes them for allies is one of them. Allah does not guide those who displace Command with desire
You will see those who harbor doubt in their hearts running to them saying, "We fear that a change of fortune may befall us." But, Allah will bring you victory, or His Command will come to pass and they will regret what they harbored in their hearts
The believers will then wonder: "Are these the same people who swore by Allah that they were with the believers?" Eventually, all their deeds will go to waste and they will be great losers
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! If you revert from your DEEN Allah will bring in your place people whom He loves and who love Him. They will be kind to the believers, and stern with the rejecters. They will strive in the Cause of Allah without fear of any blame. Such is the Bounty of Allah that He gives according to His Laws. He is Infinite, All Knowing
Your real friends and protectors are Allah, His Messenger and those believers who establish the Divine System, set up the equitable Economic Order and humble themselves before Allah's Commands
Those who ally themselves with Allah and His Messenger and the believers, belong in the party of Allah. Absolutely they are the victorious
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not take for allies, some of the people who were given the Scripture before you, and the rejecters who mock and ridicule your Religion. Be mindful of Allah's Commands if you are indeed believers
When you call to prayer, they mock at it and make a jest of it, simply because they are a people who do not use reason. (They know not that the call with its clearest Mission Statement is unique in the world and speaks volumes of the conviction behind it)
Say, "O People of the Scripture! Do you not blame us because we believe in God, and that which is revealed to us and that which was revealed before? And because most of you are drifting away from the Right Direction
Say, "Shall I point out to you something much worse for retribution with Allah? Worse is the case of those whom Allah has rejected, and His Law of Requital hits them. And whom Allah's Law relegated from the honorable stature of humanity and they started behaving like apes and swine (2:65). And they fell into becoming the slaves of TAGHOOT (tyrants and the priesthood of any religion (4:51)). Such are in worse plight, and farther astray than the mockers
When they come to you O believers, they say, "We believe". In fact they come in disbelief and depart in disbelief. Allah knows best what they conceal
You will see many of them race towards actions that drag down the human potential, create division in the society and they earn wealth through illicit means. Indeed condemnable is what they do
Why don't the rabbis and the priests forbid them from their down-grading assertions and illicit earnings? Indeed condemnable is what they manufacture. (A great many religious leaders, rabbis, priests, monks, mullahs, yogis, and mystics devour the wealth of people deceptively, and hinder them from the Way of Allah)
(The Divine System wants people to contribute to the society.) The Jews say, "Allah's hand is tied down." It is their hands that are tied down. Their uttering deprives them of Allah's Grace. His hands are wide open and He showers His Bounties according to His Laws. (O Prophet) Since the Revelation given to you by your Lord brings about a Benevolent Revolution in the society, people with vested interests hate it. Many of them plunge deeper into transgression and disbelief. Consequently, Our Law has sent down into their hearts and ranks animosity and hatred until the Day of Resurrection. Allah has put down the flames of war that they repeatedly ignited. They try to create corruption and disorder in the land and Allah does not love the corruptors
If the People of the Scripture would believe in the Qur'an and be mindful of the Divine Laws, We would remit their sins from them and admit them into the Gardens of Bliss
Had they stood fast by the Torah and the Gospel, and all the Revelation that was sent to them by their Lord, they would receive the blessings of the heavens and the earth. Among them are people who are moderate, but a great many of them follow a course that is evil
O Messenger! Make known all that your Lord has revealed to you. If you do it not, then you have not fulfilled your duty of conveying His Message at all. Allah will protect you from people. Remember that Allah does not step in to guide those who refuse to acknowledge the Truth
Say, "O People of the Scripture! You have no valid ground for your beliefs unless you uphold the Torah and the Gospel and all that has been revealed to you from your Lord." (The Truth in them has been incorporated into the Final Revelation). Yet all that has been revealed to you (O Prophet), by your Lord is bound to make many of them more stubborn in their arrogance and denial of the Truth. But grieve not for the disbelieving folk
Those who attain belief (and call themselves Muslims) and those who are Jews, and the agnostics, and Christians; whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and helps people, for them shall be no fear from without, nor shall grief touch them from within. [ Verily, those who attain belief (and call themselves Muslims), and those who are Jews, and Christians and the agnostics, whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and helps people, shall have their reward with their Sustainer. For them there shall be no fear from without, nor shall grief touch them from within
We made a Covenant with the Children of Israel to follow the Commandments, and sent Messengers to them. Whenever We sent a Messenger to them with anything that clashed with their desires, some of them they rejected, and some they even killed
They persisted in their violations thinking they could escape requital. As a consequence, they became blind and deaf to reason. But, there is plenty of room for forgiveness in Allah's Law. They took corrective actions and attained Allah's Mercy. Yet again, a great many of them faltered and fell blind and deaf. Allah is Seer of what people do
Rejecters of the Truth certainly are those who proclaim that God is Messiah, son of Mary. The Messiah himself taught them, "O Children of Israel! You shall worship God, my Lord and your Lord." Whoever associates deities with Allah, for such Allah has forbidden Paradise and their abode is the Fire. For those who displace Truth with falsehood there will be no helpers
And surely they disbelieve who say that God is one of three in a Trinity when there is no god whatever but the One God. Unless they desist from saying what they say, grievous suffering is bound to befall such of them as are bent upon denying the Truth
Will they not rather turn to Allah and seek His forgiveness? For Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The Messiah, son of Mary, was no other than a Messenger, like other Messengers before him who passed on. And his mother was a woman of truth. Both of them were human beings who had to eat food (like all other mortals). See how clearly We explain Our verses for them and note how they keep wandering in thought
Say, "Would you worship in place of Allah that which possesses no power of harm or benefit to you?" Allah it is Who is the Hearer, the Knower
Say, "O People of the Book! Do not overstep the bounds of Truth in your religious beliefs. And do not follow the errant views of people who have gone astray long before, and led a great many others astray, and those who are still straying from the Even Way
Those Children of Israel who were bent upon denying the Truth have already been condemned by the tongue of David and of Jesus, son of Mary. This because they rebelled and persisted in overstepping the bounds of what is right
They restrained not one another from violating the Divine Values. Miserable indeed was their behavior
Even now you see many of them allying themselves with the rejecters. Miserable indeed is what they send forth for their "Self". Allah is displeased with them and in the doom will they abide forever
If they had believed in Allah and the Prophet, and that which is revealed to him, they (the People of the Scripture) would not ally themselves with the rejecters. But a great many of them are drifting away from the Truth
(O Prophet) You will find the most vehement of mankind in hostility to the believers to be the Jews and the idolaters. Closer in affection to the believers you will find those who say, "We are Christians." That is because there are among them priests and monks and because they are not given to arrogance
When they listen to what has been revealed to the Messenger, you (O Prophet) see their eyes overflow with tears because of their recognition of the Truth. They say, "Our Lord! We accept it, so count us among the witnesses
Why should we not believe in Allah and that which has come to us of the Truth when we so fervently desire that Our Sustainer count us among the righteous
Allah has instantly rewarded them for saying this, Gardens underneath which rivers flow, to abide therein forever. That is the reward of the doers of good
Whereas those who reject the Truth and belie Our Revelations, are companions of the Insurmountable Barrier. (Their "Self" faces 'Jaheem', a great hindrance to actualization)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not deprive yourselves of the good things of life that Allah has made Lawful to you. But commit no excesses. Allah does not love those who exceed the limits. (Self-mortification by ascetics, monks and mystics is not the way to 'purify' a 'soul)
Thus, partake of the Lawful, good things that Allah grants you as sustenance. And be conscious of Allah, in Whom you are believers
Allah will not call you to account for vain utterances of your oaths. He will hold you accountable for your deliberate and intentional oaths. If you violate such oaths, that would be a transgression against your 'Self'. The expiation for that if you have violated an oath is: Feeding ten needy persons of what is standard for your own family, or clothing them. Or, freeing one human being from bondage, whether it is slavery, extreme poverty, heavy debt, or oppression. If you do not have the means to do so, then observe Abstinence for three days, as in Ramadan. This is the expiation of your intentional oaths. But be mindful of your oaths. Allah explains His Messages, so that you might have cause to be grateful
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Intoxicants, gambling and games of chance, sacrificing animals on stones i.e. altars of idols and idolatrous practices, and divining of the future by such means as arrows, raffles and omens, is all Satan's handiwork. Refrain from it that you may prosper
By means of intoxicants and games of chance Satan, your rebellious and selfish desire, excites you to enmity and hatred among you and hinders you from being conscious of Allah and following the Divine System. Will you not then abstain
You shall obey Allah and the Messenger, the Divine System that the Messenger has established, and be careful in this regard. If you turn away, it will be to your own detriment. Know that the duty of Our Messenger is just to convey the Message clearly
Those who have believed and do works fruitful to the society, bear no guilt for what and how they eat and drink and partake (of the Lawful). Provided they augment their belief to the point of conviction and cease not helping the needy, and benefiting humanity. Allah loves the benefactors of humanity
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! During Hajj, Allah may let you test your belief in privacy with some game or someone else's wandering livestock within easy reach of your hands and your arrows. Refrain from hunting it. Whoever crosses the limits after this, will face an awful requital
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not kill animals of game while you are in the state of Pilgrimage. Whoever kills it intentionally, must send a Permissible domestic animal to the Ka'bah, as a gift for the needy. Two equitable persons will decide what domestic animal is equivalent to the game animal that was killed. They must ensure that the offering reaches the Ka'bah (for use by the needy pilgrims (22:28)). Or for expiation, feed some poor persons at a cost equal to the cost of the animal. If someone has no means to do that, then Abstinence (for three days as in Ramadan. Three days of Abstinence would equal feeding ten poor persons (5:89). Allah has pardoned past violations. An appropriate court shall punish those who persist in violating this Law. Allah is Almighty, Able to requite
Lawful to you is all water-game, the game of the sea and its food whether they are found in the sea, river, lake, or pond or jump out of them. This is decent provision for you and for those who are traveling to Hajj by sea. Do not pursue land-game during Pilgrimage. Be mindful of Allah to Whom you will be summoned
Allah has appointed the Ka'bah, the Sacred House, a Standard for mankind, the Sacred Months (2:194), the gifts for pilgrims, and the offerings marked with garlands. Know that Allah is fully Aware of all things in the heavens and all things in the earth. And that Allah knows all things and events
Beware that Allah's Law of Requital is ever vigilant. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (So He has shown you how to become worthy of His Mercy)
The Messenger's duty is to convey the Message, and Allah knows what you declare and what you hide
Say, "The bad and the good are not same. Let not the popularity of the evil dazzle you. O People of understanding! Be mindful of Allah's Laws if you wish to reap a rich harvest. (The bad or evil is that which harms the collective good of humanity and drags your "Self" down (14:24-27)). The right is right, and the wrong is wrong regardless of what the majority think (2:243), (6:116)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Ask not unnecessary details of the things as the Israelites did to Moses about the cow. This attitude may bring unpleasant consequences for you. But if you ask them as the Qur'an is being revealed, the minor details of Ordinances might be given which will be hard for you to follow. The general rule has been given that all pure and good things are Permissible to you. Your questions are very clearly answered in the Qur'an (5:15), (15:1), (22:40). Allah has absolved you in this respect for Allah is Forgiving, Clement. (The Qur'an is for all times, and while the basic Laws and Principles remain immutable, minor details are intended to be flexible according to temporal and spatial requirements (11:1). "This day I have perfected your DEEN for you, completed My favor upon you, and chosen for you Islam as the System of Life
Some folk before you asked such questions and then rejected the instructions
Allah did not ordain that certain kinds of cattle and other livestock be marked out, assigned names, and set aside from human use or consumption. Disbelievers invented such superstitions and attributed them to Allah. Most of them do not use their intellect
When it is said to them, "Come to that which Allah has revealed and to His Messenger, they say, "Enough for us is what we found our parents doing." What! Even though their parents had no knowledge whatsoever and no guidance
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! You are responsible for yourselves. He who goes astray cannot harm you if you are rightly guided. All of you will return to Allah; and He will make you understand all that you were doing in life
(Where necessary, even minor details of Law have been given to you in the Qur'an.) O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When death approaches you, two equitable persons among you should witness your will. If the pangs of death come upon you when you are traveling far from home, then two equitable persons other than your own people (non-Muslims) may do the witnessing. After you have prayed, let the witnesses swear by God, "We shall not sell our word for any price, even though it is in favor of a relative, and we will not conceal what we have witnessed before God, or else we will be among the sinners
If the witnesses commit this very violation, then let two others from among the nearest in kin take their place and swear by God, "Our testimony (that we have heard from the deceased before) is truer than these two, and we have not transgressed the bounds of right, or else, may we indeed be counted among the transgressors
This procedure will encourage an honest testimony to begin with. The first witnesses will be more likely to bear true witness fearing that after their oath, the oath of others might be taken. Be mindful of Allah's Laws, and listen. Allah does not guide those who decide to drift away from the Straight Path
On the Day when Allah will assemble all Messengers and ask them, "What was the long term response to your teachings?" They will say, "We have no knowledge. You, only You are the Knower of the Unseen
When Allah will say, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Recall My blessings upon you and your mother. I strengthened you with Sacred Revelation, enabled you to speak eloquently to the people while still in childhood, and also at a later age (3:45). I gave you revelation and wisdom including the Torah and the Gospel. Recall that you told them that you would raise them from dust up into the heights of glory by My leave (7:176). You made people see the Truth otherwise given to blind following by My leave. You healed the wounds of inequity on people by My leave, and you gave a new meaning to life to those who were otherwise no better than dead by My leave (3:48), (3:111), (6:123). Recall, how I prevented the Children of Israel from harming you when you came to them with all evidence of the truth (4:157). And those who were bent upon denying the truth said, "This is nothing but clear deception
Recall, I told the disciples in the Gospel, "Believe in Me and in My messenger. They said, "We believe, and be Witness that we have submitted
When the disciples said, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Is your Lord Able to send down for us a Table Spread with Heavenly sustenance? Jesus said, "Be mindful of Allah's Laws if you are believers." (Establish the Divine Order on earth and that will ensure heavenly provision in abundance and equity)
They said, "This is exactly what we want. So that we live with a contented heart and know that your System is truly workable. And that we may be witnesses for the future generations
Jesus, son of Mary, said, "O God our Lord! Help us create the Heavenly System on earth that ensures abundance of provision for all of us. Let there be a happy feast for the founders and the followers of the Divine System. This will be a Sign from You that Your Commands are blissful. Provide for us and You are the Best of providers
Allah said, " I will make abundance for you as long as you remain loyal to the System. But, for those who disbelieve afterward, I will punish them as I have never punished anyone else
On the Resurrection Day, Allah will say, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you say to mankind, 'Worship me and my mother as deities besides God?" He will respond, "Be Glorified! Never could I say what was not my right. If I said such a thing, You would indeed know it. You know what is in my mind, and I know not what is in Your mind. You, only You are the Knower of what is beyond human perception
Never did I say to them except what You Commanded me to say, 'Worship and obey Allah my Lord and your Lord.' I was a witness to them as long as I lived among them. After You caused me to die, You were the Watcher over them and You are Witness over all things and events
If You punish them, they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, You alone are Almighty, Wise
Allah will say, "This is a Day when the truthful will benefit form their truthfulness. For them are Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, wherein they will be immortal. Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. This is the Greatest Triumph
To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything therein. He has Power over all things and events, and He has appointed due measure for all things
All Praise in word and action belongs to Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and appointed darkness and light. (All things in the Universe witness and manifest His Glory). Yet those who reject the Truth, hold others as equal with their Sustainer
He is the One Who created you from inorganic matter, and decreed a term for you humans, a term known to Him. It is determined according to His Laws, for individuals (3:144), (56:60) and nations (7:34), (10:49), (13:38). Yet you keep doubting and arguing about Him
He is Allah in the heavens and in the earth. He knows all that you keep secret as well as all that you do openly
Yet whenever a Message from the Revelations of their Sustainer came to them, they turned away from it
And so they are denying this Truth as it has come to them. However, soon they will come to understand what they used to ridicule
Do they not see how many a generation Our Law of Requital has annihilated before them? We had established them on earth more firmly than you, and We gave them plenty of blessings of the heavens and the earth, abundant showers from the sky and rivers flowing beneath them. When they trailed behind in humanity, Our Law obliterated them or caused them to be enslaved by another nation
Even if We had sent down to you (O Prophet) a pre-printed book written upon parchment, so that they could feel it with their hands, the rejecters would have said, "This is nothing but obvious magic
They say, "Why is not an angel sent down to him," for them to behold? If We sent down an angel, the matter would have been judged; no further time would be allowed them. (We send angels to behold only when the period of respite is over (16)
If We sent an angel to them, We would have sent him in the form of a man (so that he could live with them and speak to them), and the truth would remain obscure as it is to them now
Messengers before you have been mocked. The very thing they used to mock overwhelmed them in the end
Say, "Travel through the earth taking lessons from history (in order to comprehend the Laws of the Rise and Fall of nations), and notice the outcome of those who belied these Laws
(From history, let them turn their attention to the Universe). Say, "To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth?" Say, "To Allah Who has prescribed for Himself Mercy." (He nourishes the entire Universe as a mother's womb nourishes the fetus with no returns, while meeting its needs at all stages of development. He does not task individuals and nations to doom, without giving them a period of respite to mend their behavior). He will assemble all individuals and nations on the Day when humanity stands on its feet, and ultimately on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt. Only those who have destroyed their "Self" will keep denying the Truth
To Him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day. He is the Knower, the Hearer
Say, "Shall I take for my master other than Allah Who is the Initiator of the heavens and the earth? And He provides all without return. Feeds but is not fed." Say, " I have been commanded to be the foremost among those who surrender to Him and ascribe not divinity besides Him
Say, "I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the retribution of an awesome Day
Whoever is saved from retribution on that Day, has attained Allah's Mercy, and that is the signal triumph
Whatever adversity touches you for violating Allah's Laws, the only way to redress it is to turn to His Laws. And you attain all blessings by following His Laws, for He is Able to do all things. He has appointed due measure for all things including harm and benefit
He is Supreme over His servants, and He is the Wise, the Aware. (He uses his Authority with Wisdom and Knowledge)
Say (O Messenger), "What could be the greatest witness?" Say, "Allah is Witness between me and you. This Qur'an has been revealed to me so that I may warn you as well as whomever it reaches. Do you bear witness that there are other deities besides Allah?" Say, "I bear no such witness." Say, "He is the One God. I disown what you associate with Him
Those who have been given the Scripture, recognize this fact as they recognize their sons (the fact of God's Transcendental Uniqueness and Oneness). Yet those who have squandered their own "Self" fail to accept such undeniable Truth
Who can be a greater transgressor than the one who invents a lie against Allah and belies His Revelations? The wrongdoers who displace reality with falsehood, will not succeed
On the Day We assemble them, We will ask the idolaters, "Where are now those partners of Allah that you conceived
They will hardly have a response, but they will swear," By Allah, our Lord, we never were idolaters
Imagine how they lie against themselves, and how their fabricated gods abandon them
Some of them pretend to listen to you, but Our Law has already veiled their hearts from understanding and caused deafness in their ears. Blind followers fail to believe even when they see all kinds of proofs. When they come to argue with you, they say about the Qur'an, "These are stories of the bygones
They repel others from the Qur'an and deprive themselves of it. They hurt their own "Self" without even knowing it
If only you could see them when they face the Fire! They will say, " We wish we could go back and never reject our Lord's Revelations, and be among the believers
Nay, they will be making excuses since the Truth they used to conceal from themselves, has become obvious to them. If they were sent back (with no retention of what they have seen), they would commit exactly the same crimes. They are indeed liars
There are people who think that the only life is the life of this world and that they will not be raised again
But if only you could see when they stand before their Lord! He will ask, "Is not this real? " They will say "Yes, by our Lord." Allah will then say, "Taste the Requital for your rejection of the Truth
Losers indeed are those who deny meeting with Allah, until the Hour suddenly comes upon them. Then they say, "We deeply regret wasting our lives in this world!" They will bear on their backs their burdens. What a miserable load
The life of this world is a play and a passing delight in comparison to the Eternal Life. The abode of the Hereafter is far better for those who live according to the Divine Laws. Will you not use Reason
We know well how their talk grieves you (O Messenger). In truth they deny you not. It is the Revelations of Allah that these wrongdoers flout
Messengers before you were denied and opposed. They steadfastly faced persecution until Our help reached them. There is none to alter the Decisions, Laws and Words of Allah. Some history of the Messengers has already come to you and sets examples for you
If their rejection is hard on you, know that even if you dug a tunnel in the ground, or climbed a ladder into the sky and brought a miracle for them, they still will not believe. If it were Allah's Will, He could assemble them to Guidance. But, He wants them to make free decisions (10:98-99). Be not among those who are carried away to ignore the Law
Only those can accept who hear and listen with an open mind (10:100). The living dead will only listen when they use their faculties (2:260), or when Allah will raise them to the second life; unto Him will they be returned
They say, "If only a miracle could come down to him from his Lord!" Say, "Allah surely has the Power to send down a miracle, but most of them do not use their knowledge." (He does not wish to stun the human intellect with supernatural phenomena. He wants people to reflect and use reason)
(There are miracles in the Universe to behold). All creatures on earth and all the birds that fly on two wings are communities like you. We did not omit any knowledge from this Book that was essential to be given through Revelation. All these creatures are part of the Divine Plan and they are together working the Plan of their Lord
Those who deny Our Signs are deaf and dumb, in total darkness. Straying, and Guidance take place according to the Divine Laws
Ask them, "If a natural disaster strikes you as Divine retribution, or when the Hour comes, would you call upon others besides God? Answer if you are truthful." (You work by Divine Laws)
Nay, you call unto Him, act, and He removes your affliction according to His Laws. At that time you forget your idols
We sent Messengers to nations before you. (They compassionately advised their people that the Supreme Law is operative on the earth, as it is in the heavens). When those nations violated Our Laws in their societies, they had to face the consequences. They should have become humble and taken corrective action right away
But, instead of being humble when Our Requital touched them, their selfish desire led their minds into rationalizing their actions. This is because their hearts had been hardened with arrogance and repeated rejection of the Truth
They ignored the Message, and persisted in their ways. We opened for them the gates of all things and they kept enjoying life exploiting others (16:112). But the Law of Requital is ever vigilant. Social orders based on injustice and inequities eventually fail. Our Requital then came with stunning speed, and all they could do was, to plunge in despair
When nations violated human rights with their unjust systems they were uprooted (6:6), (7:129). Allah replaced them with people who were not like them (10:14), (11:57). You can understand that all Praise in word and action belongs to the Lord of the Worlds; His Rule is the Rule of Law (
The exploiters of the masses think that they are smarter, and hence, they deserve to take advantage (28:76-82)). They must realize that the Creator has given them the faculties of hearing, seeing and thinking. If their faculties were taken away, who can restore these back to them but the Law of Allah? See, how We use TASREEF --presenting Our verses from various view-points -- giving them the Big Picture. Yet they turn away
Tell them that the punishment according to the Law of Requital, sneaks up or suddenly hits nations that are transgressors (11:104). Would any people perish unless they are oppressors of the masses? (Nations are not annihilated unless they violate human rights)
We have sent Our Messengers to give good news and to warn. Those who attain belief, mend their ways and work for social equity fulfilling the needs of others, will have nothing to fear nor will they have any regrets
But those who belie Our Revelations, retribution will afflict them, for they keep drifting from the secure path. (Retribution is a logical and built-in consequence of their wrongdoing (7:14)
Say, (O Messenger), "I do not claim that I have the Treasures of Allah, nor do I have the knowledge of the Unseen, nor do I tell you that I am an angel. I follow what is revealed to me. (You blindly follow your ancestors). Say, "Is the blind of the heart the same as the seer who uses reason? Won't you reflect
Counsel those who are mindful of the Law of Requital and have the slightest idea that they will be brought before their Lord. And they know that besides Allah, they will have no protector and no intercessor. Counsel them so that they may live upright
In spite of the demands of the rich and powerful leaders, you shall not turn away the poor who call upon their Lord, morning and evening, seeking His Approval. They are responsible for whatever good and bad they have done, and their toiling in labor is respectable in the Sight of Allah. Likewise they are not accountable for you. If you repelled them, you shall be of the wrongdoers
We thus let people distinguish one another's egos. The elite among them say, "Are these the people among us whom Allah has favored?" But, is not Allah best Aware of the appreciative
When those who believe in Our Revelations come to you, say, SALAMUN ALAIKUM (Peace be upon you!) Your Lord has decreed for Himself Mercy. Thus anyone among you who commits a bad deed out of ignorance, and then repents and makes amends should know that He is Forgiving, Merciful
We explain Our Laws to distinguish (between minor, unintended violations and) the way of the criminals who steal the fruit of others' labor
Say, "I am forbidden to worship and obey on whom you call instead of Allah." Say, "I will not follow your desires, otherwise I will go astray and not be among the rightly guided
Say, "I have a manifest Proof from my Lord that you deny. I do not control the retribution you challenge me to bring. Judgment belongs to none but Allah. And no one has the Ultimate Rule. He declares the Truth and He is the Best of deciders
Say, "If the ultimate decision you are hastening for was up to me, the case would have been already decided. Allah is best Aware of the wrongdoers
With Him are the keys of the Unseen. (None but He knows the subtle processes and their stages where actions culminate into their logical outcome). He knows everything in the land and in the sea. Not even a leaf falls without His knowledge. Neither is there a grain in the dark depths of the soil, nor anything fresh or withered, that He knows not. But all is written in the Open Book of the Universe around you
He suspends your consciousness during sleep at night, and knows what you do by day, when awake. He resurrects you every morning until your life span is completed. Death is, likewise, a temporary suspension of consciousness and afterward to Him is your return (39:42). Then, He will inform you of what you really accomplished
He is Supreme over His servants. His Laws guard your life until the inescapable Law of death approaches you. When death comes to one of you, Our couriers receive him without delay
Then they are restored to Allah, their Rightful Master. Surely, His is the Command and His is the Judgment. And He is the most Swift of reckoners
Say, " Who saves you, in the darkness of the land and the sea, when you call upon Him humbly and quietly saying, "If He saves us this time, we will always be thankful
Say, "It is Allah (Whose Laws you trust never to change), that protects you from different afflictions. Even then you attribute partners to Him
Say, "He is Able to send punishment upon you from above you or from beneath your feet, or to bewilder you with dissension and make you taste the tyranny one of another. (Violation of His Laws can inflict you from the top in the form of tyrannical rule, or from the bottom in the form of popular rebellion. You could then divide into hateful parties, and taste smite of one another). Note how We use TASREEF, explaining Our Verses from various vantage points, that men and women may understand
Even then, (O Messenger) Your people deny the Truth. Tell them, "I have not been appointed a guardian over you
Every tiding given in the Qur'an shall come to pass and you mankind will surely find out
When you see men and women engaged in mocking Our Verses, ignore them until they turn to a different theme. If your mind gets engrossed in their discourse, then as soon as you recollect, no longer sit with them. Those who displace decent dialogue with mockery indeed wrong their own "Self
Those who walk aright bear no responsibility for them, except decent follow up reminders, so that the fellow human beings might reflect and come to walk the Right Path
Leave to themselves those who take their religion as nothing but pastime, amusement, games of ritual, and social partying; their life revolving around quick gains of the worldly life. But follow up with reminders with the Qur'an on appropriate occasions. Remind people lest a "Self" be ruined for its own actions. No "Self" has a protecting friend, master or intercessor against the Law of Allah even if it offered any conceivable ransom. Such is the end of those who land themselves into ruin with their own actions. For them is a draught of burning despair and a painful doom. They had kept denying the Truth
Say, "Should we call unto those who can neither benefit nor harm us, and turn back on our heels after Allah has guided us aright? In that situation we would be like the person who is left wandering enticed by his satanic thoughts, stranded in the desert of doubt. And his companions trying to guide him: Come to us! Say, "The guidance of Allah is Guidance, and we are commanded to submit to the Lord of the Worlds
And to establish the Divine System and walk aright. He it is to Whom you will be summoned
He has created the heavens and the earth with a definite Plan. Whenever He says "Be!" it is. His Word is the Truth and comes True. As ever, His will be the Dominion on the Day when the Trumpet is blown (of Resurrection). Knower of the invisible and the visible, He is the Wise, the Aware
Remember when Abraham said to his father Azar (Terah), "How could you worship idols as gods? I see you and your people are in obvious error." (Azar is called Terah in the Bible and Zarah in Talmud)
We gave Abraham insight, the ability to reflect, into the Mighty Dominion of the Universe so that he might attain firm conviction
(Some of his people were idolaters and others were Nature worshipers.) One night when it grew dark upon him he saw a star. Abraham exclaimed to them, "This is my Lord!" But when it went down, he said, "I love not the things that go down
(The other night) when the moon was rising, he exclaimed, "This is my Lord." But when it went down, he said to himself and to the people, "Unless my Lord guides me, I surely will go astray
(In the morning) he saw the sun rising in splendor, and he said, "This is my Lord! This is greater!" But, as the sun went down, Abraham exclaimed, "O My people! I am free from all that you associate with God
I have focused firmly on Him Who initiated the heavens and the earth; as an upright man I turn away from all that is false. I will never be an idol worshiper in any form
His people argued with him, but Abraham said, "You dispute with me about Allah when He has guided me? I have no fear of the idols you set up. Nothing can happen to me contrary to the Laws of Allah. My Lord's Knowledge encompasses all things. Will you not then, use your intellect?" (This is how Abraham tried that his people reflect and be rational)
He said, "Why should I fear that which you set up beside Him, when you fear not to set up beside Allah, deities for which He has sent no authority and that are utterly powerless. Think which of the two sides among us deserves peace and security? (3:150-151), (29:41), (33:39) Answer me if you have the answer
Those who attain belief and cloak not their belief with wrong doctrines, for them is inner peace and security. They are rightly guided
This is the logic (examples of the star, the moon and the sun) that We taught Abraham against his people. We exalt people in ranks when they follow Our Laws. Your Lord is Wise, All-Knowing
We gave him Isaac the son, and Jacob the grandson, and We guided them. Before Abraham, We guided Noah and from his descendants, We guided David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. We thus reward the benefactors of humanity
And Zachariah, John, Jesus and Elias; all in the ranks of the righteous who fulfilled the needs of mankind
And Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot. To all of them We gave distinction over people of their times
And We gave distinction to some of their ancestors, children and siblings and guided them to the Straight Path
This is the Guidance of Allah. He guides His servants according to His Laws (4:88). If they had associated others with Allah, their actions would have been vain
They were the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, Sound Judgment and Prophethood. Now, if these people reject these truths, We have entrusted these truths to people who will not refuse to acknowledge them
Those were the ones guided by Allah, so follow their guidance. Say, (O Messenger), "I ask of you no wage for this. This (Guidance in the Qur'an) is but a Reminder to all nations
People do not value Allah as He must be valued when they say, "Allah has not revealed His Message to any human being." Ask them, "Who then revealed the Scripture which Moses brought, a Light and Guidance for people? Although you put it down on parchment which you show, but you conceal a lot. You were taught what neither you, nor your ancestors knew before." Say, "Allah (revealed it)." Then leave them to play at their vain talk
And this Qur'an is the Blessed Book that We have sent down, confirming the Divine Origin of what was revealed before it, that you (O Prophet) may warn the Central Town, Makkah, and places around it. (From this Center, the Message will fan out (6:90), (12:104)). Those who believe in (the Law of Recompense) the Hereafter, accept this Book as a comprehensive Guide. And they will establish the Divine System
Who can be a greater wrongdoer than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah, or claims receiving Revelation while he has received none? Or someone who says, "I, too, can bestow the like of what Allah has bestowed." If only you could see such transgressors reach the pangs of death! The angels extend their hands to them saying, "Bring out your egos. This day you will be awarded a punishment of disgrace for speaking lies concerning Allah, and being arrogant to His revelations
Now you have come to Us alone just as We created you individuals the first time. You have left behind all your belongings. We do not see with you the intercessors you idolized. Now all ties among you have been cut off and your assumptions have failed you
Allah is the One Who causes the grains and the seeds to split and germinate. He produces the living from the dead, and the dead from the living. Such is Allah. Where are you headed in bewilderment? (Similar are the Laws that apply to individuals and nations. They must develop their inherent potentials in order to prosper)
He is the Cleaver of the daybreak. He has appointed the night for stillness, (rest and tranquility) and the sun and the moon to run their well-calculated courses. They become means of calculating time for you (10:5). Such is the Design of the All-Powerful, the All-Knowing
He it is Who has made the stars to guide you through the darkness of the land and the sea. (And they never fail to guide you (21:33), (36:40)). We have scattered Our Signs throughout the Universe for people of Science
And He it is Who initiated you from a single life cell. Then in the process of evolution He appointed stages, from one station to the next destination. (Thus goes on the journey of life here and in the Hereafter (11:6). We have explained Our Laws for people who will learn and understand
(He took care of your provision even before you were created.) He it is Who sends down water from the heights. With it We produce vegetation of all kind; green multitudes, complex grains, palm trees, from their pollens spring pendant clusters, and gardens of grapes, olives and pomegranate; fruits that are similar and diverse. Look upon the fruit thereof and look upon its ripening. These are signs for those who reach conviction through reason
Yet, there are people who think falsely that there are invisible creatures, Jinns, with occult powers that share the Divine Attributes. But He has created them, and people assign sons and daughters to Him out of sheer ignorance. Glorified, Exalted is He, infinitely Above what they ascribe to Him
Wonderful Originator of the heavens and the earth! How can He have a son when He never chose for Himself a mate? He creates all things (and does not procreate (112:3)) and He is the Profound Knower of all things and events
Such is Allah, your Sustainer. There is no god but He. No one is worthy of worship and obedience but He, the Creator of all things. Hence, obey Him! He is the Guardian of all and takes care of every thing
No vision can encompass Him while He encompasses all vision. He is Subtile, Unfathomable, and therefore beyond physical perception. He is Aware of the minutest details
(You are not expected to know His Person.) Say (O Prophet), "The manifest Enlightenment has come to you from your Lord. Whoever sees the Truth, does so for his own good. And whoever turns blind, hurts himself. I am not your keeper or guardian
And thus We give many facets to Our verses that they might realize that, "You (O Prophet) have indeed taken these teachings deep down in your heart." (Allah has taught the Messenger in the most beautiful manner). And through this method of TASREEF We make the Message clear to those who use their perceptual knowledge
Follow that which is revealed to you from your Lord. There is no god but He. And disregard those who associate others with Him (21:20-2)
We could have created all people without free will and they would then not associate any partners with Him. (But guidance has been distinguished from straying (2:256)). And We have not appointed you (O Messenger) as their guardian, nor are you responsible for them
O Believers! Insult not the idols they set up besides Allah. They might insult Allah in their ignorance and hurt themselves. To every community Our Law has made their deeds seem fair. Then unto their Lord is their return and He will inform them what they accomplished and He will make them understand what they really used to do in life
They swear by Allah that if a miracle comes to them, they would surely believe in it (the Book). Say, "All miracles are with Allah (if you reflect on the Universe). What can make you understand that even if a physical miracle came to them, they will find other excuses and still not believe
Our Law keeps their hearts and their eyes turned away from the Truth. Since they have preemptively rejected it (the Qur'an), We let them wander blindly in their rebellious attitude
Even if We caused the angels to descend to them, and the dead to speak to them, and We lined up all the miracles before them, they would not believe. People can be guided only according to Allah's Laws, but most of them choose the way of ignorance
Thus We have appointed to every Prophet enemies. The rebellious among the urban and the rural populations rose in opposition, (since the Message struck at their vested interests). They plotted and inspired each other with fancy words. If your Lord willed, they won't do that. (But, challenges come your way only to expand your personalities (2:286)). (O Prophet) Leave them alone with their fabrications
Those who love quick gains and neglect the long-term benefits and the Hereafter, are parties to such fabrications. Let them delight in it and let them earn from it what they may
Say, "Shall I seek for Judge and Ruler someone other than Allah? He it is Who has revealed this Book, well expounded in detail for you." Those whom We have given the Book know that this is revealed in Truth from your Lord. Be not among those who argue for the sake of argument
Perfected is the Word of your Lord in Truth and Justice. None can change His Words and His Laws. This announcement comes to you from the Profound Hearer, the Knower
(People will confront you with what the majority is doing.) Now if you pay heed to, or get intimidated by majority of those who live on earth, they will lead you astray from Allah's Way. Most of the people follow nothing but conjecture and they only live by guesswork
Only your Lord (shows the Right Path and) knows best those who stray and those who are rightly guided
(People wonder why different things have been made Lawful or Unlawful in the Qur'an. But what the majority thinks shall never be the criterion 3:93). So eat of that which Allah has made Permissible, if you are indeed believers in His Revelations
Why should you not eat of that on which Allah's Name has been pronounced (i.e. it is not dedicated to other than Him)? He has explained to you in detail what is forbidden along with certain exceptions in dire need (5:3). Numerous of the clergy mislead people in this matter without knowledge, and with their personal opinions. Verily, your Lord is fully Aware of those who go beyond moderation
Abstain from violating the Divine Commands, whether openly or secretly. Those who drag down their "Self" by such violations will be awarded what they have earned. (They will live a subhuman existence and meet a befitting consequence)
Eat not anything (not just meat) unless the Name of Allah has been pronounced first, for that will mean drifting away from Commands. The rebellious among people inspire their companions to dispute with you. If you people heed them, you will be associating others with Allah
(Our Light revives the living dead and makes them walk honorably among mankind.) Is one who was dead and We gave him life with Light that enables him to move among people, equal to one in total darkness from which he cannot come out? (When people have their belief system jumbled up, they lose the power to distinguish between the right and wrong). Hence, the rejecters of the Truth find their own deeds pleasing
This is how We allow the greatest ones in every community to become its greatest criminals, to weave their schemes. Yet it is only against themselves that they scheme without even knowing it
When a Message comes to them, they say, "We will not believe until we are directly given what Allah's Messengers are given." But, Allah knows best with whom to place His Message. Such criminals will be humiliated by Allah's Law of Requital, and suffer a heavy punishment for their scheming
Whoever follows Allah's Law of Guidance, He expands his chest wide open to submission. And whoever violates Allah's Law of Guidance, feels his chest tight and narrowed as if he were climbing to the sky. Thus Allah's Law appoints disgrace for those who continue to reject the Truth
And this (Qur'an) is the Path of your Lord, a Straight Path. Clearly indeed have We detailed Our Revelations for those who pay attention and take them to their heart
For them is the wonderful Abode of Peace with their Sustainer. He will be their Protecting Friend because of what they used to do
The day will come when He gathers all of them and says, "O You nomads! You have seduced many of the urbanites." Their urbanite friends will say, "Our Lord! We enjoyed each other's company (and both used each other opportunistically as happens in a chaotic society) until we wasted a life span You had given us. He will say, "Fire is your home. Abide therein forever since Allah's Laws never change. Your Lord, the Wise, All-Knowing has designed the Law of Requital
Thus Our Law makes the wrongdoers keep company towards a common earning. (The criminals of the same kind tend to hang around together)
O You, assembly of the nomads and the urbanites! Did not Messengers come to you from among you, who conveyed to you My Messages and warned you of the meeting of this your Day? They will say, "We testify against ourselves." Pursuit of only the worldly life preoccupied their hearts and minds. They will bear witness against themselves that they disregarded the Truth
And so it is that your Lord never destroys communities arbitrarily while their people are unaware of their wrongdoings
The ranks of all individuals and nations are determined solely by their deeds, and your Lord is not unaware of what they do. (Calling yourselves believers won't help)
Your Lord is Absolute, the Lord of Mercy. He could replace you with whomever He Will, like He raised you from the generations of other folk.(It is His Mercy that He does Justice to peoples without discrimination, and His Rule is the Rule of Law)
That which you are promised will surely come to pass, and you can never evade the Divine Laws
Say (to the opponents O Messenger), "O My people! Do all that is in your power. Behold, I am working. Very soon, you will come to know for which of us is the ultimate success. Violators of human rights will never be successful
(How can their program succeed when their belief system and the resulting actions are wrong?) They set aside a portion of Allah's provision of crops and cattle and claim, "This is for Allah, and this is for our idols." But the share of their idols never reaches Allah, and the share of Allah does reach their idols. What an unjust decision they make! (Their priesthood devours both portions of their making, and the poor remain wanting. To Allah reaches what you spend on the needy)
(At the prompting of the mystics and monks, and in the name of their temples, idols, sanctuaries, and the dead "holy" men and women), the MUSHRIKEEN do acts of omission and commission against their own children! They inflict great pain upon themselves and their families in the name of religion. If they followed Allah's Commands, they wouldn't have done it. (Since they take this abuse as a part of their plan to salvation, for the moment), leave them alone with their fabrications (until Reality gazes them in the eyes)
And they say, "Such and such cattle and fruits of the field are sacred. No one will eat of them except whom we permit." They also arbitrarily prohibit the riding of some animals (saying that it has been dedicated to some elite or saint. Aren't such VIP favors very much alive in the modern day JAHILYAH?) And there are cattle over which they pronounce not the Name of Allah (but of someone else to please people). Such are their fabrications in His Name. Soon He will reward them for their false imagery
(They display their bias toward women in weird ways.) They say, "What is in the bellies of these cattle is reserved for the males among us, and forbidden to our wives." But if it is a stillbirth, they permit their wives to share it. He, the Wise, the Knower, will repay them for their innovations
Lost indeed are those who kill their children foolishly, and forbid what Allah has provided them as sustenance. And they attribute their innovations to Allah! (They deprive their children to the point of starvation and death in the name of religious service, when under the instructions of the priesthood they abandon their families). Their straying is far from the way of the rightly guided
He it is Who creates Bounties for you, such as gardens that are cultivated, greens that are wild, palm trees of various kinds, crops in diversity, olives and pomegranates, fruits that are similar and diverse. Enjoy them, but give Him His Right. Render the poor what is their Divine Right, on the day of the harvest. This is how you shall give Allah His Right. Do not waste the Bounty of Allah. He does not love the wasteful
Among the large and small quadrupeds some are for work and transportation and others for flesh, and their skins for bedding materials. Enjoy what Allah has provided you. And follow not the footsteps of Satan. Satan, your selfish desire, is your open enemy
Take the example of eight quadrupeds: Two sheep, one male and one female, two goats, one male and one female. Say, "Is it the two males that He has forbidden, or the two females, or the calves in the wombs of the females? Tell me if you have true knowledge
Then two camels, one male and one female, two cows, one male and one female. Say, "Is it the two males that He has forbidden, or the two females, or the calves in the wombs of the two females? Were you witnesses when Allah made such prohibitions? Who can be a greater transgressor than the one who invents a lie and attributes it to Allah? They mislead people without knowledge. Allah does not intervene to guide those who displace knowledge with conjecture
Say, "I do not find in the Revelation given to me, any food that is prohibited for one who wishes to eat except: Carrion (dead meat), running blood as against organ meats, the flesh of swine for it is disapproved, or anything (not just meat) which, in disobedience, has been dedicated to other than Allah." If one is forced by dire need without being deliberate and without transgressing, your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.
For those who are Jewish, We had prohibited some edibles, such as animals with undivided hoof, the fat of the cow and the sheep, except that which is carried on their backs or on their intestines, or what is mixed-up in the bone. But that was only a temporary retribution for their disobedience (4:160). We are indeed True to Our Word
If they accuse you of falsehood (O Prophet), tell them, "Your Lord is a Lord of Infinite Mercy, but His Requital will not be averted from the guilty
Those who associate others with Allah will say, "Had Allah willed, we would not practice idolatry, nor would our ancestors, nor would we prohibit anything." So did their ancestors argue falsely until they tasted Our Requital. Say, "Do you have any proven knowledge that you can present (that the human being is created without free will (18:29), (76:3), (90:10)? Nay, you follow nothing but conjecture. You only run after guess-work
Say, "The most Powerful Reasoning, the Final Evidence belongs to Allah. If He Willed, He could have made all of you innately guided (like other creation who spontaneously follow Divine Laws (16:)
Say, "Come, bring forward your witnesses who can bear witness that Allah forbade all this. And if they bear witness falsely, do not bear witness with them. You shall not follow the opinions of those who deny our Revelations, nor of those who believe not in the life to come, and deem others equal with their Lord
Say, "Come, let me convey to you what your Sustainer has enjoined upon you as a sacred duty: Associate no one with Him. Honor you parents, do good to them, fulfill their needs. Neither kill your children for fear of poverty nor deprive them of proper training and education. We provide for you and for them. (The Divine System will take care of your needs and their needs). Do not go near immodesty or lewdness whether openly or in secret. Do not slay a life, life that Allah has made sacred except in the course of justice. This He has commanded you so that you use reason and obey these Commands
Allah Commands you further: Approach not the wealth of the orphan except for their own benefit until they come of age with full maturity of body and mind. Give full weight and full measure in all your dealings. Uphold justice in all aspects of your life. Our Commands are meant to widen your human potential. We do not assign any "Self" responsibility beyond its means. And when you voice an opinion, be just, even if it is against a relative. Fulfill your Covenant with Allah, the unwavering allegiance to the Divine System (1:4-5), (9:111). This He Commands for you to bear in mind
(Say, O My people), this is my Straight Path, (and I, Muhammad, walk this Path (12:108)). Follow it, then, and follow not other ways that take you away from His Path. This He has ordained for you so that you live upright
We had given Moses the Scripture complete for him who would do good to others. We gave him the Scripture in detail as guidance and a mercy that they might believe in the meeting of their Lord (and that all actions are recompensed)
And now this Qur'an is the Blessed Book that We have revealed. So follow it and walk aright so that you attain Mercy (and your human potential is guaranteed development, like a fetus grows in the mother's womb)
(It has been given to you) lest you say, "The Scripture was sent down to two groups (Jews and Christians) before our time, and we are unaware what they originally read
Or lest you say, "If a Divine Scripture had come to us, we would be better guided than they. Now has come to you a clear evidence of Truth from your Lord. It is a Beacon and Mercy. Who can be a greater transgressor than the one who denies the Revelations of Allah and turns away from them in disregard? Our Law of Requital will award those who turn away from Our Revelations, an awful suffering for their disregard
Are they waiting for angels, your Lord, or some physical miracles to come to them? On the Day one of such Signs comes, no person will benefit from declaring belief if he did not believe before. Or who, while believing, did not do good works. (Belief has to be based on Reason and it must lead you to a productive life). Say, "Keep on waiting (for miracles), we too are waiting (for the results of our efforts)
(There is only one Straight Path.) O Messenger! Those who break the unity of their DEEN and become sects, you have nothing to do with them whatsoever. Behold, their case will go to Allah and He will tell them what they had been doing
Whoever brings a good deed will receive a tenfold reward. And whoever brings an ill deed will be requited for one. And they will not be wronged
Say, "As for me, my Lord has guided me to a Straight Path, the perfect DEEN of Abraham, the upright, who was no idolater in any sense
Say, "All my duties to the Divine System, the ways to discharge them, my living and my dying are for Allah alone, the Lord of the Worlds
He has no partner. This is what I have been commanded and I am the foremost of those who surrender to Him
Say, "Shall I seek anyone other than Allah as a lord when He is the Sustainer of all things? No "Self" benefits but from its own works, and none bears the load of another. Then unto your Lord is your return and He will make you understand wherein you differed
He it is Who has made you inheritors of the earth after other nations. And your ranks are determined by your actions. People and nations must create in them the capacity to live with honor (10:14). The real test is what you do with that which He has given you. Your Lord is Swift in retribution. Yet He is Forgiving, Merciful
L.M.S. Alif. Lam. Mim. Saad. Allah Aleem, the Knower; As-Sadiq, the Truthful, states that
This Book, a Divine Writ, has been revealed to you (O Messenger). Let it not burden your chest. It has been revealed to you so that you may caution your fellow human beings against the consequences of their wrong actions. This is a Reminder for those who attain belief
O People! Follow what has been sent to you from your Lord and follow no masters other than Him. How seldom do you keep this in mind
(You will find ample documentation in history that when communities ignored Our Permanent Value System they met with destruction.) How many a community Our Law of Requital has annihilated! Our Requital visited them by night, or while they slept at noon
They had no plea when Our Requital came to them, but they said, "We were indeed unjust, and used to oppress the vulnerable
We will certainly question those to whom Our Messengers were sent, and verily We will question the Messengers
We shall recount the whole story for them, for We were never absent in Time and Place
The scales on that Day will be truly equitable. Those whose constructive deeds are heavy, will prosper
And those whose scales are light, will be the ones who have put their 'Self' in loss. This is because they used to replace Our Revelations with man-made dogmas
(Take heed before the final scales are set). We have placed you on earth and given you means for a fulfilling life. How seldom are you grateful! (Being grateful is sharing Allah's bounties with others (16:)
We created you, then shaped you, then told the angels, "Be of service to Adam! And they agreed to be of service, all but Iblis (Satan). He was not of the subservient
God said, "What stopped you from being subservient when I ordered you?" Iblis responded, "I am better than he. You created me from fire, and him from clay." (Emotions are fiery in relation to sound judgment. The criterion of honor is not lineage, color, caste or nation. It is nothing but good conduct)
(Recall that many of the verses of the Qur'an are allegorical.) God said, "You are dismissed and degraded hence. It is not for you to be arrogant here. Go forth, then! Among the humiliated you shall be
He (Iblis) said, "Give me respite till the Day they are raised up
The request was granted, " Be among those who are given respite
Iblis said, "Since You have willed that I go astray, I will lurk in ambush for them in Your Straight Path
Then I will assault them openly and secretly, through their strengths and through their weaknesses. And You will not find most of them grateful (for Your Guidance)
He said, "Go forth from here, degraded and banished. Whoever follows you among them, I will surely fill hell with you all
O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the Garden and eat from whatever you may wish; but do not approach this one tree, lest you become wrong doers." (Contrary to the popular beliefs that the Forbidden Tree was the tree of knowledge, fruit of this plant and that plant, or of sexual charms, it refers to humanity dividing itself like the branches of a tree (2:35-36), (2:2)
Then Satan deceived them in order to reveal their imperfections and fallibility to them. He said, "Your Lord forbade this tree lest you become angels or become immortals." (The selfish desire of humans prompted them to think about their own children rather than the collective good. That would, in a way, give them power and immortality)
And Satan swore to both, man and woman, "I am a sincere advisor to you
So by deceit Satan brought about their downfall. They tasted of the tree of discord and started to divide into branches. (Personal interest dominated their minds rather than the collective good of all. Humanity began to fall into mutual contention). Soon their imperfections became obvious and they tried to conceal them in vain with superficial courtesy. Then came a reminder from their Lord, "Did I not forbid you that tree and tell you that Satan is your open enemy
They said, "Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. Unless You forgive us and have mercy on us, we will certainly be lost." (Man and woman accepted responsibility acknowledging that they had free will as against Satan who had ascribed his disobedience to the Will of Allah)
(Self interests of people had given rise to unjust marking of land and individual hoarding. Suppression of the weak had begun). Allah told them that they had fallen down from the high station of humanity. They had ignored the Law that "Mankind is one community" (10:19). From then on, they would live as tribes and nations, enemies to one another, "There will be for you on land an abode and sustenance for a while
He said, "You shall live in the earth and die there and be resurrected from there." (In the meantime they could regain their lost paradise if they followed the Divine Commands)
O Children of Adam! We have provided you with garments to cover your bodies as well as to adorn you. The best garment for you to wear, in addition, is good conduct. Your character decorates you inside out. These are the verses of Allah that they must take to heart
O Children of Adam! Let not your selfish desire deceive you as it deceived your ancestors, caused them to lose their paradise, and exposed their imperfections. A host of selfish and rebellious desires lurk within you. You can't even see them but these Satans see you and befriend those who do not believe
(As an example) when people commit an indecency they say, "We found our forefathers doing it and Allah has enjoined it upon us." (Made it natural for us). Say (O Prophet), "Allah never enjoins indecency. Do you attribute to Allah of which you have no knowledge
Say (O Messenger), "My Lord enjoins justice and moderation and to stand devoted to Him alone in complete obedience. Call unto Him, sincere in your Faith in Him alone. He it is Who brought you into being in the first place, and to Him you will return." (And this is how you can regain your lost Paradise in both worlds)
But there will be two parties among people. Some of them will walk aright according to the Divine Laws of Guidance while others will ally with Satans as their friends. They take their religious leadership as their masters instead of Allah, and think that they are rightly guided
O Children of Adam! Subservience and obedience to the Divine Commands ensures for you adornment and nice things in life. So enjoy Allah's Bounties, but do not commit excesses. Allah does not love the wasters
Say, "Who has forbidden the beauty and nice things Allah has brought forth for His servants, and the pure clean things of your choice?" Say, "Such things are for those in this world who practically believe in the Divine Laws. And on the Day of Resurrection they will be exclusively for those who attained Conviction." We thus explain Our Laws for those who make good use of what they learn
Say, "My Lord forbids only: Indecent shameful deeds, open or secret. Actions that hurt the "Self" and drag down the individual and collective human potential. Unjust aggression. Idol worship in any form. It has been completely unauthorized by Allah. And that you say things about Allah that you know not
All nations and communities determine the terms of their Rise and Fall in accordance with these Divine Laws. And these Laws work with meticulous timing, without delay and without hastening
O Children of Adam! (I had revealed in the early stages of human civilization that I will keep sending My Guidance to you (2:213)). So, when Messengers of your own come to you narrating My Messages, those who will walk aright and mend their ways, will have nothing to fear or grieve
On the other hand, those who reject Our Revelations and scorn them, will dwell in the Hellfire to live therein, forever
Who can do a greater wrong than the one who invents lies about Allah, or belies His Revelations? They get their due share according to the Law of Respite till Our couriers of death come to them saying, "Where are those on whom you called besides Allah?" They will respond, " They have left us hanging." Then they will testify against themselves that they had been disbelievers
Allah will command them to join the previous rural and urban communities into the Fire. Every later group will blame the former, "Our Lord! These are the ones who misled us; double their punishment." He will say, "The punishment is doubled for both." (The first group violated the Laws and misled others, and the second group was guilty of blind following and misleading their successors)
The first nation will say to the last, "You are not the least bit better than us. So taste the doom for what you earned
Those who deny Our Messages, and scorn them, the gates of Heaven will not be opened for them. And they will not enter the Garden until the camel goes through the eye of a needle. This is how We recompense the guilty. (Likewise nations that ignore the Divine Laws will utterly fail to establish a paradise on earth)
Hell is their bed and their covering as well. This is how We recompense the guilty, those who steal the fruit of others' labor and thus violate human rights. (Nations that fail to build their own paradise on earth only lurk on hellish ground. They have a ceiling of chaos keeping them from rising in the community of nations)
On the other hand, those who attain conviction in Divine Laws and work to augment the individual and collective potential of humanity, will succeed in attaining paradise of their own making (3:136). (The paradise of people's own making will never be lost; it will be their heritage in the life to come (2:25), (3:133), (55:45-47)). We never assign goals to people that are beyond their capacity
(In earthly life human beings conceal many negative feelings that they have towards others even though they may have cordial relations with them). We will remove all negative emotions from their hearts. There will be no such feelings amongst the dwellers of earthly and heavenly Paradise wherein streams will flow. (The blessings of such a Social Order would be everlasting!) They will say: "All Praise is due to Allah Who has guided us to such a beautiful destination. Without Divine guidance we would never have reached this place. Allah's Messengers brought to us this Truth. It will be proclaimed: "This is the Paradise which you have inherited; and since you have inherited this Paradise as a result of your own effort, you will not be expelled from it
The dwellers of the Garden will call out to the dwellers of the Fire, "We have found that what our Sustainer promised us has come true. Have you too, found that what your Sustainer promised you has come true?" They will answer, "Yes!" Then from their midst a voice will proclaim, "Allah rejects the oppressors who wrongfully violated human rights
They hindered men and women from the Path of Allah and tried to make it crooked, thus practically denying the Law of Requital and the life Hereafter
Between the people of Paradise and Hell there will be a veil. On the Heights there will be people with insight who will recognize others by their looks. They will greet those who, in their estimate, are worthy of entering the Garden, with "Peace!" (2:143), (4:4)
When they turn to the ones who have been living a hellish life, they will say, "Our Lord! Keep us away from the ways of the wrongdoers and violators of human rights
The people on the Heights will recognize another group and say to them, "How did your multitude, the wealth you amassed and the things you took pride in, help you
And pointing to the dwellers of the Garden, they will say, "Are these not the people about whom you used to swear that Allah will never bestow His Grace upon them? They are entering the Garden where there will be no fear or grief." (They will make it clear that the Divine Law favors no particular peoples. Obeying His Laws brings His Grace and Bounties"). Follow His Laws and, "Enter the paradise of your own making, the society where there shall be no fear nor grief
The dwellers of Hell will say to the dwellers of Paradise, "Give us something of the life-giving resources and the provisions bestowed on you by Allah." They will reply, "Allah has made these things forbidden to the rejecters of His Laws." (The hellish societies will expect Allah's provisions to be granted to them as free-bees. They will be told that Allah's Bounties can only be achieved by establishing the Right System, and His Law forbids these Bounties to the rejecters)
Those who took their religion as mere amusement and ritual partying, were deceived by immediate gains of the worldly life (6:70). We will forget them as they forgot the meeting of this Day, and rejected Our Revelations
We have given them a Book of Knowledge that explains the Guidance in full detail. It is a Mercy for those who accept it. (It has the Power to change hellish societies into paradise on earth)
Are they waiting until the consequences stare them in their eyes? The Day the consequences appear, those who disregarded it will say, "The Messengers of our Lord did bring the Truth. Are there any intercessors to intercede on our behalf? Or can we be returned that we behave differently from our past?" They have put their "Self" in loss and their own forgery fails them. (They will seek mediation for their mutual conflicts and long for starting from scratch. Since they have hurt their "Self", they have lost the power of judgment and they would need help. They have been fabricating unworkable systems)
Verily, your Sustainer is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth in six stages, and is established on the Throne of His Almightiness (10:3), (13:2). He draws the night over the day, each seeking the other in rapid succession. The sun, the moon, the stars are committed to serve by His Command. Listen and remember, to Him belongs the World of Creation, and to Him belongs the World of Command. Exalted, He is the Lord of the Worlds
(He has the power to revive dead nations). Call unto your Lord humbly and in the secrecy of your hearts. He does not love those who transgress the bounds of what He has ordained as right
Hence, do not spread corruption on earth after it has been set in order. Call unto Him in fear and hope. (Fear the consequences of violating His Commands and hope since you know His Promise is always true). Allah's Mercy is close to the benefactors of humanity
He is the One who sends pleasant winds bearing good news of the forthcoming rain of His blessings. When the winds carry the heavy clouds, We drive them to a land that is dead. The water then causes all kinds of fruit and vegetation to sprout. This is how We can revive dead people and nations. Herein is a sign for those who pay heed
The land that has been well prepared springs up rich produce by the Leave of its Lord. The land that has not been well prepared only yields scant vegetation. (Similar is the situation of nations that wish to come back to life. They need reform at the grassroots level). This is how We explain Our verses from various vantage points for those who are grateful to receive such clear Guidance
(Now, We give you a brief resume of the previous Prophets and their nations for you to draw lessons). We sent Noah to his people. He said, " O My people! Serve Allah. You have no other god beside Him. (If you reform not) I fear for you the retribution of an awesome day
The chiefs of his people said, "We surely see you in manifest error
Noah said, "O My people! There is no error in me. I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
I only convey to you the Messages of my Lord. My advice is sincere to you and I know from Allah that which you know not
Do you wonder that there has come to you a Reminder from your Lord through a man from amongst you - to warn you, and to show you the secure path so that you may flourish in Grace
But they denied him. So, We saved him and those with him in the ship, and drowned those who denied Our Revelations. Indeed they were folk blind in arrogance. (A great flood was about to come and Noah was informed. He and his followers built an Ark. They were with him in belief and in the ship, so were they saved)
To the people of Aad, We sent their brother, Hud. He said, "O My people! Serve Allah. You have no god beside Him. Don't you wish to walk aright
The elite among his people who were disbelieving said, "Ah! We see that you are in folly, and we think that you are a liar
He said, "O My people! There is no folly in me. I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
I convey to you the Messages of my Lord, and I am a sincere and trustworthy adviser to you
Do you wonder that there has come to you a Reminder from your Lord through a man from amongst you, to warn you? Recall that He made you successors to Noah's people and gave you abundant power. Keep in mind Allah's Authority and Blessings that you may continue to prosper
They said, "Have you come to us that we worship Allah alone and give up what our forefathers worshiped? Bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are truthful
(Aad were powerful people but their society had gone unjust. Since there is a Law of Respite for nations, they flourished and were unable to see the wrong thus far). Hud said, "Allah's Law of Requital is already hovering over you. Do you argue with me about certain names, false authorities that you and your forefathers have fabricated? And Allah never authorized them (53:23). Then wait for the consequences, and I am also waiting
The people of Aad who inhabited a big empire in the North of Arabia, failed to heed the warning of the Prophet. Then hurricane winds annihilated them (41:16)). We saved him and those with him by Mercy from Us, and cut the root of those who belied Our Messages and would not believe
The people of Thamud were successors to Aad. To them We sent their brother, Saleh. He said, "O My people! Serve Allah. You have no other god but He. The Clear Truth has come to you from your Lord. This is the she-camel of Allah, a token for your obedience. So let her feed in Allah's earth and do not harm her lest painful torment seize you." (Their feudal lords controlled land, crop, oases and water resources, and the weak were suffering. Saleh assigned a she-camel as a symbol of their reformation)
Saleh said, "Remember how He made you inherit the land after Aad and established you therein. You build castles in the valleys and carve out homes in the mountains. So, remember Allah's bounties and do not spread corruption in the land
Their leaders said to the believers, "How do you know that Saleh is sent from his Lord?" They responded, "We believe in the Message he has brought." (The bringer of such Sublime Message cannot be a liar)
(The arrogant leaders and the feudal lords could see their vested interests getting hit, so they decided to reject the Divine Message.) The arrogant ones said to the believers, "We reject what you believe in
They killed the she-camel, rebelled against their Lord's Command and challenged, "O' Saleh! Bring the doom you threaten us with, if you are really a Messenger
(In their life of luxury, like other strong nations they felt invincible.) The destruction came from under their feet. A powerful earthquake annihilated them, leaving them lifeless in their homes
Saleh was grieved that his people disregarded the Message of his Lord. He moved away from the township saying to himself, "O My people! I gave my Lord's Message to you, and advised you sincerely, but you never liked good advisers
(Hud, Saleh, and their respective followers, escaped destruction because they believed in the Revelation and took appropriate precautions. The people of Prophet Lot lived by the Dead Sea in Sodom.) Lot told them, "You commit such an abomination that no one in the worlds has done before you
You approach men with lust in preference to women. Nay, but you are a people crossing all bounds
They said, "Drive them out of your town! These people want to be models of purity
We saved him and his followers. But his wife who lagged behind in belief stayed with the crowd, and was destroyed
(It was the time when a huge volcano was about to erupt. The Prophet of God had advance knowledge and he moved out at the right time, along with his followers.) And We rained a rain upon them (a huge shower of stones). See now how grievous was the outcome of the guilty
(And there was the Nation of Midyan that lived between Madinah and Damascus since around 2000 B.C. They were the descendants of Prophet Abraham's son MIDYAN from his third wife QATOORA. Most of them were traders but they squandered justice and equity in business.) We sent Shoaib (Jethro), their brother, to them (around 1300 BC). He said, "O My people! Obey Allah. There is none else worthy of obedience and Law-giving. Now has come to you the clear evidence of Truth from your Lord. Be loyal to measure and weight in all your dealings. Withhold not from people the things that are rightfully theirs. Do not corrupt the earth after it has been set straight. All this will be better for you if you would but believe. Learn from history about the outcome of the corrupt and the bloody criminals
Lurk not on every road threatening travelers, and hindering from the Path of Allah those who believe in Him. Nor seek to make it crooked. Remember, when you were few and weak and how He multiplied and strengthened you. Learn from history about the outcome of the corrupt and the bloody criminals
A group among you has believed in what I have been sent with and the other group has not believed. Then have patience (let the believers work their program of reform), until Allah judges between us. He is the Best of deciders
The arrogant leaders of his community said, "O Shoaib! We will certainly drive you and those who believe with you out of our town unless you return to our ways." Shoaib said, "Why, even though we detest your ways
Shall we forge a lie against Allah by embracing your ways when He has rescued us from the wrong? How could we revert to your ways and thus violate the Will of Allah, our Sustainer? Our Lord encompasses all things in Knowledge, (and He knows what is right and what is wrong). In Allah do we put our trust. O Our Lord! Make the Truth triumph between our people and us. You are the best Exponent of the Truth
But the disbelieving chiefs of his nation said, "O People! If you follow Shoaib, then truly we will be ruined (as we lose the big profits in our trade)
A tremendous earthquake seized them and the morning found them dead in their homes, on the ground
Those who denied Shoaib became as though they had never lived there. Those who denied Shoaib, were the losers
(The Prophet of God had been forewarned of the oncoming catastrophe and he moved out into the valley along with his followers.) As he was leaving, he said, "O My people! I delivered my Lord's Messages to you and gave you sincere advice. How could I mourn for people who rejected the Truth
We sent no Prophet to a community without Our Law of Requital trying them with adversity and tribulation for their wrongdoings, so that they become humble
Then We changed their plight for good till they became affluent. Then they said, "(Hardships and prosperity are just a matter of chance). Even our parents and forefathers have gone through these ups and downs." Our Requital seized them when they least expected it. (To them it appeared sudden, but unjust systems insidiously move towards the consequences)
If the people of the towns had believed in the Divine Laws and run their system aright, We would have opened for them blessings from the heaven and the earth. But they denied and what they earned with their deeds seized them
Can the people of any community ever feel secure that Our Requital will not come upon them at night, while they are asleep
Or do the people of townships feel secure from the coming of Our Requital upon them in the daytime while they play
Do they feel secure from the subtle progression of the Divine Laws? Do they think that the Divine Law grants them unconditional security? Only the losers feel secure from the subtle progression of Allah's Law of Requital
Is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth from previous generations that they could suffer similar consequences? Trailing behind in the community of nations is a tribulation in itself. And Our Law can cause their intellectual and perceptual faculties to be sealed and blunted for their failings
Such were the communities whose historical accounts We relate to you (O Prophet). Their Messengers came to them with clear evidence of Truth. But they preemptively rejected it, and then stuck to rejection. Or they denied the Truth in blind following since their ancestors had denied it. This is how the rejecters cause Allah's Law to seal their hearts to reason
And in most of them We found no bond with their honored stature of humanity (17:70). And We found that most of them slip away from the Permanent Values
(Here is another historical account. Moses was the next generation to Shoaib. After the Midyans had risen and declined in the previous millennium), We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our Revelations and they willfully rejected them. Now see the consequence of the corrupters
Moses said, "O Pharaoh! I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
It is incumbent upon me that I say about God nothing but the Truth. I come to you with clear evidence of the Truth from your Lord. So let the Children of Israel go with me
Pharaoh said, "If you have come with clear evidence, produce it if you are of the truthful
Moses presented his argument that he held fast, with vibrant confidence and logic
The strength of his conviction shone bright to those present
The chiefs of Pharaoh's nation said, "This is some knowing wizard
It appears to us that Moses, after gaining some following, plans to throw you out of your land." Said Pharaoh, "Now, what do you advise
After consulting among themselves, the chiefs said, "Put his and his brother, Aaron's matter on hold and send to cities couriers
To bring all master debaters to your court
The master debaters came to Pharaoh. They said, "Surely there will be reward for us if we are victors
He answered, "Yes, verily, and you will be among those who are close to me
The debaters said, "O Moses! Either you begin or let us be the first to present our case
Moses asked them to begin. When they began they cast a spell on the people's eyes, and struck them with awe, and stunned the assembly with their spellbinding eloquence
We inspired Moses to respond with Conviction, and it swallowed the deceptive rhetoric of the debaters
The Truth prevailed and their arguments were manifestly proven false
Thus were they defeated right there and humiliated
The debaters fell down prostrate
They were convinced and said, "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
Pharaoh got annoyed, "You believe in Him before I give you permission! This is a political conspiracy you all have made up in the city, so that you get my subjects out on the streets in rebellion and topple the government. You will see the punishment very soon
I will immobilize you in handcuffs and fetters. Then I will crucify every one of you." (Cutting off of the hands and feet on the alternate side refers to immobilization otherwise crucifixion won't be necessary)
They responded, "We are determined to turn to the Way of our Lord
Will you persecute us simply because we believed in the Revelations of our Lord when they came to us? Our Lord! Strengthen our resolve and make us die as those who have surrendered to You
The chiefs among Pharaoh's people said, "Will you allow Moses and his people to create disorder in the land, and forsake your rule and your gods?" He said, "We will slay their sons and spare their women. We are in power over them
Moses assured his people, "Seek help in Allah and endure. Following the Divine Commands will empower you. The earth belongs to Allah, and not to any tyrants. He grants it to His servants according to His Laws (21:105). The ultimate success belongs to those who walk aright in the Divine Light
Fearing persecution they said, "We suffered before you came to us and after you have come to us." Moses said, "Your Lord will annihilate your enemy, and you will inherit the earth. Then He will see what kind of works you do
The unjust system of Pharaoh and his people began to waver (7:94). When Our Requital struck them with famine, and scanty crop (they found themselves ill prepared for the relief efforts). They should have stopped to think
(Instead of reflecting and taking corrective action, they sought the easy way out.) All good that came along, they ascribed it to their own worthiness, and any affliction that struck them, they blamed it on the bad omen of Moses and his companions. Most people know not that there is no such thing as a bad omen or a good omen. People determine their destiny according to Allah's Laws. In that sense, then, omens are with Allah alone
They kept telling Moses, "Whatever the Verses might say, whatever bad omens you could bring, or bewitch us with your logic, we will not believe in you" (and will not consider moral reformation)
Their System was too inefficient to fight off natural calamities, such as, floods, swarms of locusts, diseases of crops, livestock and humans. These were open signs for them to wake up to reform, but Pharaoh and his chiefs were too arrogant to accept responsibility, and too involved in luxury to take action. They were guilty of misrule
(The irrational Egyptians continued to remain sunken in superstition.) Whenever hardship struck, they turned to Moses for prayer stating that Allah had a pledge with him, and promising that they would believe and let the Children of Israel go with him. (They did not understand that the pledge of Allah with His Messenger was only that of obeying His Commands and His blessings in return. It did not involve any supernatural phenomena such as miracles)
When the hardship ran its course according to Our Laws, they would break their promise with Moses
They had to meet with Our Law of Requital as they continued to deny Our Revelations and remained heedless. Instead of mending their ways, they tried to annihilate Moses and his people and We drowned them in the sea as they were pursuing Moses and his people, in rage and arrogance
We made the oppressed people inherit the east and the west of the land that We had blessed with abundant provision. The Commands of your Lord were fulfilled for the Children of Israel to reward them for their steadfastness. Pharaoh and his people eventually met destruction for violating Our Laws. And We mingled with dust, the great works and fine buildings, temples, palaces, tombs, statues and stately structures of all kinds that Pharaoh and his people had built with so much skill and pride. (The Children of Israel later inherited a sizeable and highly prosperous kingdom including Syria and Palestine under David and Solomon)
After they crossed the sea (into Sinai (2:50-51)), the Children of Israel passed by some people who were worshiping statues. They said, 'O' Moses! Make a god for us, like the gods they have." Moses said, "You are a folk who wish to lurk in darkness
What these idol worshipers are doing is senseless and vain
Shall I seek a god for you other than Allah, when He has blessed you more than the other existing nations
Remember, We delivered you from Pharaoh's folk as they were persecuting you. They killed your sons and spared your women. This was a great tribulation you incurred according to the Laws of your Lord, since you had divided among yourselves and became weak
We summoned Moses for one month and ten days to instruct him about the future program (2:51). The complete term would take forty nights, in two stages of thirty and ten to make it easy for him. Before leaving for Mount Sinai, Moses assigned his brother Aaron, as his deputy and told him to keep social order after him and not to be intimidated by the problem makers
When Moses arrived at the appointed time, and his Lord spoke to him, Moses said, "My Lord! Show me Yourself, such that I can see You." His Lord said, "You cannot see Me. The best way to see Me is to look at this mountain and think. If you contemplate, you will understand that even a single mountain is made of countless atoms that were scattered. Then consider that you have seen Me." Realizing this, Moses imagined the Glory of His Lord through His signs in the Universe. He was stunned and when he recovered his senses, he said, "Infinite are You in Your Glory! I feel embarrassed and repent at my question. I am among the foremost believers." (The 7,359 feet high Mount Sinai is standing to this day. Therefore contrary to popular literal translation of this verse, its understanding in allegorical terms is preferred. Also, a Prophet of God is unlikely to make a demand to behold God in physical form)
God said, "O Moses! I have chosen you to be My Messenger and convey My Word to the people. I have given to you My Messages and spoken to you. Hold on to these Commands and be appreciative by sharing My Bounty of Revelations with people
We ordained for him in, the Tablets of Law, Enlightenment and clearly spelled out Guidance. And told him, "Uphold these teachings strongly, and tell your people to uphold them. These are excellent teachings. I will soon let you and your people see (how blessed the outcome of compliance will be and) to which abode the drifters will be headed
The Law stands* that those who are proud on earth without justification will turn away from My revelations. Even if they went through the entire script, and saw clear evidence of the Truth, their arrogance will keep them from believing. When they see the right guidance, they do not accept it, but they readily accept straying. This is because they choose to preemptively deny Our Revelations and to remain unaware of the wisdom in them. (*The consequences according to the Law of Requital, Allah ascribes to Himself, such as "Allah did it)
Those who deny our Messages and the meeting of the Hereafter, their works are fruitless. Are they rewarded anything but what they deserved for their decisions
The people of Moses made up a calf out of their ornaments while Moses was on the Mount Sinai. They made it such that blowing into it produced a lowing sound. They didn't even see that it couldn't talk to them or show them any way. Still they chose it as a god, and thus wronged their own "Self
When they regretted their action and realized that they had gone astray, they said, "Unless our Lord embraces us with Mercy and forgives us, we surely will be lost
Moses returned to his people and was upset and grieved. He said, "You have chosen a terrible thing after me. Do you wish your Lord's Law of Requital to smite you soon (20:86)? He placed the tablets of the Commands among them and questioned his brother, Aaron, very strictly. Aaron explained, "O Son of my mother! These people treated me harshly and took my patience as weakness, and almost killed me. Let not my opponents rejoice, and count me not among the wrongdoers." (Seizing the beard and head is indicative of interrogating harshly. Aaron had been extra patient with their idolatry to avoid division among them (20:94). Aaron, the Prophet of God, preferred SHIRK over Sectarianism. This is how reprehensible sectarianism and division in religion is
Moses said, "My Lord! Forgive me, and my brother and admit us in Your Grace. You are the Most Merciful among the gracious
Those who chose the calf for worship, have incurred their Lord's Requital, and humiliation in the life of this world. Thus do We requite those who invent a lie
Those who have done ill deeds, but then repent and attain belief, for them, afterward, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
When Moses calmed down, he picked up the tablets, on which was inscribed Merciful Guidance for those who fear violating the Law of their Lord
Moses planned for the future. He appointed seventy of his people as officers to prevent the nation from wavering. An earthquake shook them (2:55) and Moses said, "My Lord! You could have destroyed them and me before, if You so willed (when they asked to see God in physical form (2:55)). Would you destroy us for the actions of the ignorant among us? This must be Your trial for us. You have appointed Laws of straying and guidance. You are our Protecting Friend. Forgive us and have Mercy on us. You are the Best of forgivers
Ordain for us the good in this world and in the Hereafter. We turn to You with conviction in Your Guidance." God responded, "My punishment is but the Law of Requital, and My Mercy embraces all things. I will specify My Mercy to those who walk aright, spend their wealth on community welfare, and practically believe in Our Revelations
(Now the Law has been revealed to Prophet Muhammad.) Follow the Messenger, the Prophet who is a non-Israelite, and who was unlettered before the Revelation (29:48). They find him well described* in the Torah and the Gospel with them. He enjoins upon them the Right, and forbids them the Wrong. He declares Lawful all good things, and declares Unlawful only the unclean things. He relieves people from the burdens they carried. He breaks the shackles that they used to wear, of mental and physical slavery, and brings them from darkness to Light (5:15-16), (65:11), (76:4). Those who believe in him, honor him, support him, and follow the Light that came with him, are the eternally successful. *(Deuteronomy xviii, 15 and 18. Gospel of John 14:16, 15:26, 16:7 PARACLETOS = COMFORTER, from original Greek PERICLYTOS = THE PRAISED ONE. In Aramaic, MAWHAMANA = THE PRAISED ONE)
Say, "O Mankind! I am Allah's Messenger to all of you (beyond temporal and geographical bounds). The Messenger of Him to Whom belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. He has Absolute Control over the fountain spring of life and over the Laws of transition to death. So, believe in Allah and His Messenger, the Prophet to whose people no Scripture was given before, and who believes in Allah and in His Words. Follow him so that you may be rightly guided
The people of Moses were given similar guidance and a section among them was guided and did justice in Truth
We set up twelve tribal communities among the Israelites for effective administration. When his people asked for water, We revealed to Moses, "Strike the rock with your staff!" And twelve springs gushed forth from there. (Remember the times when you were in the Sinai desert and there was shortage of water. Moses asked for water for his people and We guided him to a rock under which were hidden twelve springs of water ready to gush forth. Moses, with the strength of his conviction and with the help of his companions, unclogged those springs and each of the twelve tribes found their respective source of fresh cool water (2:60)). Moses had established the Divine system of life. We shall open the Blessings of the heavens and the earth for any nation that accepts these Laws and works for the collective good of humanity. Such abundance with equity is no less than a heavenly "Table spread" that ensures freedom from want for all, in the shadow of Divine Grace. They enjoyed delicious bird meat and vegetation they had grown in the oasis of their own making. That is what the people of Moses were given, "Eat of the good things that We have provided you." After a time, the corrupters in that wonderful society started dissenting. Did they harm us? Nay, they harmed their own "Self
And remember, when it was said to them, "Dwell in this town, enjoy Our bounties all along and remain humble before Our Commands. As soon as you enter the gate, your wandering in the desert will end. Remain submissive and We will forgive your faults. We increase the reward for those who benefit humanity." (2:58). Then We commanded you, "Enter the Sacred Land (of Palestine (5:21)) and enjoy the provisions; eat from where you want. Enter the gate humbly and say, HITTATUN, 'Our Lord! Absolve our misdeeds, we mend our ways.' Then do what you say and We shall forgive you your misdeeds and amply reward the doers of good
But, some of the wrongdoers began changing the Word of God that was taught to them, and displaced it with their own fabrications. And that resulted in a change in behavior. Our Heavenly Law of Requital caused them to weaken and waver, for they violated the Commands (2:59-61). Detachment from the Ideology made them lose their strength
Ask the Israelites about the township (Elat) that was located by the sea, and they had violated the Sabbath. The big fish used to come on the surface in abundance on their day of Sabbath, feeling secure, and did not come up on other days. (But the community failed to persevere, and broke the Sabbath to get a good catch). Thus We tested them to see for themselves how they drift away from discipline
The kind-hearted among them kept reminding the violators. And others said, "Why do you preach a people whom Allah's Requital is going to destroy or punish them with a severe torment?" The counselors said, "In order to be free of guilt before your Lord that we failed to advise. And in the hope that they walk aright
When they disregarded the reminders, We saved the ones who admonished them. And punished those who transgressed and drifted away from the Command
As they persisted with their rebellious behavior, Our Law caused their disposition take a downward turn and they developed apish mentality. We told them, "Be the living symbols of humiliation
And remember, your Lord proclaimed that He would raise against them till the Day of Resurrection, people who will persecute them. Your Lord is Swift in Retribution, yet any peoples who mend their ways, will find Him Forgiving, Merciful
Our Law caused them to scatter in the earth as sections. Among them some are righteous, and some are opposite. Through the turns of history We have caused them to experience easy and difficult times, in order that they might return to Our Laws
But, the succeeding generations that inherited the Scripture, did no better. They became more materialistic, falling for instant gains. Yet, they insist, "We will be forgiven," and won't have to account for it. And they keep longing for material gains. Didn't they promise to uphold the Scripture, and not to say about God but the Truth? And they have studied the Commands in it! The long-term benefit and the abode of the Hereafter are better for those who deal justly with people and walk aright. Do you not use sense
Those who hold fast to the Book of Allah, and strive to establish the Divine System, should know that We never squander the reward of the righteous
They must recall that the Mount Sinai stands over them as a telling Witness. The mountain could shake with a quake and fall to be level with them but the Divine Guidance is the unwavering Truth (13:31), (59:61). We said, "Hold fast the Scripture We have given you and work the teachings in it, so that you may live upright
Your Lord brought forth generations from the Children of Adam, and they have been the living testimony that He creates and provides them with sustenance. "Am I not your Sustainer?" They practically admit, "Yes, verily. We testify." Thus you cannot say on the Resurrection Day, "We were not aware of this
Nor will any excuse avail them such as, "It was our forefathers who took false gods and we inherited their belief system. Will you punish us for what falsehood others practiced?" (You will not be questioned what others used to do. No one will bear the load of another (2)
We explain Our Verses in detail so that people turn towards the Book
And tell them what happens to him whom We have conveyed Our Messages and he passes them by. So his selfish desire overtakes him, and he becomes of those who lose their way
He could have raised himself in honor according to Our Laws, but he clung to the earth and followed his own desire. Therefore his likeness is as the likeness of a dog. Whether you pet him or scold him, he pants. Such is the example of people who deny Our Revelations in practice. (The Revelation of Allah lightens your burdens, while man-made dogmas burden you (7:157)). So relate this narration that they may reflect
Indeed, pitiable is the example of those who reject Our Verses, since they hurt their own "Self
Whoever attains Allah's Guidance according to His Laws is led aright. And goes astray he who violates Allah's Law of Guidance
Our Law has committed to Hell numerous people, rural and urban; they are living the life of hell. They have hearts that they use not to understand. They have eyes with which they see not, and ears with which they hear not. They are like cattle. Nay, they are even worse. Such are the people who have chosen to live through life in total darkness of ignorance
All Names of Allah are the fairest names. You can invoke Him by any of them. Be mindful not to over-emphasize a single attribute of His. (For example, the Merciful God is also a Just God). Disregard those who distort His Names or the meaning of His Attributes (like calling Him, father, son, the man upstairs, the destroyer etc.) Be assured that all of you will be rewarded according to your doings, and by no other criterion
Among the communities We have created there have been those who guide with Truth and establish justice with it
And those who deny Our Revelations, Our Law of Requital leads them in stages to the miserable destination they have no idea of
I give them respite but My Law of Requital is designed to be strong
Has it never occurred to them that there is no madness whatever in their fellow-man? He has lived a whole life among you (10:16). He is only a plain Warner
Can they not see (and correlate what he tells them with) the Dominion of the heavens and the earth and what Allah has created? Does it ever occur to them that the end of their own life may be near (hence the time to make the right decisions is not unlimited)? What HADITH besides the Qur'an, are they going to believe after him
There is no guide for him who misleads himself by violating Allah's Law of Guidance. When he leaves the Law, the Law leaves him wandering in the wilderness of arrogant trespassing
(They even venture into predicting the end of the world.) They ask you (O Messenger), about the Hour, when the end of the world will come to pass. Say, "That knowledge is only with my Lord. He alone will manifest it at the appropriate time. Heavy it is in the heavens and the earth. It will come upon you suddenly." They ask you as if you could gain insight into this mystery with persistent inquiry. Say, "The knowledge thereof is with Allah only. But most people do not know that even Messengers were not given this knowledge
Say, "I do not even have the power to benefit myself or to avert harm to myself, contrary to the Laws of Allah. Had I the knowledge of what is beyond the reach of human perception, I would have amassed abundant fortune, and no adversity would ever touch me. I am but a Warner and a bearer of good news for those who believe in the Message
(The Message encompasses life in its totality.) Recall that Allah created life from a single life cell, then made male and female cells, and then shaped you into human beings, males and females. He designed it such that man might incline with love towards the woman. When he gets intimate with her, she carries a light load that she can hardly notice. As she grows heavy with the child, they both implore Allah, their Lord, "If you indeed grant us a healthy baby, we shall certainly be among the grateful
But as soon as He grants them a sound baby, they begin to ascribe to other powers beside Him a share in bringing about what He has granted them. Exalted is He, High Above all that they associate with Him
Do they ascribe to Him as partners things that can create nothing, but are themselves created
And they cannot help them, nor can they help themselves
When you invite them to the Guidance, they follow you not. It is the same for you whether you invite them or remain silent
Those whom you call upon besides Allah, such as mystics and saints, are people like you. Go ahead and call upon them, let them respond by helping you if you are true in your belief
Do the idols have feet to walk, hands to hold, eyes to see and ears to hear? (Likewise, these human demigods have no foundation of Truth to stand on, nor the power to avert Requital, nor the faculties of confronting Reason). Tell the opponents of the Message, "Call upon your idols and your so-called partners of Allah, contrive what you can, and give me no respite
My Protecting Friend is Allah Who has revealed this Book, and He befriends the righteous
Whomever you call instead of Him, have no power to help you, nor can they help themselves
Such people are lost in their reverence of false deities. When you invite them to Guidance, they hear without listening and you see them looking at you, but they see not
(O Prophet) hold to pardon, and go ahead with your program of enjoining virtue and disregard the behavior of those who adamantly remain ignorant
Seek refuge in Allah's Laws by staying alert to any covert actions of the satanic opponents. He is Hearer, Knower
Those who are mindful of Allah's Laws, stay alert to the covert actions of the hinderers and see them with an observant mind
The hinderers and their comrades plunge one another deeper into error, and cease not
When you do not produce a miracle that they demand, they say, "Why not ask God for it?" Say, "I simply follow and convey what is revealed to me from my Lord." These verses are the enlightening miracle from your Lord, the Guidance and Grace for those who accept them
When the Qur'an is read, listen to it with full attention, and listen to it silently, that you may receive Mercy
Remember your Sustainer within yourself humbly and in reverence, and without raising your voice, morning and evening. Be not among the neglectful
Those who are with your Lord (truly God conscious), are never too proud to serve Him. They strive to establish His Glory on earth by adoring Him and submitting to His Commands
They ask you (O Messenger), about the spoils of war. Say, "The spoils of war belong to Allah and the Messenger (The Central Authority). Be mindful of Allah's Commands and maintain the bonds of brotherhood among you. Obey Allah and the Messenger if you are believers
The true believers are those who feel a tremor in their hearts when Allah is mentioned. (They beat synchronously with the Commands of Allah). And when His Revelations are conveyed to them, they find their faith strengthened. They do their best and then put their trust in their Lord
They help establish the Divine System and keep the provision that We have given them, open for the good of humanity
Such are the true believers. They have high ranks with their Lord and for them is the security of forgiveness and honorable provision
(When the time came to defend the Ideological State of Madinah), your Lord commanded you (O Prophet) to go forth from your home with the conviction that the Truth was on your side. And some of the believers were reluctant
(They argued whether to meet the aggressor outside Madinah at Badr, or wait.) And they disputed with you about it after the decision had been made manifest in mutual consultations, as if they were being driven to obvious death
Allah promised you engagement and victory against one of the two groups. You preferred to face the weaker group, but Allah willed the Truth to prevail according to His Words and soundly defeat the aggressive disbelievers
(That was your first armed confrontation with the opponents in which you were greatly outnumbered and ill equipped.) For He has decreed that the Truth shall triumph, and the falsehood shall vanish, even as the guilty detest it
You sought help from your Lord and He assured you, "I will help you with a thousand of the angels, rank upon rank
Allah ordained this (allegory) as good news of success, to instill tranquility in your hearts. Victory is achieved only according to the Laws of Allah. He is Powerful, Wise. (These Divine Attributes should draw your attention to organized force and sound planning)
Remember how it was when He caused inner calm to enfold you, as an assurance from Him, and sent down upon you water from the sky. That He might refresh you and free you from the fear of the satanic act of the enemy (as they confiscated the water wells). Thus He strengthened your hearts and made firm your foothold
This is how your Lord inspired the angels, "I am with you. So make the believers stand firm. I will cast terror in the hearts of the rejecters of the Truth. Launch a swift hard strike to disillusion their command and scatter the soldiers
That is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger. Whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, for him, Allah is Strict in Retribution
That is the punishment, so taste it. And there is the torment of Fire for the rejecters
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Never turn your backs when you meet the rejecters in battle
Anyone who turns back on that day, unless strategically or to join his own troops, incurs Allah's disapproval. His abode shall be Hell, a miserable destination
You subdued them not, Allah did. You threw not the arrows, Allah did. For, Allah had permitted you to repel the aggression. He gives the believers a chance to earn credit from Him. Allah is Hearer, Knower
That is the case; and know that Allah makes weak the scheme of the rejecters
(O Disbelievers), You sought victory, and the victory has come. (If you reflect, the triumph of the Truth is the victory for all, including yourselves). If you refrain from aggression, it will be better for you. But, if you return, so shall We. Your armies will not avail you, no matter how numerous. Allah is with the believers
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Obey Allah and His Messenger. Listen to him when he speaks, without getting distracted
Be not like those who say that they hear, while they hear not
The worst of creations in the Sight of Allah are those deaf, those dumb who do not use their intellect (
If Allah had seen any good in them, He would have made them hear. But, even if He made them hear, they would have turned away. (The perceptual and conceptual, both faculties must be used for understanding and attaining guidance)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Obey Allah and respond to the Messenger. He calls you to what gives you real life. And know that Allah is closer to humans than their own hearts. And His Guidance intervenes between your determination and your desires (53:24). Unto Him you will be gathered
Beware of a tribulation that may not be limited to the wrongdoers among you. Know that Allah is strict in retribution. (There is a strong link between individual and collective good)
Recall when you were few and oppressed in the land (Makkah) and fearful lest people do away with you. He gave you shelter (in Madinah), strengthened you with His help and gave you decent provision. Be grateful in word and action
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Betray not Allah and His Messenger (the Central Authority), nor betray people who trust you, nor be lax in your duties knowingly
Know that your wealth and your children are a test for you. (Spend your wealth in Allah's Cause, provide good education and training to your children) and know that with Allah is immense reward
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! If you remain mindful of Allah's Laws, He will give you distinction among the community of nations and grant you clear discernment between Right and Wrong. He will absolve your imperfections and grant you the protection of forgiveness. Allah is of Infinite bounty
Remember (O Messenger), when the rejecters were making schemes to arrest you, slay you, or expel you. That was their plan, but Allah's Law of Requital is designed to work in a way unfailing. Allah is the Best of planners
When Our Messages are conveyed to them, they say, "We have heard. If we wish, we can speak like it. This is nothing but fables of the ancient
They went ahead saying, "O Allah! If this is indeed the Truth from You, then shower upon us rocks from the sky or bring on us a painful suffering
But, Allah did not intend to punish them when you (O Messenger), were among their midst (in Makkah, still preaching). And He would not punish them while they might seek forgiveness
Now is a new situation. Have they not deserved Allah's Requital when they are hindering His servants from the Sacred Masjid of Makkah, even though they are not its guardians? Its guardians can only be those who are mindful of Allah's Laws. Most of them don't even know how awesome this responsibility is
What is their worship at the House of Allah but whistling and clapping? Therefore it is said to them, "Taste of the Retribution for your rejection of the Truth." (Any people who plunge in ritualistic worship, trail behind in action and incur suffering)
Those who are bent upon denying the Truth, spend their riches to hinder people from the Path of Allah. They will spend it, then it will become anguish for them, and they will be overcome. And the rejecters of the Truth will be gathered to Hell
Allah will distinguish the bad from the good, then pile the bad on top of one another and cast them together in the Hellfire. They are truly the losers. (The clans of rejecters will join hands to fight the believers, but the battleground will become Hell for them)
(O Prophet) Tell the disbelievers that if they cease hostilities, all their past will be forgiven. But if they return, they will meet the example of the old nations
Fight and subdue those who persist in aggression until persecution is no more, and absolute freedom of religion is established. People must be able to adopt a religion only for God's Approval, and as free choice (2:193), (12:108). If they cease from aggression, Allah is the Seer of their actions, and therefore you shall leave them alone
(Be magnanimous in treating them) knowing that if they returned to their previous ways, Allah is your Lord Supreme. And how excellent is this Lord Supreme, and how excellent is this Giver of help
(You ask about the distribution of the spoils of war when you fight aggression and attain victory.) Whatever you take as spoils of war, a fifth of that is for Allah and for the Messenger (the Central Authority, to run the government). The rest will belong to the families of soldiers who laid their lives defending the State, the orphans, those left alone in the society, the widows, the ones whose income has stalled for any reason, the needy wayfarer, and whoever travels to the believers in a destitute condition. This is if you believe in Allah and in what We revealed to Our servant when the two armies met (at Badr) on the Day of Distinction. Allah is the Appointer of due measure for all things
You were on the Northern, Madinah side of the Valley of Badr, and they were on the Southern, Makkah side of the Valley. And the caravan of the Makkans was proceeding south along the low Western coast, from Syria to Makkah. Had you attacked the caravan, it would not have accomplished Allah's Will. He wanted you to have a decisive victory over the hostile army. Allah had decreed that the Truth shall survive and falsehood shall vanish. Allah is Hearer, Knower
Allah made them few in your vision (O Messenger). Had He made them appear more numerous (if you got intimidated by their great numbers), you believers would have failed. And you would have disputed among yourselves whether to fight them at Badr was a good idea. But Allah saved you believers from faltering. He knew the resolve in your hearts
When the two armies faced each other, He made them appear few in your eyes, and made you appear weak in their eyes (3:12). Allah willed that to be the Day of Distinction. All matters go back to Allah's Laws as their source
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Whenever you meet an army, hold firm and remember Allah's Laws of achieving victory so that you may be successful
Obey Allah and His Messenger, the Central Authority, and do not fall into disputation. If you did that, you will falter and your strength will depart from you. Be proactively steadfast since Allah is with those who persevere both in times of affluence and in times of adversity
Do not be like the disbelievers who come out of their homes boastfully and to show off, although they come forth to hinder people from the Path of Allah. Allah encompasses all actions that people do
There was a group of Satanic conspirators, the hypocrites, who praised the disbelievers' actions, "You cannot be overcome by any people today, and we will be fighting along with you as allies." But as soon as the two armies came face to face, they turned back on their heels and fled, saying, "We disown you, We see what you don't. We are afraid of Allah Who has instilled faith in the hearts of the believers. Allah is strict in punishment
The hypocrites, and those who harbor doubts in their hearts, taunted the believers, "Their religion has deluded them." (The believers were not deluded or arrogant. They had put their trust in Allah). Whoever puts his trust in Allah, will find that Allah is Mighty, Wise
Only if you could perceive how the rejecters leave this world, as the angels put them to death. It is as if they are smiting their faces and backs, "Taste the doom of burning
It is the result of your deeds that you sent forth with your own hands. Allah is never a tyrant to His servants
(They were made aware of history but) they ended up like Pharaoh's people, and nations before them. They rejected Allah's Messages, kept trailing behind in the Permanent Values, hence, the Law of Requital seized them. Allah is Strong, Strict in Retribution
Allah never changes a Blessing He has bestowed upon a nation until they first change themselves (13:11). The Hearer, the Knower, announces this Law to you
Pharaoh's people and those before them are examples. They denied the Messages of their Lord. They trailed behind in humanity and Our Law of Requital annihilated them. Pharaoh's people were drowned. All these nations had displaced justice with injustice and used to violate human rights
The worst among creatures in Allah's Sight are those who are bent on denying the Truth. They show ingratitude by not using their God-given faculties and thus fail to believe
Those with whom you have made a peace treaty, and then at every opportunity they break their treaty, certainly violate the Divine Laws
When you encounter them in war, deal with them to set an example for those who come after them, that they may remember
If you anticipate treachery and breach of treaty, then fairly return the treaty back to them. Allah does not love the treacherous
Let not the rejecters suppose that they can get away with their violations. They cannot escape the Law of Requital
Make ready for them all the power you can muster, and all the equipment you can mobilize so that you may deter the enemies of Allah, and your enemies. And others beside them whom you know not, Allah knows them. Whatever wealth and effort you spend on your defenses, will be your spending in the Cause of Allah, and it will be repaid to you generously. And you shall not be wronged
When they incline to peace, you shall incline to it, and trust in Allah. He is the Hearer, the Knower
And if they would deceive you, Allah is Sufficient for you. He has strengthened you (O Messenger) with His support, and by the believers. (An offer of peace may not be rejected in suspicion (6:52), (18)
Allah has brought together the hearts of the believers. If you (O Messenger) had spent all that is in the earth, you could not have produced that affection, but Allah has done it. (The Divine Ideology has attuned the believers). Surely, He is Almighty, Wise
O Prophet! Allah is Sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you
O Prophet! Inspire the believers to conquer all fear of death when fighting in the Cause of Allah. So that if there be twenty of you who are patient in adversity, they might overcome two hundred; and if there be one hundred of you, they might overcome one thousand of those who are bent upon denying the Truth. This is because the rejecters cannot grasp the Eternal rewards that infuse enthusiasm in the believers
For the time being, however, Allah has lightened your burden, for He knows that you are weak. And so, if there be one hundred of you who are steadfast in adversity, they should be able to overcome two hundred; and if there be one thousand of you, they should be able to overcome two thousand by Allah's Leave. For, Allah is with those who are steadfast in adversity
It is beyond the dignity of a Prophet that he may hold any captives, except temporarily, during warfare. They must be freed at the conclusion of hostilities by way of kindness, for ransom, or by exchange of prisoners of war, and there is no other option to keep them (47:4). You may desire the fleeting gains of this world, but Allah desires for you the good of Eternal Achievement, the life to come. Allah is Mighty, Wise
If Allah had not decreed for Himself Mercy, those of you who fell for temptation (of booty), would have faced a great retribution
(You have seen that you developed your character and established the Divine Order in the society. Then you had to fight off aggression.) Now enjoy what you have won as Lawful and good. Be mindful of Allah's Laws. Verily, Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful
O Prophet! Tell the captives of war who are in your hand, "If Allah sees any good in your hearts He will give you better than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
If they have treacherous designs against you, well, they have already betrayed Allah before this, and that is why He has given you power over them. Allah is Knower, Wise
Those who believed, emigrated, and strove with their possessions and lives in the Cause of Allah, as well as those who hosted them and supported them (in Madinah), are close protecting friends of one another. For those who believed but stayed back (in Makkah), you don't owe them support until they migrate. However, if they seek your help as sisters and brothers in DEEN (Divine Ideology), then it is your duty to help them except against a folk with whom you have a treaty. Allah is fully Aware of all your actions
Those who reject the Divine Message are protectors of one another. If you do not help the immigrants, there will be chaos in the land and great corruption
Those who believed and emigrated, and strove in the Cause of Allah, and those who hosted them and supported them, are True believers. For them is protection of forgiveness and honorable provision
And those who followed them in belief, and left their homes, and strove along with you, they are of you. Remember that blood relatives have certain special rights and obligations over each other according to Allah's Ordinance. They should be the first ones to help each other. Verily, Allah is Knower of all things
O You who have attained belief! The treaties that you had signed with the idolaters of the Arabian Peninsula, no longer remain valid, for they have repeatedly violated them (9:4)). Freedom from obligation in this matter is proclaimed from Allah and His Messenger towards those Idolaters with whom you made a treaty
(O Idolaters who have repeatedly violated the peace treaties), Travel freely in the land four months, and know that you cannot escape Allah, and that Allah will bring disgrace to the rejecters of the Truth. (If you persist in rebellion, you will be overpowered and the Central Authority will subdue you)
And a proclamation from Allah and His Messenger is herewith made to all mankind on this day of the Greatest Pilgrimage (9th day of the 12th lunar month, Zil-Hajjah). Allah disowns the idolaters, and so does His Messenger. So, if you repent, it will be better for you. But if you turn away from repentance, then know that you cannot escape Allah. (O Messenger) Give tiding of an awful retribution to those who are bent upon denying the Truth
Except those idolaters with whom you have a treaty and they have not subsequently failed you, nor have they helped others against you. You shall fulfill your treaty with them till their term. Verily, Allah loves those who are mindful of His Laws
When the four Sacred Months are over and if the idolaters are still aggressing, neither becoming law-abiding citizens of the State, nor emigrating, subdue them wherever you find them, take them captive, and besiege them, and ambush them. But if they repent from aggression, and help in the consolidation of the Divine System and in setting up the Just Economic Order of Zakat, then leave them free. Verily, Allah is Forgiving Merciful
(O Messenger) If anyone of the idolaters seeks your protection or a safe passage, grant him protection from the State. Convey to him the Word of God, and then send him to a place where he feels safe and secure. This kindness on your part is mandatory because they are people who have not yet seen the beauty of the Divine System
How can there be a treaty with Allah and His Messenger for the idolaters (when they have repeatedly violated it)? Exempted are those with whom you make a treaty at the Sacred Masjid. If they honor and uphold such a treaty, so shall you. Allah loves those who walk aright
How can there be a treaty seeing that if they get the upper hand of you, they would respect no ties and no pacts with you? They pleased you with their speech but their hearts opposed you. Most of them are those who slip away from their word
They trade away Allah's Revelations for petty gains and hinder people from His Path. Their deeds spread inequity and confusion in the society. (This trade mentioned in the Qur'an, generally indicates disregarding Divine Moral Values in favor of instant gratification achieved by following the selfish desire)
They respect no tie and no pact regarding a believer. They are the ones given to excesses
If they mend their ways, and as law-abiding citizens, help consolidate the Divine System, and the Just Economic Order of Zakat, then they are your brothers in the System of life. We explain Our Revelations for those who wish to learn. (The usual translation of this verse conveys the meaning that if they start praying five times a day and give 2.5% poor-due per year, then they are your brothers in religion. This interpretation goes directly against the all-encompassing Ordinance of Allah that there is no compulsion or coercion in DEEN Islam)
If they keep breaking their pledges after their treaty, and assail your System, then fight the chiefs of the disbelievers. They have no respect for their binding oaths. This action will help restrain them from aggression
Will you not fight a folk who keep breaking their solemn pledges and did everything to drive out the Messenger, and did attack you first? What! Do you fear them? Nay, it is Allah alone Whom you should more justly fear, if you are truly believers
Fight them! Allah will punish them at your hands, and He will humiliate them, and give you victory over them, and He will soothe the bosoms of those who believe. (Soothe from the persecution they have undergone for more than a decade)
He will remove the anger and frustration the believers have suffered at their hands. The invitation is still open to the opponents. Allah, according to His Law, turns to those who turn to Him. He is All Knowing, All Wise
Do you think that you will be left alone without Allah distinguishing those among you who strive in His cause, and take none for ally except Allah, His Messenger, and the believers? Allah is Informed of all your actions
Those who associate others with Allah whether idols, religious leaders or temporal leaders, shall not administer Masjids, the Centers of the Divine System. Nor shall those who choose for themselves sects in religion (9:107), (30:31), (72:18). They are bearing witness against themselves in their disbelief (of the Qur'an). All their works are vain and they will abide eternally in the Fire
Only those people are fit to administer the Masjids, the Centers of the Divine Order, who have unwavering belief in Allah and the Last Day. And, they strive to establish the Divine System, and to set up the Just Economic System of Zakat and fear none but Allah. They are the only ones who are rightly guided
Do you think that providing water to Pilgrims and caring for the Sacred Masjid (in Makkah) is equal to the work of him who has Conviction in Allah and the Last Day and then strives in the Cause of Allah? They are not equal in the Sight of Allah. Allah does not intervene to guide those who displace action with ritual
Those who attained belief, and left their homes, and strove in the Cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives, have a much greater rank with Allah. They are the ones who are truly triumphant
Their Lord gives them good news of His Grace, His Approval, and the Gardens with lasting delight and bliss
They will live there forever. Verily, with Allah is immense Reward
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Even if your parents and siblings take pleasure in disbelief rather than faith, take not them as allies. Whoever does that, does wrong to himself. (The Divine Ideology shall take precedence over all other bonds)
Say, "If your parents, your children, and your siblings, and your spouses, and your tribe, and the wealth you have acquired, and the business in which you fear a decline, and the houses you love, are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger and striving in His Cause, then wait till Allah brings His Command to pass." (Systems based on other than the Supreme Divine Ideology are destined to collapse). Allah does not intervene to guide those who drift away from Divine Laws
Allah has given you victory on many fields. But in the Battle of Hunain, you took pride in your numbers but it did not avail you. And the vast earth was made narrow for you, then, you began turning away in flight
Then Allah sent His peace of reassurance down upon His Messenger and upon the believers (48:4). And sent down armies you could not see, and punished the rejecters. (The Messenger led them from chaos back to discipline, and boosted their morale. That was the army unseen (3:125), (8:10), (9:40), (41:30)). Such is the reward of the rejecters of the Truth
Allah will turn in Mercy to the worthy according to His Laws. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! The idolaters have made their hearts unclean (and the Sacred Masjid of Makkah is the House of Pure Monotheism. Only those who believe in the Divine System can administer this Sacred House (9:18)). So let not the Idolaters come close to it after this year. If you fear scarcity of trade, Allah will enrich you with His Bounty. This is the Promise of Allah who is Knower, Wise
Fight against those who reject belief in Allah and the Last Day, and hold not Sacred what Allah and His Messenger have declared Sacred, nor acknowledge the Divine System, among those who received the Scripture, until they pay JIZYA, the tax, with willing submission, and feel themselves subjects of the State as law-abiding citizens. (As citizens of the State they must pay taxes, as the Muslims contribute toward the Just Economic Order of Zakat. In return, the State will guarantee them internal and external security, and equal rights of citizenship. JIZYA will always be less than Zakat, and will be payable only by the able-bodied Non-Muslim citizens of the State. In addition, these able-bodied citizens would be exempt from compulsory military service)
The Jews say, "Uzayr is God's son," while the Christians say, "The Messiah is God's son." They only utter baseless themes with their mouths, following in spirit assertions made in earlier times by people (like the Greeks and Zoroastrians) who denied the Truth! Allah condemns them. They are surely deluded. (Some Jews in the Arabian Peninsula used to believe that Osiris, the Egyptian idol, was God's son while others thought of Ezra, who restored the Torah after it had been lost in the Babylonian Exile, as God's son)
They take their rabbis, priests and monks to be their Lords* besides Allah. And they take as their Lord, the Messiah son of Mary. Yet they were commanded to worship but One God. There is no god but He. Praise and Glory to Him, He is far too Glorious for what they ascribe to Him. (*Talmud shows the Jewish superstition of ascribing divinity to Ezra, rabbis, saints, doctors of law and learned men. And the doctrine of Papal infallibility, divinity of saints and praying to them are common in the Roman Catholic Church)
They seek to extinguish Allah's Light (the Qur'an) by their utterances (61:8). But Allah will not allow this to pass, for He has Willed to spread His Light in all its fullness even though the rejecters may detest it
He it is Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the True Religion (DEEN = The System of Life), that He may cause it to prevail over all religions and systems of life, even though the idolaters may detest it. (9:31-33), (14:48), (18:48), (
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! A great many religious leaders, rabbis, priests, monks, mullahs, yogis, and mystics devour the wealth of mankind in falsehood, and debar them from the Path of Allah. All those who hoard up gold and silver and spend it not in the Cause of Allah, to them give tidings (O Prophet) of a painful doom
On the Day when it will all be heated in the fire of Hell and their foreheads, flanks and backs will be branded with it. "Here is what you hoarded for yourselves, now taste what you had hoarded
Allah has ordained twelve months in one year. This has been Allah's Ordinance since the day He created the heavens and the earth. Four of these Months are Sacred, forbidden for all warfare. (Mankind, through international treaties, must agree to shun all kind of warfare during these four months. This will give them a cooling off period that sense may prevail over emotions). This is the Firm Religion, the right way. So, do not wrong yourselves by fighting during the Sacred Months. However, you may fight the idolaters in any or all these months if they fight against you in any or all of them (2:194). And know that Allah is with those who restrain themselves. (Four Sacred Months: (2:)
Altering the Sacred Months is only an addition to disbelief. It increases the straying of the disbelievers. They keep the total count of the Sacred Months as four, but keep shifting them within the same year or from year to year. Thus they allow what Allah has forbidden. Their evil actions seem pleasing to them. Allah does not intervene to guide those who have decided to live in darkness
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! What is amiss with you that, when called upon, "Go forth in the Cause of Allah," you cling heavily to the ground? Do you choose pleasure in the life of this world rather than in the life to come? The enjoyment of this life is but a paltry thing compared to the Hereafter
If you did not go forth in Allah's Cause, His Law will afflict you with a painful doom. He will replace you with another nation. You cannot harm Him in the least. All things transpire according to the Laws appointed by Allah. (Only the competent nations live honorably in the earth (21:)
If you do not help the Messenger, Allah will help him, as always. When the disbelievers drove him out of his home, they were just two men. They had to seek refuge in a cave. The Messenger said to his companion, "Grieve not. Surely, Allah is with us." Then Allah sent His reassuring peace upon him, and supported him with invisible forces of faith and courage (9:26). He made the word of the disbelievers utterly low. Allah's Word remains Supreme, for Allah is Mighty, Wise
Go forth lightly armed, or heavily armed and strive with your wealth and person in the Cause of Allah. This is best for you if you but knew
There are people among you that if it were a quick material gain and a short easy journey, they would follow you. But the strife and the distance seem heavy and long to them. They will swear by Allah, "If we could, we would have gone along with you." They destroy their "Self". Allah knows that they are liars
Allah pardons you (O Messenger)! Why did you give them permission to stay behind, before you could distinguish the truthful from the liars? (The granting of permission gave the hypocrites an excuse)
Those who have conviction in Allah and the Last Day, do not ask you for exemption from striving with their wealth and persons. And Allah is Aware of those who walk aright
Only those ask your leave (O Prophet) who do not truly believe in Allah and the Last Day. Their hearts feel doubt, and in their doubt they waver
If they wanted to go forth, they would have made necessary preparation. Allah disliked their participation for their reluctance, and held them back. (The Prophet's permission had) said to them, "Stay behind with those who are sitting back
Even if they had gone forth they would have only caused trouble and run to and fro seeking sedition among you. In your ranks are some apt to listen to them and in your ranks are spies of the enemy. Allah knows the wrongdoers
They have sought to create dissension among you before, and raised difficulties for you (O Prophet). They did that till the Truth came and the Decree of Allah prevailed, though they detested it
Of them is he who says, "Grant me leave, and draw me not into trial." Have they not fallen into trial already? In fact, Hell is all around the disbelievers
If some good comes to you (O Prophet) it afflicts them. And if calamity befalls you, they say, "We took our precautions beforehand." And they turn away rejoicing
Say, "No calamity befalls us humans except within the bounds of Allah's Laws. Only He is our Lord Supreme (Maulana)." In Allah let the believers put their trust
Say, "Can you expect for us other than one of the two things" (victory or martyrdom in the Cause of Allah?) On the other hand, we expect for you retribution from Allah's Law of Requital, and it may be at our hands when you fight against us. Wait then hopefully, and we shall hopefully wait with you
(Some hypocrites want to make financial contributions.) Tell them, "Your contribution is not accepted whether you pay willingly or unwillingly. You are a people who drift away from the System at the first opportune time
What prevents their contributions from being accepted is this: They do not truly believe in Allah and His Messenger. They only claim to believe (2:8). They join you in congregations of prayer only half-heartedly and just to be seen of men (4:142), (107:5). And they contribute only with great reluctance in their hearts. (Islam involves only willing submission to Allah)
Let not their riches nor their children and party astonish you (O Prophet). It holds them back from the way of struggle. According to Allah's Law there is no Paradise for those who fail to strive and build it with their own hands (3:135), (16:32), (46:14-16). They live the life of hell in this world and they depart this world in sorrow for their rejection
And they swear by Allah that they are of you. In fact, they are not of you, but they are people ridden with fear
If they could find a refuge or a cave or a hiding place, they would rush to it like runaway horses
Some of them try to find fault with you (O Prophet) in the distribution of charity. If they are given plenty, they are pleased and if they receive little share, they get enraged
It would have been enormously good for them if they were content with what Allah and His Messenger had given them (59:7). And if they said, "Allah suffices us. (What we have received in equity is good for us). Allah will give us of His Bounty, and the Messenger will distribute in kindness and equity. We turn to Allah with all our hopes." (The Central Authority will be just to all)
Remember that the funds that the Central Authority receives as Alms and Charity belong to the following categories: The poor. Those who are not able to earn enough living to meet their basic needs, for any reason. Those whose running businesses have stalled or the ones who have lost their jobs, who have become needy with their active lives coming to a standstill. Officers who have been appointed by the government to collect alms and charity. Those who are hindered from joining the Divine System for financial reasons. To free men and women from bondage of any kind: physical slavery, unjust captivity, and oppression from any quarters. Those pressed under the load of ransom or heavy debt from an enemy. Defense of the Ideological State, in the Cause of Allah. The wayfarer who becomes needy, or travels to the believers in destitute condition, and the homeless son of the street. This is a Duty from Allah. He is the Knower, the Wise and His Commands are based on Knowledge and Wisdom
And among those (enemies of the Truth) are some who hurt the Prophet and say, " He is only a hearer." Say, "A listener, that is good for you. He believes in Allah, has faith in the believers, and is a Mercy to those of you who believe." Those who vex and hurt the Messenger of Allah, for them is an awful punishment. (The Messenger is not an emperor or a king who keep guards around them. He is accessible to all at all time and it is good for you that he pays attention to everyone)
(O You who believe) People swear by Allah to you in order to please you (and improve personal relations). But it is more fitting that they should please Allah and His Messenger, if they really believe (and embrace the Divine Ideology)
Don't they know that whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, for him verily is Hellfire, to abide therein? That is the supreme disgrace
The hypocrites fear that a Surah might be revealed concerning them, exposing what is in their hearts. Say, "Go on mocking! Allah will bring to light exactly what you are dreading
And if you ask them (O Messenger), they will say, "We only talk and jest." Say, "Do you realize that you are mocking Allah, His Revelations and His Messenger
Make no excuse. You have disbelieved after your confession of belief." If We forgive a group of you, there is another group whom We shall punish since they have violated human rights by stealing the fruit of others' labor." (Unless they restore their rights (4:17), (9:102), (25)
The hypocrites, both men and women, are all of a kind. They enjoin the doing of what is wrong and forbid the doing of what is right, and withhold their hands from doing good. They are oblivious of Allah, and so He is oblivious of them. (Whoever forgets Allah, forgets himself and his honored stature of being a human (59:19)). Verily, the hypocrites drift away from humanity
Allah promises the hypocrites, both men and women, and the rejecters of the Truth, the fire of Hell for their abode. It suffices them. They deprive themselves of the Grace of Allah, and theirs is the lasting torment
There have been people like you before who were mightier than you in strength, more affluent than you in wealth and children and party. They enjoyed their share of this worldly life. And you have been enjoying your share, just as they did, and you indulge in idle talk as they did. Such are the people whose works have perished in the world and in the life to come. And it is they, yes, they who are the losers
Has not the history reached them of those before them? Of the People of Noah, Aad, Thamud, Abraham's folk, the dwellers of Midyan, and the disasters that befell them. Their Messengers had come to them with clear evidence of the Truth. Allah never did injustice to them. But they used to wrong their own people and thus wronged their own "Self
And the believers, both men and women, are colleagues one of another. They enjoin the doing of Right and forbid the doing of Wrong (The distinction between right and wrong will never be arbitrary. The Qur'an is the eternal Criterion of what is right and what is wrong (2:185)). Together, they help establish the Divine System, and set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat (9:60). This is how they obey Allah and His Messenger. These are the men and women on whom Allah will shower His Mercy. Allah is Mighty, Wise
Allah promises to the believers, both men and women, Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will live forever, and magnificent dwellings in the Gardens of Eden. And Allah's Approval is the greatest of all Blessings. That is the Supreme Triumph
O Prophet! (Establishment of the Divine System will build a paradise on earth. But you will meet staunch opposition). Strive hard against the rejecters of the Truth and the hypocrites! And be tough with them without the least inclination towards compromise in matters of Ideology. Their ultimate abode is Hell, a miserable destination indeed
(The hypocrites) swear by Allah that they have said nothing wrong. Yet they most certainly have uttered a word of disbelief (9:61-62). And have denied the Truth after professing their surrender to Allah. They were aiming at something beyond their reach (attaining inner peace without sincerity to the Divine Guidance). And they could find no fault in the Divine System except that Allah has enriched them and caused His Messenger to enrich them out of His Bounty. Hence, it will be good for them if they repent and correct themselves. But if they still turn away, Allah will cause them to suffer grievous retribution in this world and in the life to come. And they will have no protector or helper in the earth
And among them are those who promise Allah, "If He gives us of His Bounty we will certainly spend in charity and will certainly become of the righteous, the ones who help others
Yet, when He gave them His Bounty they hoarded it and turned away from their promise
Allah's Law instilled hypocrisy in their hearts till the Day they meet Him (until their demise). This is because they broke their word to Allah that they promised Him, and because they lied again and again
Do they not know that Allah knows their thoughts and secret consultations and that Allah is the Great Knower of Things Hidden
It is these hypocrites who find fault with such of the believers who give generously, and they find fault with such believers who have nothing to give but the fruit of their toil and labor. They ridicule them all. Allah's Law of Requital will cause their ridicule to rebound on themselves, and grievous suffering awaits them
(O Prophet! You very compassionately ask forgiveness for them.) It does not matter if you ask forgiveness for them, or not, Allah will not forgive them even if you ask seventy times for their forgiveness. They have rejected Allah and His Messenger. Allah does not intervene to guide people who intentionally drift away from the Right Path
Those (hypocrites) who were left behind rejoiced at sitting still behind the Messenger of Allah, and disliked to strive with their wealth and persons in Allah's Cause. They said, "Let us not go forth in heat." Say, "The fire of Hell is more intense", if they but understood. (And the aggressors could soon bring the heat of the conflict to their homes)
Then let them laugh a little, they will weep much, as the reward of what they have earned
If Allah returns you to a situation where they ask your permission to go forth, say, "You shall never again go out with me for any foe. For you were well pleased with sitting still the first time. Stay at home then with those who are obliged to remain behind (women, children, elderly men, the sick and the disabled)
Nor shall you (O Prophet) ever follow the funeral of any of them that dies, nor stand at his grave. They rejected Allah and His Messenger and drifted away from the Divine Commands till death
Let not their wealth nor their children or party astonish you! Allah's Law will punish them with these things and their "Self" will depart while they are disbelievers (9:55). (Hoarding of wealth and taking pride in children, party and possession causes the humans to ignore the Divine Laws in their daily lives, thus these things become a tribulation for them (2:195), (8:28), (18:32), (63:9), (68)
When a Surah is revealed saying, "Attain belief in Allah, and strive along with His Messenger", the able-bodied men of wealth ask your leave and say, "Allow us to stay behind with those who remain at home
They are well pleased to be with the disabled, the elderly, the women and children, and the ill. This attitude puts a seal on their hearts. They seldom understand (that fear can only be overcome with action (2:277), (
And the Messenger, and those who believe with him, strive with their wealth and person. For them are all the good things and high ranks, and they are the ones who are truly prosperous
Allah has made ready for them Gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide. That is the Signal Victory
And of the wandering Arabs also, there were some who made excuses and came to claim exemption. And those who were false to Allah and His Messenger, merely sat behind. Grievous suffering is bound to befall the unbelievers among them
Not to be blamed are the physically weak, the elderly, the sick, and the ones who have no means to offer, so long as they are sincere to Allah and His Messenger (48:17). They should keep doing what they can to support the Cause. There is no way of blame against the doers of such good. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Nor is there any blame on those who came to you (O Messenger), requesting that you provide them with mounts (horses and camels). You told them, "I cannot find a ride to mount you on." They returned with eyes flowing with tears out of sorrow that they had no means to spend for equipment
The way of blame is only against those who ask for your leave when they are rich and able-bodied. They are well pleased to be with those who are obliged to stay behind. They have caused Allah's Law of Requital to seal their hearts without knowing it
They will make excuse to you when you believers return. Say, "Make no excuse, for we shall not believe you. Allah has informed us about you. Allah and His Messenger, the Central Authority, will keep you under probation. And then you will be brought back to Him, the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, and He will make you truly understand what you were doing in life
They will swear by Allah, when you return to them, so that you may leave them alone. So leave them alone (9:125). They have blotted their humanity and earned the abode of Hell with their actions
They swear that you believers may be pleased with them. Even if you accept them, Allah does not accept those who drift away from His Commands
The desert Arabs are more hard in rejection and hypocrisy, and more likely to ignore the Limits that Allah has revealed to His Messenger. Allah is Knower, Wise
Among these Bedouin Arabs is he who looks upon his spending as a penalty, and awaits a disaster to hit you. (They hope for the Divine Order to collapse). It is they who invite disaster upon themselves. Allah is Hearer, Knower
And among the Bedouins are those who believe in Allah and the Last Day and consider their spending as a means towards Allah and a means of supporting the Messenger. This will raise their ranks with Allah. Allah will embrace them with His Mercy. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Gracious
And the first to lead the way are the emigrants (from Makkah), their hosts who sheltered them (in Madinah), and those who followed them in goodness, Allah is well pleased with them and they are well pleased with Him. He has made ready for them Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever. This is the Supreme Triumph
Some of the Bedouins who dwell around your town are hypocrites, and some of the people of
There are others who acknowledge their faults. Since they have a mixed record of good and bad deeds, they may hope that Allah will relent towards them, for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Accept their contribution for the community. Purify their thoughts with proper education and training so that their "Self" may grow. Help them! Your support is a great source of peace in their hearts. Allah is Hearer, Knower. (Let the believers adopt the Divine qualities in their human capacity)
Do they not know that Allah is He Who accepts the repentance of His servants, and accepts their charity? Verily, Allah is the Acceptor of repentance, Merciful
Say, "Act! (Prove your word with action). Allah will behold your actions, and so will His Messenger, and the believers. Ultimately you will be returned to the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible. He will show you a replay of all you used to do
There are some who await Allah's Decree whether He will punish them or relent to them. Allah is All Knowing, All Wise. (Their matter is under investigation by the State. Allah's Laws are based on Knowledge and Wisdom)
(The hypocrites keep making schemes.) They built a Masjid out of mischief and to promote disbelief, and sectarianism among the believers, and as an outpost for those who warred against Allah and His Messenger before. They will surely swear, "We had but good intentions", but Allah bears witness that they are liars
You shall not stand in such a Masjid! (6:160). There is a Masjid whose foundation was laid from the first day on the Secure Way, it is more worthy that you stand therein. In it are men who love to be purified, and Allah loves those who keep clean of division and sectarianism
Is he who founded his building on the Secure Way of Allah and His goodly Acceptance better, or he who founded his building on the crumbling cliff of "Shirk" that topples down with him into the fire of Hell? Allah does not intervene to guide a folk who displace right with wrong
The building which they have built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts be torn to pieces. (A building that divides believers will remain a source of unrest in the hearts of the sectarians till their hearts stop beating). Allah is Knower, Wise
Allah has bought from the believers their persons and their goods, for (in return) theirs is the Garden. They shall fight in the Cause of Allah, and shall slay and be slain. It is a Promise that is binding on Him in the Torah and the Gospel, and the Qur'an. Who can fulfill a promise better than Allah? Rejoice then in the bargain you have made, for that is the Supreme Triumph. (Deuteronomy 6:4-5, 6:32. Matthew 10:5, 10:39,)
Triumphant are those who: Return to the Right Path and take corrective action as soon as they feel that they have erred. Obey the Commands of Allah. Praise Allah in word and action by serving His creation. Pick up lessons from travel and from history. Are always humble before the Divine System. Adore Allah alone. Promote the Qur'anic Values, and resist the non-Qur'anic customs. Guard against trespassing the Limits ordained by Allah. These are the men and women who deserve a pleasant life in both worlds (33:35), (66:5). Give them the glad tiding (O Messenger)
It is of no avail for the Prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness when the idolaters face the Law, even if they are their relatives, once it has been made clear that they are destined for Hell
Abraham asked forgiveness for his father because of a promise that he had made. The promise was based on the hope that his father would mend his ways. When Abraham was sure that his father was a persistent opponent of Allah's Commands, he desisted from asking forgiveness for him (14:41), (19:47). Abraham was kind-hearted, clement
Allah never sends a folk astray after He has guided them, unless they violate the Laws that were made plain. Surely, Allah is the Knower of all things
To Allah belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth. He has full control over the Laws of life and death, for individuals and nations. You have no protector and helper outside Allah's Laws
Allah is Kind to the Prophet, the emigrants and those who hosted them. The support came in difficult times. That is when the hearts of some of them slightly wavered. Allah turned to them in Mercy. He is Compassionate and Kind to them
Allah showed compassion to the three men who had stayed behind. They felt hopeless and the vast earth seemed shrunk to them, and their lives became narrow for them. They realized that there is no refuge but within the Divine Laws. Then He turned to them in Mercy that they too might turn in hopeful repentance (9:106). Allah is Acceptor of repentance, Merciful
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be mindful of Allah's Laws and be with the truthful. (That is way to Paradise)
People of Madinah, and the Bedouins around, should not stay behind the Messenger. Nor shall they prefer their lives to his life. For, any thirst, effort or hunger that afflicts them in the Cause of Allah, or a single step that they take that angers the rejecters, and whatever gain they gain from the enemy, becomes a credit, a good deed recorded for them. Allah never loses the wages of the doers of good
And whatever they spend, small or large, and whenever they cross a valley, it is recorded in their credit, so that Allah repays them the best return for their actions
The believers shall not all go to an expedition. Of every group of believers, let some of them come forth to gain sound knowledge of DEEN (the Qur'anic System of life). Then they can pass the knowledge on to their people when they return, so that they may remain aware
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Fight those of the disbelievers who close up on you, and let them find strength among your ranks. And know that Allah is with those who are mindful of His Laws
Whenever a Surah is revealed some of them (hypocrites) say, "Which one of you has increased in faith?" In fact, it has increased the believers in faith and they rejoice
But those who have caused their hearts to ail by harboring doubts, it only adds another element of disbelief to disbelief, and they die refusing to accept the Truth
Don't they see that they are tested once or twice each year (at your hands 9:14)? Still they do not repent, nor pay heed
When a Surah is revealed, the hypocrites look at each other mockingly as if saying, "Does anyone see you? Let us leave." And then they turn away. Allah's Law turns their hearts away because they are a people who do not use their faculties of understanding
(All humanity must realize that) there has come to you a Messenger one of your own who feels your burden. He is full of concern for your betterment, and for those who attain belief, he is compassionate, merciful
(O Messenger) if they turn away, say, "Allah suffices me. There is no god, but He. In Him I put my trust. He is the Lord of the Tremendous Throne
L.R. Alif. Laam. RA. Allah Aleem the Knower, Raheem the Merciful, announces that these are the Verses of a Book that is full of Wisdom
Is it too much of a wonder for people that We reveal Our Message to a man among them? "You shall warn mankind, and give good news to those who attain belief that they have a sure footing with their Lord." Those who are bent upon denying the Truth, say, "This man is an obvious wizard." (He is gifted with spellbinding eloquence)
But, your Lord (Who sent this Book) is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six stages, and is established on the Throne of His Almightiness in Supreme Control. He, the Director of all directions, Issuer of all decrees, runs the Universe according to His Laws. No intercessor can stand in His Court but as a witness of Law (2:255), (16:111)). Such is Allah, your Sustainer. You shall serve Him. Won't you use your intellect and reasoning
To Him is your ultimate return, all of you. Allah's Promise is the unwavering Truth. He creates the first creation, and He will create it again so that every action may have its Just Recompense. Those who attained belief and worked to augment the society will have their just reward. And those who rejected the Truth, for them will be a burning draught of despair and a painful doom because of their persistent refusal to acknowledge the Truth. (A consequence of their own doings (33:24), (34:3-4), (45)
He it is, Who appointed the sun as a splendid glow, and the moon as a cool light. He appointed stages for the moon, in due measure. You make your calculations and calendars accordingly (6:97), (17:12). Allah has created the Universe as the Absolute Reality and for a Purpose. (It is neither a dream, nor a reflection of the world of ideas). Allah details His Verses for those who wish to learn
In the difference of day and night, and all that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for those who wish to walk aright
Those who expect not to meet Us, and content themselves with the petty delights of the worldly life, do not look beyond it, and neglect Our Messages
Their home will be the Fire that they have earned (ignited) with their own actions
Those who attain to faith, and help people, their Lord guides them by their conviction (that no action goes waste). He shows and walks them the way to the Gardens of delight, beneath which rivers flow
Their prayer therein will be, "Glory be to You, O Allah!" Their greeting to one another will be, "Peace!" The conclusion of their prayer will be, "Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!" (And so shall be the peaceful Ideal Society on earth. They will realize that the good of one is the good of another and see how Praiseworthy the Giver of such Blissful Guidance is)
If Allah hastened requital for people as they hasten for immediate delights, their respite would have already expired. (It is Allah's Mercy that His Law of Requital does not grasp them instantly. He gives them time to mend their ways). Those who do not entertain the hope of meeting with Us, We leave them wandering in their rebellion
When affliction befalls man, he cries unto Us, whether he be lying, or sitting or standing. But when We have relieved him of the affliction, he goes his way as if he had never cried unto Us for what afflicted him. Those who trespass the Divine Laws, lose discernment and even their ill deeds then seem fair to them
We annihilated many nations before you for their violation of human rights. Their Messengers had come to them with clear evidence of the Truth, but they refused to believe them. Thus do We reward those who steal the fruit of others' labor
Now, We have made you their successors in the land, to behold how you behave
When Our Messages are conveyed to them in all clarity, those who hope not that they are destined to meet with Us, (want to strike a deal with the Messenger). They say, "Bring us a Qur'an other than this or make some changes in it." Say (O Prophet), "It is not conceivable that I would alter it myself. I only follow what is revealed to me. I cannot disobey my Lord, for I fear the retribution of a Mighty Day
Say, "If Allah wanted otherwise, I would have not recited and conveyed this to you, nor would have made you aware of it. Indeed, a whole lifetime have I dwelt among you before this. (You have always called me)
Who does a greater wrong than the one who himself forges a lie, then ascribes it to Allah, or falsifies His Revelations, or denies them? Those who steal the fruit of others' labor under any pretense, certainly do not prosper
They worship and obey besides Allah, deities that can neither harm nor benefit them. They say, "These are our intercessors with Allah." Say, "Are you informing Allah of what He knows not in the heavens and the earth? Glory to Him! (39:3). He is High, Exalted above all that they associate with Him
All mankind were but one community (and are meant to be so); then they differed (2:213). Had not your Lord decreed the Law of free will for humans, He would have judged their disputes immediately (2:30), (2:256), (11:118), (1)
And they say, "Why was not a miracle sent down upon him from his Lord?" Then answer (O Prophet), "The Unseen is known to Allah alone. Wait for the results of my Program. Indeed, I shall be waiting with you." (That will be the best sign for all of us to behold)
When We cause people to taste of Mercy after they have suffered a hardship, they start scheming to defy Our Commands. Say, "Allah is more Swift in planning. Our couriers write down what you plot
He it is Who enables you to travel in the land and the sea. When you board the ships, the ships sail with the voyagers with a favorable breeze. And they rejoice therein. If a stormy wind comes and the waves surround them, they think they are overwhelmed. Then they implore God, in all sincerity turning to His Universal Laws, saying, "If You only save us this time, we will truly show our gratitude
Yet as soon as He has saved them, they return to land in their behavior of rebellion against the Divine Laws. O Mankind! Remember that your rebellion is only against your own "Self" (91:9-10). Enjoyment of the worldly life with disregard of Eternity, is but a fleeting delight. Then unto Us is your return, and We shall make you understand what you truly accomplished
Those who do not invest in the life to come must consider a similitude: The life of the world is a passing delight: We send down water from the height to produce with it all kinds of plants from the earth, provision for humans and animals. Then, just as the earth has taken its ornament and is perfectly adorned, and its people think that they are in control, Our Command arrives by night or by day, leaving it completely barren, as if nothing existed there yesterday. The only way to inherit the fruit of your labor in the Hereafter is to live by Our Laws. We expound Our Revelations and Signs in Nature for those who use their intellect
Allah calls to the Lasting Abode of Peace, and leads men and women to the Straight Path. This Guidance can only be achieved according to His Laws
Those who benefit humanity get rewarded manifold. No dust of sadness and no trace of humiliation will overshadow their faces. Such are the rightful dwellers of the Garden; they will abide therein
And those who are unjust to others in their daily lives, will fail to balance their own personalities. They will spend their lives in sadness and humiliation, a linear result of their own actions. There will be no one to protect them from Allah's Law. They will wander as if the darkness of night had covered their faces. They are the ones who have built their Hell and they will inherit it in the Eternity
One Day We will gather all of them together. We will say to those who acknowledged false deities, "Stay back, you and your pretended partners of Allah!" We will have the leaders and their followers confront each other. Their leaders will say, "It was not us you worshiped
And such false deities (as Prophets, angels, saints, and the Universal forces) will say, "Allah suffices as a Witness between us and you, that we were not even aware of your worship." (They worshiped the intrinsic and extrinsic projections of their own desires and fantasies)
Therein every person will experience exactly what he or she did before. Then they are returned to Allah, their MAULA, the True Lord Supreme, and all their false imagery leaves them in the lurch. (There is no MAULANA but Allah)
(Now is the time for them to think.) Say (O Messenger), "Who is it that provides for you from the heaven and the earth, or who is it that has full power over your hearing and sight? And who is it that brings forth the living from the dead, and the dead from the living? And who is it that directs the Order of the Universe?" They will say, "Allah." Say, "Will you not then be mindful of His Laws
Such is Allah, your Rightful Lord. After the Truth what is there but error? How could you then turn away
The Word of your Lord is justified that those who drift away from Reason will not accept the Truth
Ask them, "Can any of your 'partner gods' originate Creation and carry them through evolution?" Say, "Allah originates Creation and carries them through evolution. How are you then so misled
Say, "Of your 'partners' is there any that can lead you to the Truth?" Say, "Allah leads to the Truth. So, who is more worthy of being followed? The One Who shows you the Way or he who finds no way unless he is guided? What is amiss with you? How do you judge
The majority of the people follow nothing but conjecture. Surely, conjecture can never at all be a substitute for the Truth. Allah is Knower of how they act (and forge)
Now this Qur'an could not possibly have been devised by anyone except Allah. Nay indeed, it is a confirmation of the Divine Origin of the earlier Revelations, and a clear exposition of the Eternal Law. Without any trace of doubt, this Book is from the Lord of the Worlds. (While it confirms the surviving Truth in the previous Revelations, it is a Watcher over them and ignores and, where necessary, corrects the human touch in them)
Or, do they say, "He has invented it?" Tell them, "Bring one Surah like this and call for help everyone you can besides Allah, if you are truthful." (2:23), (11:13). (One chapter like this in beauty, eloquence and wisdom. And "besides Allah" would mean, without copying phrases and sentences from the Qur'an)
Nay, they deny it without grasping the profound knowledge therein. And they have yet to see the benevolent transformation it can bring about in the making of humanity. Generations before them rejected Divine Revelation. Then see what was the consequence for those who thus wronged themselves
And of them is he who believes in this (Qur'an), and of them is he who does not believe in it. And your Lord is best Aware of those who are bent upon denial and want corruption and disorder to go on
If they keep denying you (O Prophet), say, "I have my work, and you have your work. You are innocent of what I do and I am innocent of what you do
Among them are those who apparently listen to you. (But their thoughts are wandering). Can you make those deaf to hear who do not use reason
And among them you will find those who look at you without seeing. (Their mind is roaming elsewhere). Can you show the way to those who are blind of the heart
Allah is never unjust to human beings; but people wrong themselves. (Failing to use the God-given faculties is the first wrong one can commit. It brings the humans down to subhuman levels)
On the Day when He will gather them, they will think as if they lived in this world for one hour of the day. Others will think it was a day or a few days (20:103-104). They will recognize one another as they did yesterday. Lost are those who used to deny that they were destined to meet Allah, face His Law of Requital, and thus remained unguided
Whether We let you (O Messenger), behold something of what We promise them, or cause you to die, unto Us is their return (and the Law of Requital is ever vigilant). Allah is the Watcher over what they do
For every nation there has been a Messenger. And he always explained to them the distinction between justice and injustice. The Law of Requital has never unjustly dealt with any nation
They say, "When will the promise be fulfilled, if you believers are truthful
Say (O Messenger), "I have no power even to avert any harm to myself, or benefit myself contrary to the Laws of Allah. Every nation determines its own rise and fall. When the time comes, they can neither delay, nor hasten the Requital
Say, "Have you thought, when His retribution comes to you suddenly by night, or in the bustling day, what portion of it would the guilty wish to hasten
Would you then profess belief in it at last, when it comes to pass! Ah! Now? And you wanted to hasten it on." (But the period of Respite has been over)
It will be said to the oppressors and violators of human rights, "Taste the eternal torment, the exact reward of what you earned
They keep asking you (O Prophet), "Is it really true?" Say, "Yes indeed, by my Lord, it is really true. And you cannot defy His Laws
Whoever oppresses people, has wronged his own "Self". Even if they possessed everything on earth, they would readily present it as ransom. But they will be ashamed within themselves, when they see the doom. They will be judged fairly and no wrong shall be done to them
Oh, verily, To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. His Promise is unwaveringly True but most of them never learn
He it is Who gives life and death. You and your actions will be returned to Him
O Mankind! There has now come to you Enlightenment from your Sustainer, and a healing for everything that troubles your hearts, and Guidance, and Grace to all who embrace it
Say, "In this Bounty of Allah and in His Grace - in this, then, let them rejoice. It is better than all the treasures that they may amass
Say, "Have you considered how Allah sends down to you all kinds of provisions for your minds and bodies? Then you render some of them unlawful and some lawful?" (You go after man-made dogmas thus tampering with the revealed Word of God and declare unlawful His Bounties of sustenance, food, clothing, ornament of life and things of aesthetic beauty such as art). Say, "Has Allah permitted you to do this? Or do you invent lies and attribute them to Allah
Does it ever occur to the people who tamper with religion and invent lies concerning Allah, that they will have to face Him on the Resurrection Day? Allah is Infinitely Bountiful toward mankind, but the majority of them do not show gratitude in word and action
In whatever condition you may find yourself (O Prophet), and whatever of the Qur'an you are reciting and preaching, and whatever work or business you believers are occupied with, remember that We are your Witness from the moment you enter upon it. Not an atom's weight in the Low nor in the Height escapes your Lord's knowledge. Nor, a thing smaller or bigger, everything in the Universe is recorded in His Clear Decree
Remember that people who strive to establish the Divine System, become the friends of Allah. They will have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve
They accepted His Message, followed His Commands, and walked aright
There is good news for them in this world and in the life to come. (This is Allah's Word). Allah's Words never change. (And changeless are His Laws (33:62), (35:43), (48:23). And you will never find even a slight turn in His Laws (17:77)). Success in the world and in the life to come is the Supreme Triumph
Let not their utterances sadden you (O Prophet!) To Allah wholly belong all Authority, Might and Honor. He is the Hearer, the Knower. (No power, glory or honor is attainable contrary to His Laws)
Behold! Verily, all creatures in the heavens and all creatures in the earth belong to Allah. (All are His subjects). So, what do they follow who call upon "partners" of Allah? They follow nothing but the conjecture of others, and themselves do nothing but guess
He it is Who made night for you to rest in, and made the day lighted to make things visible to you. These are Signs for those who are willing to listen and think
And yet they assert, "God has taken unto Himself a son!" Glory to Him! Self-sufficient is He. Unto Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. No evidence whatever you have for this assertion! Would you ascribe to God something you really don't know
Say, "Verily, They who attribute their lying inventions to Allah, will see the crops of their false imagery burning to ashes
They get their fleeting share in this world, but then unto Us is their return. Our Law of Requital will have them effectively taste a dreadful doom, for they chose to live in the darkness of falsehood
(People have been fabricating falsehood since ancient times.) Relate to them the history of Noah. Behold! He said, "O My People! If my presence among you and my announcement of Allah's Messages are hard on you, well, I have put my trust in Allah. Decide then upon what you are going to do against me, and call to your aid your "partners". And once you have chosen your course of action, let no hesitation deflect you from it. Then have a go at me and give me no respite
But if you change your mind and turn away from hostility, do so for your own good. I have asked of you no wage. My wage is with Allah alone, and I am commanded to be of those who surrender to Him
But, they persisted in their denial, and We saved Noah and his companions who boarded the ship, and made them successors in the land. (The deniers thought of the flood warning as a laughing matter. The Tigris and the Euphrates rivers flooded with torrential rains) and We drowned those who had rejected Our Messages. See then what happened to those who had been given sufficient warning
Then after him We sent many Messengers to their respective nations and they brought them clear evidence of the Truth. They preemptively refused to accept the Message. And they were not the kind of people who would rethink their decisions. Our Law puts a seal on the hearts of those who trespass the bounds of reason
Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs, with Our Messages. But they were a folk arrogant and they were used to thriving on the fruit of others' toil
When the Truth from Us came to them, they said, "This is clearly nothing but magic
Moses said, "This is what you say about the Truth when it has come to you! Is this magic? Those who deceive people with lies and claims of magic, never succeed
They said, "Have you come to turn us away from our ancestral ways, and so that you two become prominent in the country? However, we will not believe in you two
Pharaoh said, "Bring all eloquent debaters to me
And when they came, Moses said to them, "Begin with your presentation
When they finished with their arguments, Moses said, "Your reasoning is totally flawed. Allah's Laws annihilate the political and social systems that promote corruption, disorder and bloody feuds
Allah will always vindicate the Truth by His Laws. Societies will flourish only when they embrace the Permanent Value System. Even though, the guilty that are used to thriving on the toil of others, will hate equity
Only a few of the Egyptians, some youngsters, could proclaim belief in Moses because of the fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs. Pharaoh was indeed a great tyrant on earth. He used to cross all bounds of human behavior
Moses said, "O My people! If you have believed in Allah and surrendered to Him, then be steadfast in your resolve and action by putting your trust in Him
They responded, "In Allah we trust. O Our Lord! Save us from the oppression of the oppressor
Save us with Your Mercy from these ruthless disbelieving folk
We commanded Moses and his brother, "Maintain your homes in Egypt, and turn them into places of worship to remember God. Establish the Commandments in your lives and give good news to the believers
(Moses promised to proceed on these lines.) He prayed, "Our Lord! You have given Pharaoh and his chiefs a life of luxury and abundance. Our Lord! With their resources and might they continue with their oppression and lead people astray from Your Path. Our Lord! Destroy their riches and make their faculties incapable of contriving their oppressive designs. They will not see the Truth unless they face an awful suffering
Allah said, "Your prayer is heard. Both of you shall remain determined. And you both shall not follow the path of those who act without knowledge." (2)
We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and Pharaoh with his armies pursued them in rage and bitter enmity. When Pharaoh was drowning, he cried out, "I believe that there is no god but the One in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am of those who surrender
What? Now! You rebelled ardently all your life. You committed bloody crimes on earth
Nay, but this day We will only save you in your body so that you may remain a lesson for generations to come. A great many of mankind remain heedless of Our Signs
Thereafter indeed, We assigned to the Children of Israel an honorable dwelling place, and gave them decent provision. But they began to hold divergent views and divided among themselves despite the knowledge (of Revelation). Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding wherein they differed
(O Prophet), If you ever think whether the Revelation We send to you could be an inspiration from your heart, ask the angels who bring it. They read it before you read it. Verily the Truth has come to you from your Lord. Be not of those who waver
(Those who consider Our Revelations as intrinsic inspiration, in fact deny them.) Be not of those who deny Our Revelations and become losers
Verily, they who violate your Lord's Law of Guidance, will not believe
Though every evidence may come to them, till they see the painful doom
For, alas, there has never yet been any community that attained belief, and benefited by its belief, except the nation of Jonah. When they embraced belief, We removed from them the suffering of disgrace, and let them enjoy their term. (37:147-148). (They used to live in humiliation at Nineveh. When they accepted the Divine Message, they prospered for about two centuries between 800-612 B.C. Then the Midyans conquered them. After the demise of Jonah, his people had been fast ignoring the Divine Word revealed to Jonah, and leaning towards the resurging priest class. The invaders set on fire the wonderful town of Nineveh. The spacious 60 mile wide, and beautiful town was reduced to ashes. The king of Assyria got himself burnt alive in the palace, and that was the end of the Assyrian dynasty)
If your Lord willed, all men and women on earth would have believed. Would you compel people to believe? (2:)
None can attain conviction contrary to Allah's Laws. And those who do not use their intellect are made to carry loads of confusion on their minds
Say, "Behold what is in the heavens and the earth! No miracles and no warnings will help those who are bent upon denying the Truth. (2)
Can they expect other than the days of calamity that befell those who passed away before them? Say, "Wait then! I shall wait with you
(At the time of Requital) We save Our Messengers and the community of believers as in the old times. It is incumbent upon Us to save the community of true believers
Say, "O Mankind! If you have any doubt about the System that I am trying to establish, and if you believe that other parallel systems can be of avail to you, let us go ahead with our programs. I worship not and obey not those whom you worship and obey instead of Allah. But I obey Allah Who causes you do die (and Who controls the Laws of life and death of individuals and nations). I have been commanded to be of the believers
(O Prophet) Set your purpose resolutely for the Upright System of life and do not be of those who associate anyone with Allah in any form
Do not ever call on deities besides Allah. They have no control over your harm or benefit. If you expected help outside the Laws of Allah, you will be among the wrongdoers
If Allah's Law afflicts you, there is none who can remove it contrary to His Laws. And when He blesses you, no power can hinder His Grace. He bestows His Grace upon His servants according to His Laws. And He is Forgiving, Merciful
Say, "O Mankind! Now has come to you the Truth from your Lord. So whoever chooses to follow the right path, follows it for his own "Self". And whoever chooses to go astray, goes astray to his own hurt. And I am not a guardian over you
(O Messenger), Follow what is revealed to you and be steadfast in adversity until Allah issues His Judgment. And He is the Best of judges
L.R. Allah, Aleem the Knower, Raheem the Kind. A Divine Writ this is, the Verses wherein are perfected and then expounded. It comes from One Wise, Aware
It teaches that you serve none but Allah. (Say O Prophet), "I am unto you from Him a Warner and a bearer of good news
Seek your Sustainer's forgiveness, then turn towards Him in repentance. He will then grant you a goodly enjoyment of life in this world until a term appointed. He will bestow His abounding Grace on all who abound in merit. But if you turn away, then I fear for you the chastisement of a Great Day
To Allah is your return and He has Power over all things
Oh, verily, see how they enshroud their hearts hiding their innermost thoughts, as if to keep Him from knowing them! (Are they trying to live a dual personality? (71:7)) Ah! When they cover themselves with garments of vanity, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal. For, He is Knower of the innermost thoughts of the hearts
There is not a creature in the earth but its sustenance depends on Allah. He is Aware of its habitation and of the needs of His creation at every stage (6:99). He carries them from one station to another until the final destination. His Laws are preserved in the Clear Book of Decree, the Divine Database
He created the heavens and the earth in six stages and established Himself on the throne of His Almightiness. He has Supreme Control over the origination of life which began in water (21:30). Life is a test for yourselves to see which of you leads a balanced life and is best in conduct. Yet, if you (O Prophet), say, "You will be raised again after death," the rejecters of the Truth will surely answer, "This is clearly nothing but a fabulous delusion
And when We delay for them the retribution until after the Period of Respite, they will surely say, "What is keeping back the doom?" Ah! On the day it actually reaches them, nothing will turn it away from them. And their mockery will completely surround them
(Those who only believe in the instant gains of this life, are quick to rejoice and quick to despair.) If Our Law causes man to taste Mercy from Us and afterward withdraws it from him, he behaves despairing, thankless
And if Our Law causes him to taste Blessing after some hardship has visited him, he says, "Gone is all affliction from me!" Behold! He falls into exultation and pride
But those who are steadfast in adversity and prosperity, and work to improve the quality of life for all, behave positively. For them is the protection of forgiveness and a great reward
Is it then conceivable (O Prophet), that you omit any part of what is being revealed to you (because the rejecters dislike it)? Or because you feel uncomfortable on their saying, "Why has not a treasure been sent down for him, or an angel come with him?" You are but a Warner, and it is Allah Who is the Custodian of all things
Or they assert, "He has invented it." Say to them, "Then bring a portion of Surahs like this, invented, and call on everyone you can besides Allah, if you are truthful!" (Or produce one Surah like this (2)
And if they answer not your prayer, then know that it has been revealed only in the Knowledge of Allah; and that there is no god but He. Will you then surrender yourselves unto Him
Whoever cares for (no more than) the short term gains and glitter of the worldly life, We shall repay for them their deeds herein without the least reduction
But (since they did not invest in the life to come), for them is nothing but Fire in the Hereafter. All that they have contrived here is vain, and worthless is all that they did. (Following ones own desires is the inevitable consequence of disregarding the Divine Values)
Contrary to such people is the one who has truly seen his Lord's Signs in the Universe. Now he has the Prophet as a witness, who correlates Allah's Signs in the Universe with His Messages. And before this, the Scripture of Moses has set a precedent and graceful guidance. (It foretold the advent of the final Messenger; Deuteronomy 18:15-18). Such people will surely attain belief. As for those who league together in rejection of such obvious Truth, the Fire is their appointed place. Harbor not any doubt; verily this is the Truth from your Sustainer. But the majority of mankind do not believe
Who can be a greater wrongdoer than the one who invents a lie about Allah? (The clergy have always done it with previous Scriptures, and they will do it again (2:79), (3:77), (6:113), (6:138-139), (9:34), (22:52)). Such will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, "These are they who lied about their Sustainer." Oh, verily, Allah's rejection is the due of all those who displace right with wrong
They are the ones who hinder people from the Path of Allah, and seek to make it crooked. Thus they practically disbelieve in the life Hereafter
They cannot escape Allah's Law of Requital even if they run to and fro in the earth, unscathed. Never will they find anyone to protect them from Allah. Double suffering will be imposed on them since they could not bear to hear the Truth nor could see it
Such are those who have lost their "Self", and all their false imagery, their invented dogmas and idols will leave them in the lurch
These fabricators will be the worst losers in the Hereafter
Those who attain belief and work for the betterment of people, and are humble before their Lord, are the rightful dwellers of the Garden; they will abide therein
These two kinds of people may be likened to the blind and deaf of reason, and the seeing and hearing. Can these two be deemed alike? Will you not then keep this in mind? (13:1)
We sent Noah to his folk and he declared, "Behold, I come to you with a plain warning
That you may serve none but Allah (and follow not the rampant traditions); I am afraid this trend is slowly taking you towards a day of an awful disaster
But the chiefs of his people, who were the foremost in rejection of the Message, came forward with four objections: We see you but a human being like us. And we see not that any follow you but the obviously lowest caste among us. (17:70). We do not see that you people are in any way superior to us, such as, wealth and property. Nay, we deem all of you liars
Noah said, "O My people! Bethink! What if I am taking my stand on clear evidence from my Lord? What if He has blessed me out of His Grace of guidance? It is obscure to you because you are not seeing it through the eyes of reason. In any case, can we compel you to accept what you don't like
O My people! No benefit do I ask you for this. My reward rests with none but Allah. And I am not going to repulse any of the believers (39:40), (63:8). Verily, they know that they are destined to meet their Lord, whereas in you I see people who are wandering in the darkness of ignorance
And O My people! Who will help me against Allah if I drove them away? Will you then not reflect
I never say to you that I have the Treasures of Allah. Neither do I claim knowledge of what is beyond human perception, nor do I say that I am an angel. I disagree with you, that my followers are the folk of the lesser status. You claim that Allah will never give them His Bounties, but He knows their true merit. I cannot be unjust to them
They said, "O Noah! You have disputed with us and disputed a great deal. Now bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are a man of truth
He answered, "Only Allah brings His Requital according to His Law, once it is upon you, then you can by no means escape
Noah said, "My counseling and well-wishing will not help you outside of Allah's Law of Guidance and straying (4:88). He is your Lord, and unto Him you must return along with your deeds
God said to Noah, "Do they say that you have invented this set of values?" "Tell them, if I made it up, I am responsible for my crime. And I am innocent of your crimes." (Let them at least reflect if they are doing wrong or not)
And it was revealed to Noah, "No one of your folk will attain faith except the ones who have believed already. So grieve no longer over their actions
We commanded Noah, "But build an ark under Our Eyes and according to Our Directions, and do not plead with Me on behalf of the oppressors. (23:27). Behold, they are destined to be drowned." (A flood in the valley of Tigris and Euphrates was forthcoming. (11:44). The rejecters would drown for not following the Prophet
As he was building the ship, and every time the chiefs of his nation passed by him, they mocked at him. Thereupon he said, "If you are mocking us, behold, we are mocking (at your ignorance) just as you are mocking us
And soon you will know upon whom a humiliating punishment befalls, and upon whom a lasting torment will come
Thus it was until Our Command came to pass. Water gushed forth in torrents over the face of the land. Torrential rain began and the rivers started over flowing. We commanded Noah to take with him livestock, a couple each, and to take his family and followers with him. The rejecters, of course, were not to embark (Noah's son and wife (11:45), (66:10) did not embark). The community of believers with Noah was small
Noah put his trust in Allah and told his people to embark, "Come on board, in the name of Allah will be its course and its resting. My Lord is the Provider of shelter, Merciful
The ship sailed with them amidst huge waves as Noah called his son, who was standing aloof, "O My dear son! Come ride with us; do not be with the disbelievers
He said. "I will cling to a hill-top to protect me from the water." Noah said, "Nothing can protect anyone today from God's Command except for those who have earned His Grace." (The only security that day in the valley was for those who had believed in Noah, followed his advice and thus attained God's Mercy). A towering wave came between them and his son was among those who drowned
And it was said, "O Earth! Swallow your water and, O Sky! Cease!" And the command was fulfilled. The water sank into the earth. And the ark came to rest upon the Mount
Noah called upon his Lord, "My Lord! My son was of my family and Your Promise is the True Promise and You are the Most Just of judges." (So, why was he not saved? Didn't You promise to save my family)
His Lord said, "O Noah! Your son was not of your family. His conduct was not righteous. You were not aware of the Divine Criterion of relationships which are based on Ideology and not on lineage otherwise you wouldn't have asked such a question. I enlighten you so that you don't remain ignorant in this regard
Noah said, "My Lord! I guard myself in Your shelter from asking favors which do not befit me, and for my lack of knowledge. Forgive me and shower me with Your Grace, otherwise I will become a loser
He was told, "O Noah! Disembark and descend from the hills in Peace from Us, and there are the blessings of decent sustenance for you and your companions (in spite of the recent flood (11:41)). And other nations, all of them will be awarded according to their deeds. Those who care only for the ornament of this life will be provided for in the world, but eventually suffer from Our Law of Requital
(O Prophet) These are the news We reveal to you that neither you, nor your people were aware of. Go ahead with your program with forbearance. The destination of Bliss belongs to those who journey through life upright
We sent to Aad their brother Hud. He said, "O My people! Serve Allah alone. You have no god but He. As it is, you are but inventors of falsehood
He said, "O My people! I ask no reward from you. My reward is with Him Who brought me into being. If you use your sense, you will understand
O My nation! Come to the forgiveness of your Lord by turning to Him and mending your ways. He will shower upon you heavenly blessings abundant, and add strength to your strength. Do not turn away, guilty
They said, "O Hud! You have not shown us any miracle. We will not forsake our idols just because you say so. We are not going to believe you
We think that one of our gods has possessed you like a demon and you have gone crazy." Hud said, "I call Allah to witness, and you too bear witness that I am absolutely free of your idolatry
Get together, all of you and your gods besides Him. Make a firm decision against me and give me no respite
I have put my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. There is not a creature in the Universe beyond His firm Control. Behold, my Lord is on the Straight Path
You may accept or reject the Message that I have clearly conveyed to you. If you turn away, you will decline and fall. Then, My Lord will bring another nation in your place. You cannot harm Him at all. Verily, My Lord is He Who is the Guardian of all things
And so, when Our Command came to pass, We saved Hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us. We saved them from a harsh retribution that inflicted the rejecters
Such were Aad. They denied the clear Messages of their Lord, rebelled against His Messengers and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant
And they were pursued in this world by Divine rejection, and will be overtaken by it on the Resurrection Day. Oh, verily, Aad denied their Sustainer! Oh, away with the Aad, the people of Hud
And to the nation of Thamud, We sent their brother Saleh. He said, "O My people! Serve Allah. You have no one worthy of obedience but He. He initiated you from the earth and made you thrive thereon. Come to His forgiveness, then turn to Him in repentance mending your ways. My Lord is ever-Near, Responsive
They said, "O Saleh! Great hopes We had placed in you before this! But now you are telling us to move away from worshiping what our forefathers worshiped. Verily, now we are in grave doubt, amounting to suspicion about the meaning of your call to us
He said, "O My people! Do you really think? If I have clear evidence of the Truth from my Lord, and there has come to me a mercy from Him, who can help me against Allah if I disobey Him? (If I get intimidated), you can only push me into ruin
(The feudal lords had been depriving the poor of using the land and its natural resources of water and vegetation.) Saleh said, "O My people! This she-camel belonging to Allah shall be a token for you. So leave her alone to graze in the land belonging to Allah. Do her no harm, lest speedy punishment befall you (91:13)." (This verse along with (55:10) pronounces one of the most revolutionary concepts of the Qur'an. The land, the earth is owned by none but Allah and must be open for all His creation as a means of sustenance. Hence, all landlord-ship is contrary to the Divine Ordinance. In the Divine System, the Central Authority will see to it that any piece of land will be for those who toil in it and give Allah His Right, the poor-due
But they cruelly slaughtered her. Thereupon He said to his people, "Only for three more days shall you enjoy life in your homes. This is a Promise not to be belied
And so, when Our Command came to pass, by Our grace We saved Saleh and the believers with him from the humiliating annihilation of the day. Verily, your Lord, He alone is Strong, Almighty
(Saleh and His followers moved out of the town while the disbelievers stayed back with their mockery.) And a tremendous blast overtook the oppressors, and then they lay lifeless, in their very homes, on the ground
As if they had never lived there. Oh, verily, Thamud had denied their Lord. Oh, away with the Thamud
(Similar was the outcome of the people of Lot.) Our Messengers came to Abraham bearing a glad tiding. They greeted Abraham with "Peace!" And he greeted them back with "Peace!" and made haste to place before them a roasted calf
But when he saw that their hands did not reach out towards it, he deemed their conduct strange and became apprehensive of them. But they said, "Fear not! Behold, we are sent to the people of Lot." (Abraham was apprehensive thinking the visitors refusing hospitality might have aggressive intentions, but in fact they were hurrying to Lot)
And his wife (Sarah), standing nearby, laughed when We gave her good tiding of Isaac, and after Isaac, (his son) Jacob
She exclaimed, "Oh, woe is me! Shall I bear a child, now that I am an old woman and this husband of mine is an old man? This is really strange
Answered the Messengers, "Do you wonder about Allah's Command? May Allah's Grace and Blessings be upon you, O dwellers of the house! Verily the Owner of all Praise, Sublime is He
When the fear had left Abraham, and the good news was conveyed to him, he began to plead with Us for Lot's people
For, Abraham was clement, kind-hearted, ever turning to His Lord
(It was said) O Abraham! Forsake this! Your Lord's Command has gone forth, and verily, the retribution is now inevitable
When Our Messengers came to Lot he was distressed, and knew not how to save his people. He exclaimed, "This is a difficult day
And the most iniquitous among his people came rushing to Lot. (They wished the visiting Messengers to approve their behavior). Lot said, "O My people! Your wives, who are like my daughters, are permitted for you. Be mindful of Allah's Laws, and do not humiliate me in the presence of my guests. Is there not a single upright man among you?" (Genesis 19:14 states that Lot offered them his own married daughters. Two daughters and the whole crowd! Nay, a Prophet is the spiritual father of his nation)
They said, "You know, we have little interest in our wives whom you call your daughters. And, you know well what we want." (Our intention is to get our behavior into the realm of the Permissible)
Lot exclaimed, "I wish I had the strength to resist you or had some strong support among you
The visiting Messengers said, "O Lot! Behold, we are Messengers of your Lord. Never shall they follow your guidance nor shall be able to catch up to you. Depart then, with your household and followers, while it is yet night. Leave this land never to look back again. Except your wife for, what befalls the people will befall her as well. Their appointed time is the morning, and isn't the morning near? (She stays behind because she has chosen to go along with the trends of the times. And she is among those who remain silent at the prevalent wrongdoing)
And so, when Our Command came to pass, We brought low the highly arrogant towns (Sodom and Gomorrah), and rained down upon them hard devastating rocks (from the volcano)
The stones were marked arrows from your Lord. His Requital is never far from those who displace the right conduct with wrong
And to Midyan, We sent their brother Shoaib. He said, "O My people! Serve Allah alone. There is no god for you but He. And give not short measure and weight. I see that you are well-to-do, but (any system based on injustice is never durable) I fear for you a Day that will surround you with chastisement
Hence, O My people! Always give full measure and weight with equity and do not deprive people of what is rightfully theirs. Do not spread corruption and disorder in the land
That which Allah gives you as just profit is better for you if you believe. But I am not a guardian over you
They said, "O Shoaib! (We had thought that your religion was only a matter between you and your Lord). Does your Salat command that we should forsake the worship that our fathers practiced? Or, that we leave off doing what we like to do with our economy? Behold, you want us to think that you are the only clement, and the rightly guided man among us
He said, "O My people! Think again! What if I have clear evidence of the Truth from my Lord? What if He has provided me with a decent and honorable sustenance while I follow His Laws? I deal in all fairness and I shall never preach what I don't practice behind your sight. I sincerely desire your betterment so far as I can. But the achievement of my aim depends on Allah alone. I trust in Allah and turn to Him hoping for the best
O My people! Let not my disagreement with you be taken personally to cause you to persist in your guilt so that the same (retribution) befall you that befell the people of Noah, and the people of Hud, and the people of Saleh. And remember that the people of Lot did not live very far from you
(None of the nations was destroyed for a deficiency in their worship. They met destruction for violating human rights). "Seek forgiveness of your Lord, then repent by journeying on the right path. You will experience that my Lord is Merciful, Loving
They said, "O Shoaib! Much of what you tell us is beyond our comprehension. We see that you are not a man in power in our midst. If we were not concerned about your family and your tribe, we would have stoned you. You are of no value to us
He said, "O My people! Is my family and tribe more honorable to you than Allah? You only take His name as a formality. In real life you assign the back seat to Him. Remember, my Lord surrounds all your actions
O My people! Act what is in your power and I will work. Soon you will know upon whom comes a humiliating doom, and who is a liar. And watch! I am a watcher with you
When Our Command came to pass, We saved Shoaib, and those who believed with him, by a mercy from Us. An awful blast seized the wrongdoers. The morning found them dead in their very homes, on the ground. (Shoaib and his companions had moved to safety as forewarned)
As if they had never lived there. Oh, away with Midyan, just as the Thamud have been done away with
And, indeed, We sent Moses with Our Messages and a manifest authority
To Pharaoh and his chiefs. They followed only the command of Pharaoh, and his command did not lead to right
Pharaoh will go before his people on the Day of Resurrection, and lead them into the Fire. What a miserable place to land
Divine rejection was made to follow them in this world and will overcome them on the Day of Resurrection. Contemptible is the gift that will be given to them
(O Messenger), this is news from only a few of the past communities that We narrate to you. Some of them are merely surviving and some have vanished
We did no injustice to them, but they wronged themselves. And when the Command of your Lord came to pass, their gods whom they called besides Allah availed them not. They only added to their ruin
Such is the grasp of your Lord's Law of Requital on townships when they run oppressive systems. His grasp is painful, strong
Herein, verily is a lesson for those who fear the suffering of the life to come. That is a Day unto which all mankind will be gathered, and that is a Day that will be witnessed by all that ever lived. And the results of all actions will become manifest
And We defer the Day only to a specified time
On the Day, when it comes, no one will speak except by His Leave. Some of them will be miserable, others glad. (The miserable ones will get deprived of the blessings, and the glad ones will enjoy all the bounties of the eternal life)
Now those who by their deeds brought misery on themselves will be in the Fire; sighing and wailing will be their portion
Therein to abide, as long as the New Universe endures; that is time beyond count, unless your Lord decrees otherwise. Your Lord is Doer of what He Wills in the World of Command. (The current Universe will be dismantled for a new Universe (5:44), (14:48), (21:104), (25:22), (39:37), (
The happy ones on that Day will enter the Garden and live there as long as the New Universe endures, that is time beyond count; until your Lord opens for them the way to further evolution, a gift unfailing
Be not in doubt about the outcome of those who worship idols in any form. They only blindly follow their forefathers. They and their forefathers will get their due portion according to Our Law of Requital
People differed even when Moses was given the Scripture. Had it not been for a Word that had already gone forth from your Lord, the case would have been judged between them. (The Word that the Final Revelation, the Qur'an, will come forth with the Plain Truth.) They are still lingering on in their doubts about the Messages of their Lord
Unto each your Lord will verily repay his works. He is fully Aware of what they do
Therefore, (O Prophet) stand firm as you are commanded, along with those who turn to Allah with you. Remember to be moderate in all your actions. He is watching all that you do
Do not be intimidated by the oppressors and guard yourself against even a touch of the Fire. Remember, there are no protectors to help you against the Laws of Allah. And then you will not be helped in any way
Strive to establish and consolidate the Divine System, day and night. Actions that create balance in the society remove the ill effects of inequities. Good deeds remove bad deeds. This is a reminder for those who pay attention
Be steadfast in service. Allah never loses the wages of the benefactors of humanity
(Here is a lesson for the future of humanity.) Alas, among the older generations there were few people of virtue, those who would take a stand against corruption and disorder in the land. Except the few whom We saved for their righteousness. Whereas most people indulged in violation of human rights, enjoying the fleeting delights of the world and thriving on the fruit of others' toil
For, your Lord would never annihilate a community for wrong beliefs alone as long as its people behave righteously towards one another. (The Qur'an is consistent in its theme that people will be rewarded according to what they do YA'AMALOON, and not what they know YA'ALAMOON. The reason that the Book stresses so much on the right belief system, is that humans are strongly influenced in their behavior by what they think and believe)
Had your Lord so willed, He could have made all mankind one single community, (but He has granted them free will as against other creatures (5:48)). Therefore, they continue to hold divergent views. Eventually however, the Divine Truth given in the Qur'an will be the dominant force in the world bringing most of the mankind together (9:33), (41:53), (
Your Lord will have Mercy on those who work toward that Noble Objective. He created them from one common source. The smaller and the bigger communities that defy Divine Laws will fulfill the Word of your Lord, "Verily, I shall fill Hell with the rural and urban mankind all together
And (O Messenger), all that We relate to you of the history of some Messengers, is in order to strengthen your heart. Although through these accounts the Truth comes to you, but it is also meant to be an enlightenment and Reminder for all believers in this Divine Writ
And tell those who adamantly disbelieve, "Do anything that may be in your power, while, behold, we shall labor in God's Way
And tell them, "And wait for what is coming. Behold, we are also waiting
And Allah alone comprehends the hidden reality of the heavens and the earth. For, all that exists goes back to Him as its Source. Serve Him, then, and place your trust in Him alone. Your Lord is not unaware of what you humans do
L.R. Allah, Aleem the Knower, Raheem the Merciful. These are the Messages of a Revelation clear in itself and clearly showing the Truth
Behold, We have sent it down in all clarity, in the Arabic tongue, so that you might encompass it with your reason
We reveal this Qur'an to you (O Prophet), and explain it in the best possible way, seeing that before this you were indeed unaware of what Revelation is
Thus spoke Joseph to his father, "O My father! I saw in a dream eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon, I saw them prone themselves unto me
Jacob replied, "O My dear son! Do not relate your dream to your brothers. They might, out of envy, devise a scheme against you. Verily, selfish ego is man's open enemy
Your Lord will elect you and give you outstanding insight into the reality of things. He will perfect His Grace upon you, and upon the House of Jacob, as He perfected it upon your forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Verily, your Lord is Knower, Wise
Indeed, in the story of Joseph and his brothers there are messages for all with a seeking mind
Now Joseph's brothers spoke thus to one another, "Joseph and his brother, Benjamin, are dearer to our father even though we are so many. Indeed our father is in plain aberration
One of them proposed, "Let us slay Joseph or leave him in a distant land. Then your father's favor will be all for you, and your affairs will be adjusted right for you
Another of them suggested, "Do not slay Joseph. Rather, if you must do something, cast him into a deep well, and some caravan may pick him up
They said, "O Our father! Why don't you trust us with Joseph when we are good friends to him
Send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play. We will take good care of him
Jacob said, "I worry that you take him with you to the wild and some wolf devours him when you are distracted
They said, "If a wolf devours him in the strong presence (of the ten) of us, will our lives be worth living
Unanimous in their decision, they led Joseph to cast him into a deep well. When they were placing Joseph in the well, We revealed to him that he would remain secure, and one day he would tell his brothers about what they did. We also revealed to him that it would be a mystery to them as to how Joseph was saved
After carrying out their plan they came to their father at night weeping
Saying, "O Our father! We went racing among us, and left Joseph by our belongings. A wolf did eat him up. We fear that you will not believe us even if we are telling the truth
And they came with false blood on his shirt. He said, "I don't believe this story; you have made it up. I will remain steadfast in the face of your conspiracy, and Allah it is Whose help is sought in the kind of misfortune you describe to me
And, there came a caravan, and they sent their water drawer. He let down his rope and pail into the well. He called in excitement, "Oh, what a lucky find! It is a teenage boy!" People of the caravan took him along as treasure. And Allah was Aware of what they did
They sold him in the market for a low price, a few silver coins. His value they knew not
The one who bought him in Egypt said to his wife, "Receive him honorably. Take good care of him. May be he can help us or we can adopt him as a son." We, thus, established Joseph in Egypt and arranged for him proper education and training. He was gifted with a great insight into events. Allah's Command always prevails although most people won't understand the stages of cause and effect
When Joseph reached his prime, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, since he lived upright. This is Our Law that We bestow knowledge and wisdom on those who live a balanced life in youth
The lady of the house, tried to seduce him. She closed the doors and said, "I am all yours." He said, "May Allah preserve me! My Sustainer has placed me in a station of balanced character. Those who displace moral values with temptation do not prosper
She desired him, and he would have desired her if he had not seen the Argument of his Lord, ("Go not close to adultery" (17:32)). Obeying Our Command saved him from evil and lewdness. He was among Our sincere servants
And they raced to the door and in the process, she tore his shirt from behind. They found her husband at the door. She said, "What should be the punishment for one who wanted to molest your wife, prison or some chastisement of pain
Joseph said, "She is the one who tried to seduce me." Now a member of her family came and suggested, "If his shirt is torn from the front, then she is telling the truth, and he is the liar
And if his shirt is torn from the back then she lied, and he is telling the truth
When her husband saw the shirt torn from the back, he said, "This is the typical scheme of you women. Your scheming is formidable." (His discriminatory comment shows his anger, and that women in that society were not viewed well)
He said, "O Joseph! Forget about what happened. And you O woman! Ask forgiveness. For, you have been greatly at fault
Women in the city started gossiping, "The governor's wife is trying to seduce her servant. She is deeply in love with him. But we see that she adopted the wrong tactics
When she heard their gossip, she invited them, and prepared comfortable couches for them, and they schemed. She gave a knife to each of the women. Then, she called Joseph, "Come out unto them!" And when they saw him they flattered him and 'cut their hands'. They exclaimed in their flattery, "Good Lord! This is no mortal man! This is but an angel!" (The governor's wife and her friends had planned to incriminate Joseph, and they were just buying time. They made marks on their hands to feign self-defense. There is absolutely no mention of the supposed "beauty' of Joseph, a fabrication adopted by most commentators from the Bible! Secondly, the root word QAT'A in this verse is of very special significance. Did these women chop off their hands? Must the thieves get their hands chopped off? Please see)
The lady of the house said, "This is he about whom you blamed me. I tried to seduce him but he preserved himself. Since he thinks he is an angel, and remains adamant against my command, he shall be imprisoned and brought low. (And, now we have the evidence against him with marks on your hands. We will humiliate him)
Joseph said, "O My Lord! Prison is dearer to me than these women's schemes. If you did not help me fend off their design, I am afraid of their intimidation, and of behaving like the unguided
His Lord heard his prayer, and helped Joseph remain steadfast in fending off their schemes. Verily, He is the Hearer, the Knower of all intentions and actions
(The women brought a suit against him.) The judges after seeing the marks on their hands put him in prison for a time
Two young men went to prison with him (for unrelated crimes). One of them (a butler) told his dream, "I saw myself making wine." The other (a baker) said, "I saw myself carrying bread on my head from which birds were eating. Can you tell us what this means? We see that you are a doer of good
He said, "I will tell you the meaning before today's meal is served. But, remember, that it is my Lord Who teaches me through Revelation. I am not one of those who reject Allah's Laws and disbelieve in the accountability of the life to come
I follow the creed of such ancestors as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It is not conceivable that we ever ascribe partners to Allah. This belief in the Oneness of God is of the Bounty of Allah upon us and upon all mankind. (It frees them from bondage to superstition and to 'men of religion'). But the majority of people fail to grasp this point, and thus remain thankless
O My prison mates! Are several masters better, or Allah, the One, the Dominant
Those whom you worship and obey besides Him, are but names that you have named, you and your forefathers. Allah has revealed no authority for them. All ruling belongs to Allah alone. And there is no Judge but He. He has commanded that you serve none but Him. That is the Right Religion. But most people are not aware of this fact or disregard it in practice
O My prison mates! The first of you will be (restored as) the chief wine butler for the King. The other one (the chief baker of the King) will be crucified and birds will eat off his head. Thus is the case decided about what you ask
Joseph asked the one whom he thought would be released, "Mention me in the presence of your King." But, his selfish ways made him ignore to mention it to the King, so Joseph stayed in prison for a few years
And one day the King of Egypt said to his court, "I have dreamed seven fat cows being eaten up by seven lean cows and seven green spikes of wheat and (seven) dry. O My chiefs! Explain to me my vision, if you can interpret dreams
They answered, "Confused nightmares! We are not skilled in interpreting such dreams
The one who was released (the chief butler) at long last remembered. He said, "I can bring you the meaning, so send me forth
He said, "Joseph! O you truthful one! Explain for us the seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and the seven green spikes of wheat and others dry. I wish to go back with information that they may know" (the interpretation and your value)
Joseph (without blaming him for his forgetfulness) told him the meaning and the way to avert the oncoming famine, "Work hard on agriculture for seven seasons. When you harvest the crop, only reap the amount you need. Leave the rest of the grains in the spikes
Then after that will come seven dry seasons which will use up all that you have prepared for them, but a little that you have stored up
After that, one year will come with good rains and the crops will be plenty. You will get abundant grain and fruit, and a lot of oil and juice to squeeze
And the King said, "Bring him before me!" When the courier came to Joseph, he said, "Return to your King and ask him to find out the case of the women who marked their hands. Verily, my Lord knows their plot." (Joseph asked for investigation before being released, to vindicate his character)
The King sent for those women, and asked them, "What happened when you tried to seduce Joseph?" They answered, "Good Lord! We found no evil in him." The wife of the governor (Zelicha) couldn't hold back, "Now the truth is out. I was the one at fault and he is surely truthful
(When Joseph learned this) He said, "I hope that the governor will realize that I never betrayed him in his absence. And Allah never leads to success those who betray Him and betray the trust of people
I do not claim that I am angelic, with no ego or desire. The human "Self" is not invincible against temptation (unless we make it surrender to the Divine Commands). It is my Lord's Mercy that mankind are in control of their behavior. Verily, my Lord is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful
The King said, "Bring him to me so that I may appoint him a close adviser to me." And when he had spoken with him, the King decreed, "From today on you have a high standing with us, invested with all trust
Joseph replied, "Place in my charge the treasury of the State. I shall be a competent custodian." (Now that he could personally handle the oncoming drought)
Thus, We gave established power to Joseph in the land (of Egypt). He had full mastery over it, ruling as he saw fit. We bestow Our Grace according to Our Laws, and never waste the reward of the doers of good
And the reward in the life to come is phenomenally better for all those who attain belief and walk aright
(And after some years) Joseph's brothers came and presented themselves before him. Joseph recognized them, but they did not. (They came from Canaan to buy grain as places around Egypt started suffering the drought)
And when he had given them suitable provisions, he said, "Next time bring to me that brother of yours from your father's side. Now you have seen that I am just and hospitable
And if you don't bring him to me, you will get no share from me; you will not even come close
They said, "We shall try to persuade his father to let him go; that we will surely do
Joseph said to his servants, "Load their barter (the price of wheat) back in their saddlebags. So that they may find it when they come home, and hence be more eager to return
When they went back to their father, they said, "O Our father! All grain is to be withheld from us unless you send with us our brother (Benjamin). So send him that we may obtain the measure, surely, we shall guard him well
Jacob said, "Shall I trust you with him as I trusted you with his brother? Allah is better at Guarding and He is the most Merciful of the merciful
When they opened their packs, they discovered that their barter had been returned to them. (The grand minister, the Prophet of God, had paid on their behalf). They said, "O Our father! What more can we ask? We shall bring food for our family and guard our brother. And we shall have the extra measure of a camel load. The first load we have brought is but scant
Jacob said, "I will not send him with you till you give me a solemn pledge in the name of Allah, that you will bring him back to me unless you get surrounded (by circumstances beyond control). And when they gave him their solemn pledge, he said, "Allah is the Warden over all we say
And he said, "O My sons! Do not enter the town all by one gate, but enter by different gates. Yet, I cannot avail you against the Divine Laws. (So, handle all situations accordingly). Rule and Law-giving belongs to Allah alone. In Him I trust, and everyone must place trust in Him since the Divine Laws never change." (17:77), (33:38), (35:43). (It is a common misconception that Jacob told his eleven sons to enter by different gates to obviate 'evil eye'. Historically the brothers had been accused of spying on a previous occasion. The Qur'an consistently rejects all superstition)
When they went, they entered the town as their father instructed. Jacob was quite right that even he (a Prophet of God) could not avail them against the Divine Laws. It was a duty that he did (giving the correct advice to his sons), although it could not prevent what was to happen (with Benjamin (12:75-81)). He was, by Our teaching, full of knowledge. And most people are devoid of that level of insight
When they met with Joseph, he brought his brother closer to him and said, "I am your brother, do not grieve about what they have been doing to us
As the camels were loading, one of the brothers hid the drinking-cup in Benjamin's saddlebag (12:77), (12:83), (12:89). Then a caller cried, "O Camel-riders! You are thieves!" (The Qur'an here corrects the statement in Genesis that it was Joseph who placed the cup in their pack)
They said, coming towards them, "What is it that you have lost
They said, "We have lost the King's cup, and whoever produces it shall have an extra camel-load, and I (the chief royal servant) guarantee that
They explained, "By God! Well you know that we did not come here to create mischief in the land, and we are no thieves
The callers asked, "What shall be the penalty for it if you prove liars
The brothers replied, "The penalty for it! He in whose bag the cup is found he shall be the penalty for it. (The thief belongs to you). Thus we requite the doers of such wrong (in our land)
They were brought before Joseph for the search. He began with the bags of his half-brothers before the bag of his brother (Benjamin). And finally extracted the cup out of his brother's bag. We thus perfected the plan for Joseph. He could not have detained his brother under the King's law. But that was the Will of Allah. We raise people in ranks according to Our Laws. And above every person of knowledge there is One who knows all
The brothers said, "If he stole, so did his brother in the past." Joseph stayed quiet, revealing nothing. He only said in his heart, "You are in worse case, and Allah is the Best Knower of what you allege
They said to Joseph, "O Noble one! He has an aged father, so take one of us instead of him. We see that you are a doer of good
Joseph (stressing the circumstantial evidence) answered, "God preserve us from detaining other than him with whom we have found our property. For, then we would indeed be unjust
So, when they lost hope, they conferred in solitude. The eldest among them said, "Don't you know that your father took a solemn pledge from you in Allah's name, and how you failed in the case of Joseph before? I shall not go from this place until my father gives leave or Allah judges for me. He is the Best of deciders
He told the rest of the nine brothers, "Return to your father and say, 'O Our father! Verily, your son has stolen. We know for sure, because we witnessed it. That was something beyond our knowledge and control
Ask the township where we were, and the caravan we came with. We are indeed telling the truth
Jacob said, "Nay, you have made up yet another story good enough only for you. But I resort to decent forbearance. May Allah bring them all to me. Verily, He, only He, is the Knower, the Wise
Then Jacob turned away from them saying, "Alas, my grief for Joseph!" His eyes glistened with tears but he suppressed his grief." (Jacob worried more about Joseph since he had no news of him yet. Many exponents at this point have ventured into strange guesswork. They report that Prophet Jacob became blind with grief and cried incessantly for eighty years grieving for Joseph! The Bible relates that Jacob lived to be 147 years old. Even so, it is not befitting of a Prophet of God, or even an ordinary person, to turn blind with grief and weep incessantly for 80 years. The whiteness of his eyes in this verse clearly refers to his eyes glistening with tears momentarily. And then he controlled his grief)
His sons said, "By God! You will never cease remembering Joseph until your health is ruined or you perish
He said, "I present my distress and anguish only to Allah and I know from Allah what you know not
O My sons! Go and find Joseph and his brother and never despair of the soothing Mercy of Allah. None but the disbelievers (in His Attributes) despair of the soothing Mercy of Allah
When they came before Joseph, they said, "O Noble one! We have suffered a lot of hardship along with our family. We bring only inferior barter to pay. So give us the full measure, and be charitable to us. Allah rewards the charitable
As he granted the request, Joseph said, "Do you remember what you did to Joseph and his brother in your ignorance
They exclaimed, "Wow! Is it indeed you who are Joseph?" He answered, "I am Joseph and this is my brother. Allah has been Gracious to us. Verily, if one walks aright and is steadfast, Allah never loses the reward of such doers of good
They said, "By God! Certainly Allah has raised you above us, and we were indeed at fault
Joseph said, "There is no blame on you this day! May Allah forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful
Now, go and take this royal shirt of mine and show it to my father. He will see the reality of things. Then, bring all your family to me
As soon as the caravan departed from Egypt, their father (Jacob) began telling his neighbors in Canaan about the Revelation that his son Joseph was in a position of high authority. "I do indeed scent the presence of Joseph even though you may call me senile
The skeptics said, "By God! You are still in your old confusion
The caravan arrived in Canaan and the good news was given to Jacob. When Joseph's royal shirt was shown to Jacob, he was delighted and his eyes saw the reality. He said, "Didn't I tell you that I know from Allah what you know not
They said, "O Our father! Ask forgiveness for us, for we trailed behind in your obedience, indeed we were at fault
Jacob answered, "I shall ask forgiveness for you from my Sustainer. Verily, He is Forgiving, Merciful
And when they came in before Joseph, he respectfully greeted his parents, "Welcome to Egypt! God willing you will be in safety and peace here
He raised his parents upon the throne of honor. All those present bowed to him in respect (To let his parents see the honor Allah had given their son). Joseph said, "O My father! This is how my Lord has made my dream come true. He has been very kind to me, since He freed me from the prison, and He has brought you here from the village. Satan (selfishness of my brothers) had sown enmity between us brothers. Verily, my Lord is Sublime in helping the worthy. He is the Knower, the Wise
Then, Joseph prayed, "O My Lord! You have indeed bestowed upon me some kingship, and have imparted to me the insight into events. Originator of the heavens and the earth! You are my Protecting Friend in the world and the Hereafter. Help me remain committed to your Commands till the last breath, and be counted among those who help augment the human potential
(O Prophet Muhammad) These are the chapters of the Unseen (history) that We reveal to you. You were not there when the brothers of Joseph decided together and were making their schemes
(Although you narrated the accurate account of Joseph as they demanded), most of these people will not believe even as you compassionately so desire
Although you ask them no reward for it. It is but a Reminder for the Worlds
How many a Sign is there in the heavens and the earth which they pass by with their faces turned away
The majority of those who claim to believe in Allah, practically submit to false authorities; humans and idols in countless forms. That is indeed SHIRK and they are MUSHRIKOON
Do they deem themselves secure from the overwhelming Requital of Allah, or the coming of the Hour suddenly while they are unaware
Say (O Prophet), "This is my way. Resting my call upon insight accessible to reason. I am calling you all to Allah, I and they who follow me." (We do not invite through blind faith, vague dogmas or by stunning your intellect with miracles). Glory to Allah! And I am not one of those who ascribe divinity in any form besides Him
And even before your time, We never sent (as Our Messengers) but men to whom We revealed Our Messages. We always chose them from among the people of their own communities. Have they then never journeyed about the earth and seen what happened in the end to those who lived before them? And, don't they know that those who walk aright, the life to come is better for them. Will they not then, use reason
There have been times when even the Messengers had lost all hope of reformation and thought that they had been denied. Then came Our help. We saved everyone worthy of being saved. Without exception We punished those who thrived on the fruit of others' toil
Indeed in the history of these men, there is a lesson for people of understanding. As for this Revelation, it could not possibly be a hadith, fabricated. It confirms the Divine Origin of the previous Scriptures, and gives a detailed explanation of everything. And it is a Beacon and Mercy for all those who accept it
L.M.R. Alif. Laam. Mim. Ra. Allah Aleem the Knower, Kareem the Honored, Raheem the Merciful. These are the verses of the Divine Writ, the Scripture. That which is revealed to you (O Prophet) from your Sustainer is the Truth. Yet most people do not believe in it
Allah it is Who raised the heavens without pillars visible to you. Then upon the Throne of His Almightiness He assumed Supreme Control of the entire Universe. He committed the sun and the moon to be of service, each running to an appointed term. He keeps Order in the Universe and He explains His Messages in detail, so that you may be sure of meeting with your Lord. (Studying the Book of Nature will bring mankind closer to their Lord)
And He it is Who has spread the earth wide and placed therein firm mountains, and flowing streams. And (He) created thereon couples of every kind of plants (and their fruit). (Plants have male and female flowers, and some trees like the date-palm are unisexual, male and female). He causes the night to cover the day. Verily, in all this there are Signs for people who think
And, on earth are many lots and tracts of land in proximity, yet widely differing from one another in composition and quality. On it, there are vineyards, and fields of grain, date and palm-trees, growing in clusters or standing alone. All of them are watered by the same water and yet, We have made some of them excel others in fruit. Verily, in all this there are Messages for people who use sense
If you wonder, then wondrous is their saying, "What! After we have become dust, shall we indeed be restored to life in a new act of creation?" It is they who are bent upon denying their Sustainer. As a result, it is they who carry the shackles of their own making around their necks. And it is they who are destined for the Fire, therein to abide
(Instead of helping you establish and consolidate the Divine System on earth), they challenge you (O Prophet) to hasten the disaster that strikes nations when they ignore the Divine Values. Sufficient precedents have been set for them in the form of exemplary punishments to generations before them. Now, behold, your Lord is Full of forgiveness for people despite their wrongdoing. But, behold, your Lord is also Strict in retribution! (He has decreed the Law of Respite during which period people can safely mend their ways)
The rejecters of the Truth keep complaining, "Why has no miracle ever been bestowed upon him from his Lord?" You (O Prophet) are but a Warner for every nation there is and ever will be. (The Perfect Divine Guidance through the Prophet shall be preserved in the form of the Qur'an for all times and all peoples (6:34), (6:91), (6:116), (10:64), (15:9), (18:27), (41:53), (75:16-19). And his prime duty is to counsel mankind that false individual or collective systems of life only end up in disaster
Allah knows what any female bears, and what decrease or increase takes place in the womb. Everything has a due measure with Him. (Allah's Guidance is a Mercy to humanity. You may liken it to the nourishment of the embryo in the evolving environment of the womb. The embryo lodges in security and its needs are met in a timely fashion and in perfect balance. Then it comes to the world ready to thrive. This is how the Divine System, when established in a society, nourishes the individual)
He has perfect Knowledge of the visible and the invisible. He is the Great, Most High
It is all alike to Him whether any of you conceals his thoughts or declares them, and whether he seeks to hide under the cover of night or walks boldly in the light of day
A person may think that he has helpers, perceptible (wealth etc) and imperceptible (status etc) that could preserve him from Allah's Requital. But the Law of Requital applies to individuals and nations. Verily, Allah never changes a nation's condition unless they change their inner selves (8:53). And when nations suffer Allah's Requital for their actions, there is none that can repel it, nor do they have a defender outside His Laws
He it is Who displays before you the lightning, to cause fear and hope, and initiates heavy clouds. (Similarly, the Light of Guidance brings to you the warning and a good tiding)
And the thunder and the (other) angels strive to glorify Him by carrying out their duties in awe of Him. And He it is Whose physical Laws let loose the thunderbolt to strike the earth. And yet they stubbornly argue about Allah's Laws (and fall for superstitions). Though Awesome He is in Power
Calling upon, and working in line with His Laws yield solid results. Those unto whom they call besides Allah, respond to them not at all. Thus they are like those who stretch their hands to the water which is not there. So nothing reaches their mouths. Hence, the prayer of the deniers of the Divine Laws is but vain prayer
And before Allah bow, willingly or unwillingly, all beings that are in the heavens and earth, as do their shadows in the mornings and evenings (
Ask them, "Who is the Lord of the Highs and the Lows?" Say, "Allah!" (23:84-90), (29:21-23). Then ask, "Why then, do you take as protectors besides Him those who have neither benefit, nor harm even for themselves?" (When you acknowledge Him as the God of the heavens, what stops you from acknowledging Him as God of the earth, and thus, as the Law-giving Authority? (6:3), (21:21-22), (43:84)). Say, "Is the blind of reason equal to the seer, or is darkness equal to light?" (11:24), (35:19). Have their 'partners' of Allah created something like He has created, so that this act of creation appears to them to be similar? Say, "Allah is the Creator of all things. He is the One, Dominating
He sends down water from the height causing the riverbeds to flow according to their measure, and the flood bears on its surface swelling foam. And, when they use fire to refine metals for their jewelry or equipment, foam is produced like it. In this way Allah is citing for you the example of the Truth and the Falsehood. For, as far as the foam is concerned, it passes away as scum upon the banks. While that which is of benefit to mankind, abides on earth. (The real existence on earth is of the person or the system that benefits humanity). This is how Allah uses analogies for you to understand
For those who respond to their Sustainer decently, is a state of Bliss. And those who do not respond to Him, even if they had all the treasures of the world and more like it, they would readily give it as ransom. But, a terrible reckoning awaits them, and Hell will be their abode, what a miserable bed to lie on
Is, then, he who knows that what has been revealed to you (O Prophet), is the Truth from your Sustainer, like him who chooses to remain blind? Only those who develop their insight will bear this in mind
Those people of insight who: Are true to their bond with Allah (their allegiance to the Divine System). Keep their pledge with Allah and with human beings
Build bridges of goodwill between people, and strengthen all ties of human relationships as Allah has commanded. (2:27). And stand in awe of their Sustainer. (They do not relegate His Commands to the level of others' utterances). And fear the eventuality of a tough accountability
They persevere in the face of adversities on way to seeking the Approval of their Sustainer. They help establish and consolidate the Divine System, and the Permanent Values. Spend on others of the provision We have given them, in secret and in public. And they counter harshness with kind manners. It is these that will find fulfillment in the Eternal Home
They will enter the Gardens of Eden, along with all who are righteous, of their parents, spouses and children. Angels will greet them at every gate
Saying, "Peace be upon you, since you remained steadfast in your commitment! Ah, what an excellent final home
But those who broke the pledge with Allah after ratifying it, and cut asunder what Allah has commanded to be joined (13:20-21), and spread corruption and disorder in the earth, their due is (the Divine) rejection. And theirs is the terrible Home
Allah grants abundant provision, or gives it in scant measure according to His Laws (17:18-21). And they (rejecters of the Divine Values) rejoice in the life of this world alone (without investing in the Eternity). But the life of this world is a fleeting pleasure compared with the Hereafter
(These Laws are unwavering.) Now those who are bent upon denying say, "Why has no miracle ever been bestowed upon him from his Lord?" Say, "People go astray according to Allah's Laws, and attain guidance according to His Laws. (4:88). (Man has been endowed with free will and there is no compulsion or coercion in Religion, whether physical, emotional or intellectual (2:2)
Those who attain faith through reason, their hearts find rest in the practical remembrance of Allah, that is, in following His Commands. For, verily, remembering Allah by following His Commands ensures tranquility in the hearts
The abode of Bliss is guaranteed to those who accept the Message and fulfill the needs of others
(O Messenger), We have sent you as We sent the Messengers before you so that you convey to them what We reveal to you, for in their ignorance, they deny the Most Gracious. Say, "He is my Lord, there is no deity except Him. In Him I put my trust and to Him is my recourse
Our Law precludes the possibility that a Lecture would move the mountains, tear the earth asunder, or make the dead speak. (The Qur'an is intended to move hearts, not mountains (6:7), (6:25), (6:112), (15:14-15), (17:90-93)). Nay, all Decree belongs to Allah. Do not the believers know that if Allah had Willed, He could have guided all mankind (by not giving them free will 10:100)? As for the rejecters of the Divine Laws, disasters will not cease to strike them for their deeds, even close to their homes until the Promise of Allah comes to pass. Verily, Allah never fails in His Promise. (Mankind will keep devising various political systems in search for the best. Those systems will keep collapsing and they will keep suffering far and close to their homes. Then, ultimately, they will realize that the Qur'an offers the solutions to all the problems facing humanity (41:53)
And verily, Messengers were mocked before you, but I gave the rejecters plenty of Respite. At length I seized them, and how awesome was My Requital
Is there anyone equal to the One Who watches minutely over every being and knows all that it does? Yet, they set up idols to rival Allah. Say, "Name them! Are you educating Him about something on earth that He doesn't know? Or, do you merely utter empty words?" Nay, what they contrive, seems fair to the rejecters of the Truth, for they have been hindered (by their own fault) from the Way. Whoever goes astray for violating the Divine Laws of Guidance, for him there is no guide
For them is torment in the life of this world, and verily the doom of the life to come is harder, and they will have no savior for them against Allah
The similitude of the Garden which is promised for the upright, is flowing streams beneath, its fruit everlasting, and cool shades (14:25), (47:15). This is the reward of the upright, while the reward of the rejecters is the Fire
Hence, they unto whom We have given the Book rejoice in what is revealed to you (O Prophet). But among the groups that follow other creeds, there are such who deny some of it. (They even preach that some of the verses have been abrogated, or that they have a hidden meaning!) Say, "I am commanded only that I serve Allah and associate none with Him. Unto Him I invite all mankind, and He is my goal
Thus, We have revealed it, a Decisive Authority in Arabic. (O Prophet), indeed if you got influenced by people's likes and dislikes after the Knowledge has come to you, you will have no protector or savior against Allah
And verily We sent Messengers before you, and We appointed for them wives and children as well. (They all were mortal human beings and they conveyed Allah's Revelation as commanded). It was not given to any Messenger that he could bring a Sign (the requital they hastened for), but it came according to Allah's Law of Respite. For every rise and for every fall, there is a Written Law
Allah blots out and establishes communities according to His Laws. Nations rise and fall accordingly, and with Him is the Ultimate Ordinance
(O Messenger) Whether We show you what We promise them, or cause you to die before that, your duty is to convey the Message. And the reckoning is Ours
Don't they see that every day on earth brings them closer to the end? For, when Allah judges, there is no power that could repel His Judgment. And Swift in reckoning is He
Now those who lived before these people, also devised schemes, but the most Subtle devising is that of Allah. He knows what every "Self" earns. The rejecters will soon find out as to whom belongs the Future
The disbelievers say, "You have not been sent (by God)." Say, "None can bear witness between me and you as Allah does; and then, none can bear witness as the one who truly understands this Book by way of reason." (Allah will soon prove me true)
L.R. Alif. Laam. Ra. Allah Aleem the Knower, Raziq the Provider. A Divine Writ is this that We have revealed to you (O Prophet). So that you may bring forth all mankind, by their Sustainer's leave, out of darkness into Light. On to the Way that leads to the Almighty, the Owner of all praise. (
Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. (His Commands must govern your social order as they govern the Universe). Therefore, those who reject His Guidance, incur an awful retribution
They choose the life of this world as the sole object of their love, preferring it to the life to come, and debar people from the Path of Allah. (They oppose reform in order to protect their vested interests). They try to make the Straight Path crooked. They have indeed gone far astray
We never sent a Messenger who did not speak the language of his people, so that he might make the Message clear to them. People go astray or attain guidance according to Allah's Laws (4:88). He is Almighty, Wise
(Moses spoke the language of his people.) We sent him with Our Messages, saying, "Bring your people from darkness to Light and remind them of the days of Allah (when different nations earned His Blessings). Verily, there are lessons in the history of nations for those who are steadfast in their resolve to rise as a community and wish that their efforts be fruitful." (SHUKR or gratefulness is not just the verbal proclamation of 'Thank God!' It pertains to our efforts bearing fruit, and then our sharing of the fruit of success with the servants of Allah)
And, Moses spoke thus to his people, "Remember Allah's Blessing upon you when he saved you from Pharaoh's people. They used to persecute you, and were killing your sons and sparing your women. From your Lord's Law of Requital that was a tremendous hardship on you
Your Lord proclaimed, "If you become practically grateful (by establishing a system where everyone equitably receives the Divine Bounties), I will give you more. And if you violated this Law, remember that My Requital is strict
Moses made it clear to his people that obedience to the Divine Commands was only good for them, "If you deny the Truth, you and all those who live in the earth, know that Allah is indeed Self-sufficient, Owner of Praise
Has not the history of the previous nations reached you? Of Noah and Aad and Thamud, and others who came after them, known only to Allah? (Their histories not known to people). Their Messengers came to them with clear evidence of the Truth, but the people tried to smother their voice, saying, "We reject what you have been sent with. We are in great doubt concerning your call
Their Messengers said, "Can there be any doubt about Allah, the Initiator of the Highs and the Lows? He only calls you that He may grant you the protection of His forgiveness, to save you from trailing behind in humanity and to sustain your community for a long time." They said, "You are but mortals like us! You want us to turn away from the way our ancestors used to worship. Then bring us a convincing miracle?" (Allah is far too Glorious from feeling offended by idol worship in any form. But submitting to false deities and 'authorities' is the root cause of inequities in any society, such as superstition, exploitation, ritualism and division of humanity into castes and sects, and the resulting violation of human rights. That is why all Messengers of God began their mission by calling people to the worship and obedience of the One True God)
Without exception their Messengers said to them, "Yes, we are human beings like you. Allah gives His grace of Revelation to whom He chooses among His servants. We work within the Laws of Allah that preclude the performance of supernatural miracles." (The right way to attain firm belief is reflecting at the Universe, within our own selves, at the accounts of history, and upon these verses. That is the general approach of the Book). "Then you can attain the belief whence you can firmly put your trust in the never changing Laws of Allah
Why should we not put our trust in Allah? Even in the face of your persecution, we walk the path we have been shown, with uncompromising resolve. All those who wish to entrust the results of their actions with someone, must put their ultimate trust in the Laws of Allah
The rejecters resorted to threatening the Messengers, "We will banish you from our land unless you join our religion." Then their Lord revealed to them, "Verily, Our Law of Requital will bring low those who try to displace truth with falsehood and insist on running oppressive systems
And verily We will establish you in the land after them. This reward is for those who recognize My Majesty and My Warning, and thus respect the Permanent Values given by Me
The Messengers earnestly sought help from their Lord, and every stubborn tyrant ended up frustrated
Behind every stubborn tyrant, the enemy of Truth, is the Hell of his own making and before him is the drink of distress. (Such people hinder their own development and forfeit inner peace in this life as well)
How difficult it is to swallow the bitterness of self-imposed failure! A life unlived, a mere survival, neither living nor dead (20:74), (87:13). What a heavy retribution
Here is a similitude. The works of those who live rejecting the Permanent Values of their Lord are like ashes that the wind blows away on a stormy day. They gain naught for their deeds (13:17). That is the outcome of following trails that lead nowhere
Have you not realized that Allah has created the heavens and the earth with a sublime Purpose? If He Will, He can do away with you and bring a new creation. (4:133), (7:146), (
Implementation of His Laws is not at all difficult for Allah
All mankind will appear before Allah. Then the ones who had disabled their minds with blind following will say to their 'self-glorified' leaders, "We used to follow you. Can you divert some of the requital from us?" The leaders will respond, "If Allah had guided us, we would have guided you. Ah, it is too late! Now it makes no difference whether we panic in grief or try to bear it in patience, there is no escape for us." (It is noteworthy here that Satan had brought the same argument that his Lord sent him astray)
Satan (their selfish desires) will disown them after the Judgment has been issued, "Verily Allah promised you a true promise; and I promised you and failed you. And I had no power over you except that I called unto you and you obeyed me. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. Neither can I help you, nor can you help me. I refuse to accept that you worshiped me ever." Verily, for those who displace trust with betrayal is a painful doom
And those who attained belief and augmented the human potential, will be admitted to the Gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein abiding by their Lord's Leave. Their greeting therein is, "Peace
See! Allah teaches you by an example. A Goodly Word! The Divine Ideology is like a good tree firmly rooted in the earth and its branches are swinging high in the heaven. (This Ideology ensures blessings in both lives. Also, it guarantees prosperity in the earth under Heavenly Guidance)
The tree of this Ideology bears fruit in all seasons by Leave of its Lord. Allah gives examples to mankind that they may reflect
And the example of an evil ideology is that of a bad tree that gets easily uprooted from the surface of the earth, and it has no stability. (It is neither firmly rooted, nor reaches any heights)
Allah strengthens those who accept (the good tree of) Divine Ideology in the life of this world and in the Hereafter. Allah's Law sends astray those who displace truth with falsehood. And Allah does everything according to His Laws
Have you not seen those who respond to the blessings of Allah with ingratitude and lead their people to an abode of utter desolation? (They show ingratitude by holding on to Allah's blessings for themselves, and exhort their people to do the same)
Hell, which they will have to endure, what an evil place to stay
They set up rivals to Allah that they may mislead people from His Path. (They take "Imams" as their authorities instead of the Word of Allah, thus setting up rivals to Him). Tell them, "Enjoy life while you may, for your sure destination is the Fire
(O Prophet) "Tell My servants to establish and consolidate the Divine System and spend of the provision We have given them, on others, secretly and publicly, before a Day comes wherein there shall be no trading of deeds nor friendship be of avail
(Think about the Source of your wealth and provision). Allah it is Who has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down water from the sky, thereby producing fruit and vegetation as provision for you. And He makes ships and boats to be of service to you that they sail in the sea by His Command, and has made of service to you the rivers
And makes the sun and the moon, both of them constant on their courses. And committed the night and the day to serve you
And He gives you all that you would be asking Him for (55:29). If you count the blessings of Allah's provision (they are so diverse that) never will you be able to number them. But verily, man when practically ingrate, is a wrongdoer to himself. (He is given to greed and hoarding)
Mankind needs Divine Guidance to be saved from selfishness and greed. To teach justice and equity among people Abraham founded the Sacred Center (2:125)). Recall that Abraham said, "My Lord! Make this a peaceful land and preserve me and my children from worshiping idols in any form
My Lord! The keepers of these idols and temples mislead a great many people. Whoever will follow me, will be of me, as the relationships would stand on Ideology (2:124), (60:4). Anyone who rebels against me, his or her case shall be with You. You are Forgiving, Merciful. You provide sustenance indiscriminately
Our Lord! I have settled some of my family in this barren, plant-less valley by your Sacred House. Our Lord! They are here to establish the Divine System. Give them the nobility of character so that the hearts of people incline toward them. Provide for them so that they may focus on their Mission and show gratitude by sharing Your heavenly and earthly blessings
Our Lord! You know our intentions and proclamations. Nothing is hidden from Allah in the Low and High
All Praise to Allah Who has given me sons like Ishmael and Isaac in later age! My Lord is indeed the Hearer of prayer
My Lord! Enable me and my children to establish the Divine System. Our Sustainer! And (earnestly do I ask) accept the prayer
Our Lord! Grant the shelter of forgiveness to me, my parents, and the believers on the Day when the final reckoning comes to pass
Deem not that Allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers are doing. He but gives them respite. They will stare in horror on the Day when all their deeds will reach their logical conclusion
They will be on the run to and fro with their heads uplifted in tension as they stare at what they behold, and their hearts vacant of all hope
Hence, warn mankind of the Day when this suffering may befall them, and every violator of the Divine Commands will long for a little more respite, saying, "Our Lord! Give us a little time. We will obey Your Message and follow the Messengers." The answer will be given, "Did you not use to swear before that there shall be no decline of status for you
You dwelled in the homes and towns where people before you had dwelt and wronged themselves oppressing the weak. And you were made well aware of how Our Law of Requital dealt with them. And We gave you plenty of examples
Their schemes, all recorded with Allah, were strong enough to intimidate the strongest of resolves. But, since their schemes were pitched against the Divine Laws, they utterly failed
So think not that Allah could ever fail to keep His Promise to His Messengers. Verily, Allah is Mighty, the Lord of just requital
The Day will come when this earth will be replaced with a new earth, and the heavens also will be changed, and they will come forth unto Allah, the One, the Dominating. (And before that, as the caravan of humanity journeys forward, people will witness a total metamorphosis in their political and social systems, a brand new environment where the Universal Law of the One Mighty, Dominating God will prevail (9:31-33),(18:48), (4)
And even before the Day of Resurrection, the Divine System will be established on earth and the guilty will not be able to commit bloody crimes on earth, nor will they be able to steal the fruit of the toil of others. They will be effectively immobilized
They will be drenched in the flames of their own igniting, feeling as if the coal tar is stuck on their whole existence
Justice will be swift in the Divine Order, so that everyone is paid a quick recompense and peace remains undisturbed. Allah is Swift at reckoning
This is a clear Message for all mankind in order that they may be warned thereby, and that they may know that He is only One God. Let those who are endowed with insight take this to heart. (Danger signs have been posted on the highway of life as the caravan of humanity moves along to the Noble goal of Peace. God is the Sustainer and Cherisher of all humanity and His Law is Supreme (1:1), (114:1). Men and women of understanding and discernment, and those of history, anthropology, philosophy, psychology, sociology, and those in positions of authority must pay heed to what their Lord is telling them (9:31-33), (14:48), (18:48), (4)
L.R. Allah, Aleem the Knower, Raziq the Provider. These are Messages of Revelation, of a discourse clear in itself and clearly showing the Truth. This is Qur'an, a plain reading and a Revelation that explains itself
The time is coming when the rejecters of the Truth will ardently wish that they were Muslims
Let them eat, drink, and enjoy life while hanging on to false hopes (47:12). They will come to know. (If they do not come to the Truth, the Truth will come to them, and they will see it)
And Our Law of Requital annihilated no community or township before the period of respite was over
The Law of Respite has no exceptions. No nation can hasten or delay the consequence
And yet, they who deny the Truth, say, "O You, unto whom this Reminder has been revealed, verily you are mad
Why don't you bring angels to us if you are a man of truth
We do not send down the angels except when the period of respite is over. And in that case the rejecters get no further reprieve
Behold, it is We Ourselves Who have sent down this Reminder, and behold, it is We Who shall truly guard it
And indeed (O Prophet) even before your time We sent Messengers to the communities
And never came there a Messenger unto them but they did mock him
Our Law turns the psyche of the guilty such that they ridicule reform since they are used to thriving on the fruit of others' toil
They accept not the Message. Such has been the way of those who went before them
And even if We opened to them a Gate into the Heaven, and they kept ascending through it
They would say, "Our eyes are intoxicated. Nay, we are a folk bewitched
We have set constellations in the Sky and We have beautified it for the beholders
And We have guarded it from every destructive force
(Allah is everywhere, not just in the skies. The Qur'an dispels all superstitions including the clairvoyants and fortunetellers spying onto His Court). The Shining Flame of Knowledge has now come to you to dispel the deceptive claims of every deceiver. (26:210-212), (37:8-9), (52:38), (6)
And the earth, We have spread it out wide and compressed its Globe (39:5) and placed firm in it mountain ranges. And caused each seemly thing to grow in due proportion therein. (15:19-20), (31:10), (41:10), (79:28-3)
And We have given you means of livelihood, as well as for all whose sustenance does not depend on you
And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures thereof. And We send it down but in precise measure
And We send the winds as pollinators that fertilize plants, and cause water to come down from the height for you to drink. Who holds the stores of the Universe? You don't
For, it is We, We alone Who control the Laws of life and death, and it is We alone Who remain the Ultimate Inheritor. (Hence, Our provision must remain accessible to all)
And, verily, We know those who passed on before you, and We know those who will come after you. (And We know those who advance in goodness and those who lag behind)
And, behold, it is your Lord Who will gather all of them together. Verily, He is Wise, all-Knowing
And, indeed, We created man from sounding clay, out of dark inorganic matter
Before humanity became civilized, (you can say that) We created the caveman from flames, i.e. with fiery disposition in self-preservation
Recall when your Sustainer said to the angels, "Behold, I am about to create a mortal man out of inorganic matter." (2:30-35), (7:11-22), (17:61), (19:21)
And when I have perfected him in due proportion and breathed into him something of My Energy, bow before him." (That something will be the gift of free will, the ability to make decisions)
Thereupon the angels bowed, all of them together. (The physical Laws in the Universe were made subservient to mankind)
But Iblis (Satan). He refused to be among those who bowed. (The selfish desire of mankind declared rebellion against the higher control of Reason and Permanent Moral Values)
God asked, "O Iblis! Why are you not with those who bowed
He replied, "I am not one to bow to man whom You have created from sounding clay out of inorganic matter
God said, "Go forth then, from here! You are dismissed forthwith
My rejection shall be your due until the Day of Judgment
Said Iblis, "Then O My Sustainer! Grant me a respite till the Day when all shall be raised from the dead
Answered He, "Verily, so be it. You shall be among those who are granted respite
Till the Day known (to Me alone)
Now Iblis said, "O My Lord! Since You let me go astray, I verily shall make attractive the path of error for them in the earth. And I shall mislead them everyone
Except those who are truly Your servants
This is, with Me, a Straight Path," said God
Verily, you shall have no power over My servants, except those who put themselves in error and follow you
And for all such, behold, Hell is the promised abode
With seven gates leading into it, each gate receiving its share of wrongdoers." (The Straight Path is one, while the wrong paths are numerous and each of them leads to Hell)
Verily, those who walk aright, will find themselves amidst gardens and springs
They will be told, "Enter them in peace, secure
And We shall remove from their hearts any sense of jealousy, rancor, rivalry and bitterness (7:43). And they shall rest as brothers and sisters, facing one another, on thrones of happiness. (5)
No weariness shall ever touch them, and never shall they lose this abode of Bliss
Tell My servants that I am Forgiving, Merciful
Yet, My Law of Requital dispenses a severe requital
As an example, tell them once again about Abraham's guests
When they came unto him, and said, "Peace!" He said, "Behold, We are afraid of you
Said they, "Fear not! Behold, we bring you the glad tiding of an enlightened son
He said, "How can you give me such glad tiding even though I have been overtaken by old age
They answered, "We have given you the glad tiding that is bound to come true. So be not of those who abandon hope
Abraham exclaimed, "And who, other than the one in error, despairs of the Grace of his Lord
He added, "And afterward what is your mission O Messengers
They replied, "We are sent to a guilty people (for retribution)
Barring Lot's household and followers. All of whom, behold, we shall save (as Commanded)
Excepting his wife. Allah has decreed that she would stay behind (due to her disobedi-ence)
When the Messengers came to Lot's house
He said, "Behold, you are people unknown
They answered, "Nay, we bring to you the decision of what they keep disputing with you
And we are bringing you the certainty (that the period of respite for your people is over). For, behold, we are indeed truthful
Go, then, with your family and followers while it is yet night. Follow them in the rear, and let none of you look back (ever to come back to this place). But proceed where you are commanded (by your Lord)
And We revealed to Lot this decree, "The last remnant of those shall be wiped out in the morning
(As this conversation was taking place), people of the town came rejoicing in anticipation. (They thought that these Messengers would make for them permissible what Lot had been declaring non-permissible)
Lot said, "Behold, these are my guests; so do not embarrass me
Be mindful of Allah and disgrace me not
They answered, "Haven't we forbidden you to entertain any kind of people (who are strangers)
Lot said, "Your wives, who are like my daughters, are better for you
The Messengers said to Lot, "They won't listen to you even if you preach them all your life." They were totally intoxicated, stumbling up and down
The blast (of Our Requital) overtook them at the time of sunrise
And We turned the towns upside down and showered upon them hard heated rocks
Therein verily are lessons for those who read the signs
And behold, those towns (Sodom and Gomorrah) stood by a road that still exists
Verily, herein lies a message indeed for those who believe
And the dwellers in woods (of Midyan, the people of Shoaib), were also wrongdoers
And so Our just Law of Requital struck them. And, behold, these both communities lived by a highway, to this day plain to see
And likewise indeed, the dwellers in
And We gave them Our Messages, but they stubbornly turned away from them
Even as they (with power given by Us) used to carve homes in the mountains for security
And so the blast (of Our Requital) overtook them early in the morning
And of no avail to them was all the power that they had acquired
Remember, We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, without Purpose. (Nations that do not fit themselves in the Divine Plan get wiped out. So shall happen to your people, (O Prophet), if they do not mend their ways). Behold, the Hour is surely coming (when you shall be victorious). So overlook their faults, and forgive them graciously
Verily, your Lord! He is the All Knowing Creator
We have given you several examples from history that repeats itself, and We have given you this Sublime Qur'an that defines the Laws of the rise and fall of nations
So do not even look at the worldly possessions that We have given to different people (among the deniers) and grieve not that their luxuries keep them from seeing the Truth. But lower your wing of kindness to the believers
Say, "Behold, I am indeed he that warns openly and without ambiguity
We did send down punishment upon the formulators of sects, after such warnings
Now those who cause division and sectarianism after (this Revelation), will be seen as dismembering the Qur'an
Them, by your Lord! We shall indeed call them to account, everyone and all
For whatever they have done
Hence, proclaim openly all that you have been commanded and disregard those who bring forth 'authorities' parallel to Him
Verily, We shall suffice you against all who deride this Message
And set up, side by side, parallel 'authorities
And well do We know that your heart is distressed by what they say
But extol you your Sustainer. Strive in your Mission so that they see that the Giver of such magnificent Guidance is indeed Praiseworthy. Be you among the foremost to adore Him
Submit entirely to your Sustainer so that you may have conviction in the success that is forthcoming
Allah's Command has come. Stop and think over these Messages and hasten not in comprehending the Qur'an. Glorified, Exalted He is, High above what people associate with Him
He sends down His angels with Revelation of His Command, to such of His servants as He Wills. Saying, "Proclaim that there is no one worthy of obedience but Me, so be mindful of My Laws
He has created the heavens and the earth with Purpose. He is High, Exalted above all that they associate with Him
He created the human being out of male and female gametes. They should be humble before their Creator's Messages instead of being contentious
And cattle He has created for you. From them you derive warmth, and numerous benefits, and from them you obtain food
And you find beauty in them when you drive them home in the evenings and when you take them out to pasture in the mornings
They carry your loads to places you could not reach without much hardship. Verily, your Lord is Compassionate, Merciful
And He created horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride and for joyful decor. And He will yet create things of which (today) you have no knowledge
(You see that these animals serve you and follow their instinct.) Allah alone can show the Right Path, but there are ways that turn aside towards wrong. If Allah willed, He could have guided all of you. (He could have created you driven by your instinct without the ability to make choices)
He it is Who sends down water from the sky, from it you drink, and out of it grows the vegetation on which you feed your cattle
Therewith He causes crops to grow for you, corn, olives, date palms, grapes, vineyards, and all kinds of fruit. This is indeed a convincing sign for those who reflect on the Universal order
He has committed in your service the night and the day, as well as the sun and the moon, and the stars are committed by His Command. These are sufficient signs for people who use their intellect
And all that He has created for you in the earth is of diverse colors and qualities. Therein is indeed a message for those who read the "Book of Nature
And He it is Who has made the sea subservient. You eat from it tender fresh meat and take from it gems which you may wear. And on that very sea you see the ships roaming through the waves so that you might seek of His bounty and be appreciative
And He has placed firm mountains on earth, lest it sway with you, and rivers and paths, so that you may find your way. (21:31), (31:10). (Mountains are the most vivid evidence of the geological history of the earth. With the earth's interior still being almost a molten fluid, the earth crust cooled off becoming hard and mountains came into being like pegs as the crest shrank)
And the natural landmarks as well as the stars to help people navigate
Is the One Who creates comparable to anyone that cannot create? Will you then not reflect
If you count Allah's Universal blessings, you cannot possibly reckon them. Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful. (His blessings encompass all Universe. He is the Absolver of imperfections. And He bestows means of physical and mental protection of humans as well as their individual and collective nourishment)
And Allah knows which of His blessings you keep hidden and which of them you bring into the open
Those whom they invoke besides Allah create nothing and are themselves created
(Powerless are the so-called saints, mystics and monks, whom you make holier and holier with the passage of time.) They are dead, disintegrated bodies, not living. They are not even aware when they will be raised. (And you still call upon them for help)
Your God is One God. Those who call upon others are practical deniers of the life to come, since they ignore the tough accountability that awaits them. They are too proud to submit to the Supreme Authority
(They deceive people with fancy words and contrived rituals but) Allah knows their intentions and actions, and what they hide and what they proclaim. Verily, He loves not the arrogant
And when it is said to them, "What has your Lord revealed?" They say, "Fables of ancient times!" (When the Qur'an is presented to them, their clergy claim that its Verses apply not to them, but only to Jews and Christians and the idolaters of Arabia)
They shall bear their burdens undiminished on the Resurrection Day, with part of the burdens of those whom they misled without this revealed Knowledge. Ah, evil is what they bear
Those who lived before them, had also plotted (against the Divine Laws) - whereupon Allah struck at the very foundations of all they had built and contrived. Such that the roof caved in upon them from above them. And the doom befell them from directions that they had perceived not
On the Resurrection Day He will cover them with shame and say, "Where are My 'partners' for whose sake you opposed My Guidance?" Men and women blessed with knowledge will say, " This Day, indeed, are the rejecters covered with shame and misery
Namely, those whose lives the angels take while they were doing wrong to their own "Self". They finally would offer submission and say, "We did not mean to do wrong." "Yes indeed! Allah is Knower of all you were doing
Therefore, enter the gates of Hell, to abide therein." A miserable abode for those who do wrong and take pride in it
And to those who walk aright, it is said, "What has your Lord sent down?" They say, "All that is good." (The Qur'an impels people to do good to others). For those who do good to others in this world, is a goodly return here, and the home of the Hereafter will be better. Pleasant indeed will be the home of those who walk aright
The Gardens of Eden they will enter, underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will have whatever they wish. This is how Allah rewards the upright
(The upright are contented even as they depart from the world.) Angels cause them to die saying, "Peace unto you! Enter the Garden now because of what you used to do
(Whereas those who violate human rights, wrong their own "Self.") Are they waiting for the angels to visit them, or that your Lord's Command comes to pass (and calls them to Requital)? Similar has been the attitude of those before them. Allah wronged them not, but they wronged themselves
All the evil that they had done fell back upon them, and the very thing they used to mock, surrounded them
Now the idolaters say, "If Allah had so willed, we would not have worshiped or served anyone but Him, we and our forefathers. Nor had we forbidden things outside His Command." Thus did those before them. But, are the Messengers responsible for other than conveying the Message clearly
And verily, We have raised in every nation a Messenger, saying, "Serve Allah alone and shun false gods in any form." Then Allah guided some of the people (since they adopted the right approach (4:88)). And error took hold of others (who fell into arrogance or blind following (18:29)). Do take lessons from history as you travel in the earth, and see the consequence of the deniers
(O Messenger) In your compassion you desire everyone to have the right guidance, but Allah never intervenes to guide those who choose straying. And, such have no helpers
They most strongly swear by Allah that He will not raise the dead. Nay, but it is a promise binding upon Him in truth, but most people do not make use of whatever they know
He will then make them understand wherein they differ, and the rejecters will realize that they were liars
Whenever We Will anything to be, We say unto it Our Word "Be" and it is. (The moment We pass a Decree in the World of Command, it goes into action)
Those who emigrate in the Cause of Allah because they were oppressed, We shall give them good lodging in the world, and surely the reward of the Hereafter is greater, if they knew
They have been steadfast, and have put their trust in their Sustainer
(O Prophet) Before you We sent none but men to whom We granted Revelation. (Tell the deniers), "If you do not know this, ask the followers of previous Revelations
With clear evidence of the Truth and Books of Divine Wisdom, We sent them. And now, (O Prophet) We have revealed this Reminder to you so that you convey to mankind what has been revealed for them. So that they may think
Can they who devise evil schemes ever feel sure that Allah will not cause the earth to swallow them, or that suffering will not befall them in ways they could least anticipate? (Such people indeed are going down in their "Self" development)
Or that His Law of Requital will not take them to task suddenly in the midst of their comings and goings? Then there is no escape for them
Or that His Law could cause such nations to decline slowly. (6:65), (7:182). And yet, your Lord is most Compassionate, Merciful. (He has ordained the Law of Respite for individuals and nations)
Have they not observed the things that Allah has created? Their shadows incline to the right and to the left; that is their utter submission to Allah, in all humility. (Even the shadows can show you that the entire Cosmos, with its celestial bodies, is submitting to His Laws)
Behold, before Allah, bows in submission all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, whether living beings or the angels, for none are arrogant. ('All that is' includes three classes of Allah's creation; inanimate things, living beings and angels. Angels, here, represent the Divine Laws in the Universe)
They all fear their Lord, High above them, and they do all that they are commanded
And Allah has said, "Take not two God's. There is only One God. So Me, only Me, shall you fear." (21:19-21), (29:60-61), (43:84). (The One True God Who sustains all Universe, must be your God in your individual and collective lives. And there is no such thing as two powers in the Universe, one good and one evil, as the Zoroastrians believe)
Unto Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. And His DEEN, the System is eternally followed in the Cosmos. Will you then fear deities that do not exist
And whatever blessings you enjoy are from Allah, and when touched by distress, unto His Laws you turn for help
Yet as soon as He relieves you from the distress, some of you fall back into associating others with their Lord
As if to show their ingratitude to what We have given them. Enjoy yourselves while you may. Soon the reality will dawn upon you
They set aside a portion of what We have provided them with, to those about whom they know nothing (idols, clergy, and the living or dead saints). By Allah! You will indeed be questioned concerning all that you fabricate
They ascribe daughters to Allah. Glory be to Him! And to themselves they choose what they desire (sons)
So, whenever any of them is given the glad tiding of the birth of a daughter, his face darkens with sadness and anger
Ashamed, he hides himself from people, because of the bad news given to him. He even asks himself, "Shall I keep the baby grudgingly, or bury her deep in the dust?" Oh, evil indeed is what they decide
Those who disbelieve in the Hereafter, set up the worst examples in the human society. Whereas Allah's Sublime Attributes enable you to set up excellent examples, for He alone is the Mighty, the Wise
If Allah were to punish mankind for their wrongdoing, He would not leave a single living creature upon the face of the earth (35:45). But, He grants them respite until a term according to His Law. But when the end of their term approaches, they can neither delay it by a single moment nor can they hasten it
They ascribe to Allah what they dislike for themselves, and then utter the lie that the fair reward is for them. Surely, for them is the Fire, and they will be hastened on into it
(They try to rationalize their desires.) By Allah! We verily sent Messengers to nations before you. But Satan, their selfish desire, made their actions fair-seeming to them. To this day he remains their patron friend, and they have incurred a painful doom
And upon you (O Prophet) We have revealed this Book so that you may clearly explain to people the reality of those things in which they differ (and thus help them become one community). And this Book is a Guidance and Mercy for people who will believe
(This Divine Writ has the power to revive the intellectually dead, and those who are going through a life unlived. The likeliness of the Qur'an is that) Allah sends down water from the sky, giving life thereby to the earth after it had been lifeless. Herein, behold, is a message for those who hear and listen
And, behold, in the cattle too there is indeed a lesson for you. We give you to drink from their bellies, from between the refuse and the blood, pure milk pleasant to those who drink it
And of the fruits of the date-palm, and grapes, from which you make intoxicants, as well as wholesome sustenance. In this indeed is a message for those who use their sense
And consider how your Lord inspired the bee, "Build for yourself dwellings in hills and in trees, and in what people may build
And then eat of all kind of fruit, and follow the ways that your Sustainer has made easy for you." (We endowed the bee with navigational skills). And then comes forth from their bellies a delicious drink of many hues, in which there is health for people. In all this, behold, there is a message for people who are willing to listen
And Allah has created you, and in time will cause you to die. There are some among you whose lives are prolonged to an abject old age, ceasing to know what they once knew so well. (The time to do good deeds is when you are capable). Verily, Allah is all-Knowing, the Powerful Appointer of His Laws
And Allah has caused some of you to excel in earning livelihood over the others (43:32). And yet, they who are more abundantly provided are often unwilling to share their provision with those who work for them, lest all might be equal in this respect (70:24), (30:28). Will they continue to deny Allah's blessings in this manner? (16:53), (2)
And Allah has given you mates of your own kind, and through your mates, has given you children and their children, and has provided for you decent sustenance of life. (Note that in your family, individuals earn according to their capacity and receive according to their needs). Will people, then, believe in false systems in the society and thus turn ungrateful to Allah's blessings
And they serve systems other than what Allah ordains. The man-made systems are powerless in that they can neither provide equitably, nor are they the custodians of the heavenly treasures
Therefore, compare none with Allah. Surely Allah knows and you do not know
Allah gives you an example of two men; one of them is enslaved, unable to do anything of his own accord. And the other is a free man whom We have blessed with Our bounties, and he can spend of it on others secretly and openly. Can these two be deemed equal? Praise be to Allah! (So, praise Him by way of obedience). But the majority of humans do not understand that verbal thanks do not equal practical gratitude
Allah gives you another example of two men. One of them is he whose faculties of speech and mind are totally disabled. He cannot do anything of his own accord and he is totally dependent on his care-provider, unable to bring forth any good in any way. Can such a one be considered equal of the man who is fit, enjoins justice and himself walks the Straight Path? (Allah expects you to use your faculties to the best of your abilities)
Unto Allah belongs the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and the Hour is but as a twinkling of the eye, or even quicker. (And a speedy revolution can come to humanity). Surely, Allah has appointed due measure for all things and events
Allah brought you forth from the bellies of your mothers when you knew nothing, and He gave you hearing, sight and intelligence so that you may give thanks. (You must give thanks by using your faculties to actualize your potentials)
Have they not considered the birds enabled to fly in mid-air, with none but Allah holding them aloft? (24:71). In this, behold, are messages for those who wish to attain conviction through reason
Allah has made your homes the place for your rest. And the tent-houses that you make from the skins of animals. You find them light when you travel and when you camp. And of their wool, and their fur, and their hair, you make furnishings and comforts that serve you for a while
Allah has provided you shades out of things He has created. He has granted you resorts in the mountains, garments to protect you from heat, and coats of armor to protect you from your own foolhardy violence. He bestows His Blessings in full measure so that may (think of His Power and Grace and) submit to His Authority
If they still turn away, then your only duty to them (O Prophet) is the clear delivery of the Message
In fact, they recognize Allah's blessings, but deny them in practice. That is how most of the men and women are rated unbelievers
And bethink of the Day when We shall raise among every community a witness, then there is no leave for the rejecters, nor will they be allowed to make mends. (4:41), (16:77), (1)
And when the wrongdoers will see the Requital coming, it will be too late. Neither will it be made light for them, nor will they be given further respite
When those who ascribe partners to Allah see their 'partners' they will say, "Our Lord! These are our 'partners' whom we used to call instead of You." But, the leaders will fling to them the retort, "You verily have been lying to yourselves in self-deception
And they will tender their submission to Allah on that Day, but all they used to fabricate will leave them in the lurch
The ones who not only rejected the Truth, but hindered people from the Way of Allah, We will add doom upon doom for them because they corrupted the human minds and the society
For, one Day, We shall raise from every community a leading witness against them from among themselves. And We shall call you (O Prophet) to testify regarding those whom your Message has reached. The Book We have revealed to you explains everything; a Guide and Grace and the glad tiding for all those who have submitted
Verily, Allah enjoins (the Permanent Values in this Book that you): Uphold Justice. Benefit humanity. Give to your family, relatives (and fellow-men). Stay away from all that is shameful and immodest. Shun everything that runs counter to reason. Do not withhold your wealth and resources just for yourself. Guard yourself against envy. Do not create rebellion in the society. ('Fahasha', 'Munkar' and 'Baghii' include the last five meanings). And He admonishes you repeatedly that you bear all this in mind
Fulfill the Covenant with Allah when you have pledged to do so (1:4-5), (9:111). And do not break your oaths after you have confirmed them, for you have made Allah as the Guarantor over you. Verily, Allah knows all you do
And be not like the knitting woman who spins yarn with tremendous hard work, and then breaks it apart. She wastes with her own hands a whole day's labor at the spinning wheel. (Breaking solemn pledges could nullify your good deeds). This is an example for you, if you abuse your promises to take advantage of others. People usually do that to advance from others wrongfully, or help their own groups (57:20). Allah has devised this as a test of your character. (Human beings are the only creatures who can make a pledge. Breaking promises violates human rights and hurts your own "Self"). On The Day of Resurrection you will appear before your Lord with the imprints of your doings on your "Self". He will then make you understand the dispute between your word and your action and between your reason and emotions
Had Allah Willed, He could have made you all one community. But, He shows you the Right Path and gives you a free choice (and you will have to work for it (2:256), (18:29)). And He has established the Laws for straying and guidance (4:88). You will surely be questioned about your actions
Do not abuse the oaths among you. When you make pledges with people or sign treaties with other nations, be not deceitful. If you did that, you would be hindering people from the Path of Allah. And, you will lose the confidence of people and nations. Your feet will slip after being firmly planted and you will suffer a heavy punishment
Do not trade your Covenant with Allah for petty gains. Verily, Allah possesses what is far better for you, if you but knew
What you possess runs out, but that which He has (that you deposit with Him) lasts forever. We will give beautiful rewards (in both lives) to those who are steadfast in their pledges and in doing good deeds
Whoever, whether male or female, does works that help others and is a believer, We shall certainly cause them to live a good life, and We shall grant them the rewards considering the best of their actions
(Whenever you try to convey and implement the Message of the Qur'an, you will face stern opposition. This opposition will come from those who worship their selfish desire). Seek refuge with perseverance and confidence in the Laws of Allah
This Satan (your selfish desire) has no power over those who truly believe and put their trust in their Lord
Satan's power is only over those who befriend him. Such are Mushrikoon (idol worshipers) since they worship their own desire instead of God
And now that We replace one Message by another, for Allah is fully Aware of what He reveals in stages, some people say, "You are an inventor." (But, human civilization has evolved sufficiently to be given the perfect Divine System. This Qur'an will remain a watcher over previous Scriptures (5:48)). But most of them do not know this fact
Tell them, "The Sacred and Soothing Divine Energy has brought it down from your Lord in Absolute Truth (Gabriel (2:97), 'Rooh, Rauh' Soothing Mercy (12:87), Trustworthy (26:193)). This Qur'an will keep firm in thought and action, those who accept it. And it will provide Guidance and the good news to all who submit to Allah
We know well what they say, "It is but a man teaching him!" The tongue of him they so maliciously point to is notably foreign, while this is Arabic, pure and clear
Behold, those who refuse to acknowledge Allah's verses, Allah does not intervene to show them the lighted road, and for them is a painful suffering. ('Ayaatillah' = Divine Revelation = Qur'anic verses = Also implies Allah's Signs in the Book and in the Universe, depending on the context)
Those who are bent upon disbelieving Allah's Messages, Allah will not intervene to guide them, and grievous suffering will be their lot
Anyone who utters unbelief, after accepting faith in Allah, except under compulsion, his heart remaining firm in faith, is different from the one who is fully content with disbelief. The latter group invites Allah's Requital, and theirs is an awful doom
That is because they have chosen the life of this world only, ignoring the life to come. Allah does not intervene to guide the rejecters of the Truth
Such are they whose hearts, ears and eyes Allah has sealed. Yet, they remain unaware. (Disuse of faculties brings people down to subhuman levels of existence (2:)
There is no doubt that such people will be great losers in the Hereafter as well
But verily, your Lord; to those who leave their homes after trial and persecution, and then strive and patiently persevere, your Lord is oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful
Beware of the Day when every human being will come to plead for himself alone. (There shall be no pleaders or intercessors), and they will be repaid exactly what they did. And no one shall be wronged
Allah gives you an example. Think of a township that used to be secure and prosperous, with provision coming to it in plenty from all directions. But, they practically denied Allah's blessings by not sharing them with the needy. So Allah's Law made it experience the garb of hunger and fear for their wrong system
A Messenger came to them from among themselves, but they denied him. And so the torment seized them since they used to wrong themselves by doing wrong to others
So enjoy all the Lawful and decent things which Allah has provided for you. And be grateful for Allah's bounty practically, if it is Him you truly serve
He only prohibits for you the dead animal, blood, and swine-flesh and anything that has been dedicated to other than Allah. In a forced situation, provided one doesn't exceed the necessity, remember that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Do not keep uttering in falsehood, "This is lawful and this is unlawful", thus inventing lies against Allah. Those who fabricate lies against Allah, fail to prosper in their "Self
A brief enjoyment, but grievous suffering in the long run
To the Jews We had prohibited such things as We have mentioned to you before (6:147). We did them no wrong, but they were used to doing wrong to themselves (following their religious leadership instead of the Revelation)
And once again, behold! Your Lord shows Mercy to those who do evil out of ignorance but then come back to the right path and make mends. Verily, your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
Abraham was indeed a man who combined within himself all virtues, exemplary in his commitment to Allah, turning away from all that is false. (His impact on history was that of a whole nation). He upheld Strict Monotheism and never indulged in idolatry of any kind. (2:124-12)
He was always practically grateful for the blessings granted by Him Who had elected him and guided him on to Straight Path
We gave him good reward in the world. And in the Hereafter he shall be among those who fully developed their personalities (actualized their potentials)
We have revealed to you this Message (O Prophet), "Follow the creed of Abraham who turned away from all that is false." (2:125). He was not of the idolaters in any way
And know that the observance of Sabbath was ordained for those who came to hold divergent views about him (about Abraham, since they thought that being his progeny spontaneously made them the chosen ones, and hence, they needed to be disciplined (2:65), (4:47), (4:154), (7:163)). Your Lord will judge between them on the Resurrection Day regarding where they differed (from the way of Abraham)
Call to the Way of your Lord with wisdom and beautiful exhortation. Reason with them most decently. Your Lord is best Aware of him who strays from His Path, and He is best Aware of those who go aright
Hence, if you have to respond to an attack in argument, respond only to the extent of the attack leveled against you. But to bear with patience is indeed far better for the steadfast
Endure then, with patience, always remembering that it is none but Allah Who gives you the strength to endure (O Prophet). And grieve not over them, nor be distressed by the false arguments they devise
For, verily, Allah is with those who walk aright, and are doers of good to others
Glorious is He Who initiated the migration by night of His servant from the Sacred Masjid to the Remote Masjid whose environs We did bless that We might show him of Our Signs (20:23). (That the Divine System will begin to prevail from therein). Verily, He is the Hearer, the Seer
(Recall that Moses had to migrate from Pharaoh's Kingdom to the Sinai Peninsula.) We gave Moses the Scripture and We appointed it a Guide to the Children of Israel, saying, "Choose no guardian besides Me
They were the descendants of those whom We carried in the ship along with Noah. Behold, he was a most grateful servant of Ours
We had informed the Children of Israel in the Scripture, "Verily, you will work corruption in the earth twice, and show great arrogance and tyranny
When the first of the warnings came to pass, We sent against you Our servants of great might (armies of Nimrod Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babylon) who ravaged your country as a warning fulfilled (and took you to Babylon as slaves in 586 B.C)
Then, We granted you victory over them (when King Cyrus of Persia defeated the Babylonians and brought you back to your country in 520 B.C.). We then, helped you with wealth and children and made you numerous in soldiery
We made it clear, "If you (keep the Commandments and) do collective good, you will be doing good to yourselves. And if you do evil, you will hurt yourselves. (You did not heed these warnings), and then the second warning came to pass. (The Roman General Titus invaded Jerusalem in 70 C.E.). His armies entered the Temple and destroyed everything they conquered completely, just as the Babylonians had done before
Now is the time that your Lord may Bless you with His Mercy (as the Final Messenger is in your midst (7:157)). If you repeat your transgressions, We will counter with retribution. We have made Hell a prison for opponents of the Divine Order
Verily, this Qur'an guides to what is most Upright, and gives good news of a great reward to those who accept it and do works of social welfare
And that for those who disbelieve in the life to come, We have readied grievous suffering
Man asks for what is evil for him as he prays for the good. Man is prone to be hasty in judgment
(Right and Wrong have been made distinct as day and night.) We have appointed the Night and the Day as two of Our Signs. The Sign of the Night We have made darkness (of ignorance) while the Sign of the Day we have made brightness (of Guidance). You shall seek the Bounty from your Lord, and be aware of the passing years and make your calendars. (6:97), (10:5). (Reckon every day, month and year to see what you have gained and what you have lost in your self-development). We have given you much detail in this brief statement
All deeds of the humans are instantly recorded on their "Self", as if the record book is fastened to their own necks. And We shall bring forth this record book wide open to them on the Day of Resurrection
Read your book! You are a sufficient auditor for yourself this Day
So, whoever goes right, does it for his own "Self", and whoever strays, strays against his own "Self". No person bears the load of another. And We never punish any people until We have sent a Messenger. (The Eternal Messenger now is the Book of Allah)
(Here is the Divine Law of Requital for nations.) We let the leaders of a nation commit corruption, drift out of discipline and consider themselves above Law. Then Our Law annihilates them completely. (And the leaders and the public are left blaming one another (7:38), (10:28), (1)
How many generations has Our Law annihilated since Noah! Allah suffices as the Knower and Beholder of what causes His servants to trail behind
Those who fall for quick gains of life that hastens away, (disregarding the Eternal Values and the Hereafter), We hasten for them according to Our Laws indiscriminately. (But, since they have not invested in the Hereafter) We have appointed for them Hell; they will endure its heat, disgraced, rejected. (2:20)
And the one who keeps the life to come in view and strives for it as best as he can, provided he is a true believer; the endeavor of every such person will be accepted
All, these as well as those, We bestow on them some of your Lord's gifts since your Lord's giving is not confined
Behold how We bestow more bounty on some of them than others. But the life to come will be far higher in degree and far greater in bounty
Do not set up gods besides Allah. If you run man-made systems, disregarding the Divine Values, you will face an embarrassing failure
(A benevolent society begins at home.) Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and always be kind to your parents. If one of them or both attain old age, do not utter the slightest harsh word to them. Never repel them and always address them respectfully
Lower for them the wing of kindness and humility and say, "My Lord! Bestow upon them Your Mercy as they raised me since I was little
Your Lord is best Aware of your psyche. If you fulfill the needs of others, you grow your own personality. If you turn to His Laws, He will protect your "Self" from deterioration. (Ghufarah = Helmet and armor)
And give your relative his or her Divine right, and give to those whose running businesses have stalled, who have lost their jobs, the needy wayfarer, the homeless, and the one who reaches you in a state of destitution. (For this nobility you will have to guard yourself against squandering your wealth). Do not squander your wealth senselessly
Squanderers are close companions of Satan, their selfish desire. And your Satan is ever ungrateful to his Lord
If you are waiting for affluence from your Lord, and are unable to currently help the needy, then speak to them in kindness, and treat them in the nicest manner
You should not keep your hand chained to your neck in stinginess, nor open it foolishly lest you sit down destitute and denuded
(Make decent effort to earn your provision.) Your Lord has appointed Laws for affluence and poverty in societies. (In the Divine System every individual will get generous return for his toil (53:39)). Verily, He is fully Cognizant, Seer of His servants
Kill not your children (nor deprive them of good rearing) for fear of poverty. We it is Who provide for them as well as for you. (The Divine System will take responsibility of all your needs (9:111), (20:118)). Verily, killing them (or depriving them of proper education and training) is a grave offense
Do not come close to adultery, for, it is an abomination and an evil way
You shall not kill any person, for Allah has made all life sacred, except in the course of justice through an appropriate court. In case of unjust killing, We have given rights to the victim's family. With that right of retribution, comes the responsibility that since the law is helping them, they must not exceed the limits. (2:178), (5:32), (6)
Go not near the wealth of the orphan, except for his or her own good, until they come of age. (Then let them make their own decisions). This is a covenant that you must fulfill. Surely, you will be questioned about all your covenants
(Always be mindful of just dealings.) Give full measure when you measure, and weigh with even scale. This is the best way and will prove to be best in the end
And you shall not follow blindly any information of which you have no direct knowledge. (Using your faculties of perception and conception) you must verify it for yourself. In the Court of your Lord, you will be held accountable for your hearing, sight, and the faculty of reasoning. (And so, the insane and the disabled will have their incapacities taken into account in a court of law)
Walk not on earth with pride. Neither would you bore through the earth, nor would you become as tall as the mountains. (Know, that your body language speaks louder than words (3:187), (31)
The evil of all this is detestable in the Sight of your Lord
This is some of the Wisdom your Lord has revealed to you. Do not set up with Allah any other god, lest you be cast into Hell blameworthy rejected. (Accept no Authority worthy of obedience in lieu of Allah)
What! Has your Lord distinguished you by giving you sons, and chosen for Himself daughters in the guise of angels? (16:57). Verily you speak a monstrous word
We have explained things in various ways in this Qur'an so that people understand. But Our Law of Guidance is unwavering (4:88). The ones with preconceived denial will only increase in their flight from the Truth
Say, "If there were any other deities side by side with Him, as they claim, even those would have to find a way unto the Lord of the Throne of Almightiness
Glorified is He, and High Exalted above what they say
All the seven Highs and their Lows, and all beings in them are working His Plan, displaying that He is Praiseworthy. All creatures are playing their role in the Universe. In your present state of knowledge, you do not understand their exact modes of action. Allah, the Clement, the Absolver of imperfections, sustains and maintains them in Order
The prejudiced among them approach you with a closed mind when you convey the Qur'an to them (17:41). Since they believe not in the life to come, they are preoccupied with immediate gains only. And their attitude causes Our Law to create a hidden (psychological) barrier between you and them. (Many people would rather embark upon a journey without a road map)
It is Allah's Law that people who do not use their faculties, lose them. Their minds, hearts, and ears act impermeable when you mention your Lord alone in the Qur'an. And, they turn their backs in disgust. (They wish to hear about other deities and false 'authorities)
We are best Aware of what they wish to hear when they listen to you. Then they hold secret meetings and these wrongdoers say, "You only follow a man who is under the influence of magic." (It is unfortunate that under the influence of fabricated traditions, most of the Muslims even today believe that a Jewish magician successfully cast a spell of 'magic' on the exalted Prophet! Such traditions and ahadith that clash with the Qur'an, were obviously contrived by non-Muslims in the guise of 'Imams)
See how (cunning) examples they make up about you (O Prophet)! They are going astray to the point of no return
And they say, "After we are bones and fragments, shall we be raised up as a new creation
Say, "Even if you turn into rocks or iron
Or fossilize into forms as far away from life as you can imagine, you shall be raised up." Then they might say, "Who shall bring us back to life?" Tell them, "He Who initiated you in the first place." They will then shake their heads and say, "When will that be?" Say, "It may be sooner than you think
A Day when He will call you, you will be spellbound with His Glory. Then you will think that you lived in this world only a short while
(They must do good in this short life-span, so) Tell My servants to speak to one another in a kind manner and treat one another nicely. Verily, Satan, their selfishness, creates discord among them. For, verily, Satan is man's open foe
Your Lord is best Aware of you (what you are, what you do and what you deserve). He will bestow His Grace upon you and He will chastise you according to His Laws. We have not sent you (O Prophet) as a warden over them
And your Lord is best Aware of all beings who are in the Highs and the Lows. (In this, Our Infinite Knowledge, did We send Our Messengers). But, indeed, We caused some Prophets to excel the others, however, you should understand that they were all one in Purpose, so make no distinction among them on that account (2:62), (2:136), (2:253). (You O Prophet, are given the Perfected Eternal Message). To David We gave a Book of Wisdom, (the Psalms, as well as a kingdom that was matchless in its times (21:79), (34:10)
(All these prophets taught that there is only One True God.) Say, "Call unto those saints, angels, idols, whom you consider gods besides Him. They have no power to rid you of any troubles, nor can they divert them
Even the believing sages whom they call upon, are themselves striving to obtain their Lord's favor and closeness. They hope for His Grace, and fear His Requital. Verily, your Lord's Requital is something to beware of
There is no nation that upholds a wrong system, and yet survives the Law of Requital. This Law will be effective until the Day of Resurrection, and is well-recorded in the Divine Database
Nothing has changed Our Plan to send down this Final Revelation, even though the previous nations have often denied or distorted Our Verses. The most blatant example is of Thamud who violated the clear sign of their submission, and failed the crucial test by killing the she-camel. (7:73), (11:89), (26:141), (27:45). We continued to send Messages for mankind to establish the Order in which peace would replace fear
And, We said to you (O Prophet), "Behold, your Lord encompasses all mankind, so We have given you the Vision." (Through this Final Message, We have given you the VISION that they shall all become One Community again). Those who hinder this Plan will end up eating the bitter and pungent Tree of Division that is mentioned in the Qur'an (7:19), (14:26), (15:39), (17:60), (37:65), (38:82), (44:44). This Vision and the Tree of Division shall be a test for them. Now We have conveyed a warning to them, yet, for a time it shall increase them in great rebellion. (But mankind shall win their lost Paradise)
(Refresh the story of your common origin and the challenge facing humanity since day one.) We made Angels, the Divine Laws in the Universe, subservient to Adam, the mankind. It was Iblis, their selfish desire that refused to submit. He said, "Shall I bow before that whom You have created from inorganic matter (and thus charged him with material temptations)?" (2:30-39), (7:11-1)
He said, "Since You have honored him above me, grant me respite until the Day of Resurrection, and I will put reins through the noses of his children and pull them wherever I please. Only a few will withstand my temptation
God said, "Go! But whoever of them follows you, Hell will be the reward for all of you, an ample recompense
Tempt and allure them with your voice such of them as you can (through the media and show biz, and propaganda against the Truth.) You may prompt them into armed conflicts, and entice them with monetary help, business partnerships and ready loans. You may misguide the children with detrimental educational programs, and counter-productive recreation. And hold out promises to them." Whatever Satan promises them is but meant to deceive their minds
Behold, you shall have no power over My faithful servants. And your Lord suffices as their Guardian
(O Mankind, be mindful of your Lord to ward of your selfish desire). Your Sustainer is He Who causes the ships to move onward for you through the sea that you may seek of His bounty. Verily, He is Most Gracious towards you
(You hardly think that His Laws are changeless and, therefore, trustworthy.) When harm touches you on the sea, those you call upon besides Him, leave you in the lurch! (You try to save the ship according to Our Laws and forget superstitions). But when He brings you safely ashore, you turn aside and forget Him. The fact is, that the unguided human is ever ungrateful
(You forget that His Laws apply to land as they do to the entire Universe.) Can you then, ever feel sure that He will not cause the dry land to engulf you, or let loose upon you a deadly storm, whereupon you find none to be your protector
Or can you feel sure that He will not return you to that plight a second time, and then let loose upon you a raging tempest and cause you to drown in requital for your ingratitude? And then, you will find none to help you against Our Laws. (Life is too short and too unpredictable to postpone for tomorrow the good you can do today)
Now indeed, We have conferred dignity on the children of Adam (as a birth right, regardless of where the child is born). And provided them with transport on land and sea and given them decent things of life. And We have favored the humans far above a great many of Our creation
But one Day We shall summon all human beings with their records. One who is given his record in the right hand will read it in jubilation. This will be a symbol of success for them, and they will receive their rewards without the least reduction
Whoever is blind of heart here will be blind in the life to come as well, and yet further astray (from Divine Grace). (Individuals and nations who are blind of reason live in misery in this world, and no amount of wishful thinking will take them to Paradise)
And, behold, they endeavor to tempt you away (O Prophet) from what We reveal to you (and make compromises in return for accepting you as the King of Arabia and a Prophet) if you invented something of their liking (like authorizing the worship of their false deities or taking back the equality of humans) in Our Name
Their pressure was so intense that, without firm Conviction that brings Our support, you might have inclined toward them a little. (10:15), (1)
Had you inclined toward them, We would have doubled the retribution for you in this life and after death, and you would have found no one to help you against Our Law of Requital
Since they saw that they could not persuade you, they wished to drive you out (of Madinah as well.) If they had done that, (they would have lost the stabilizing force of your presence), and would have annihilated one another in a short while
Such has always been Our Law with all of Our Messengers, We sent before you. (Nations that drove them out, suffered dire consequences). You will never find a change in Our Laws
You shall strive in the Divine Cause from morning to night. The Qur'an upsprings the Light for you to witness your objective and your way. Its likeness is the Dawn that brings light after a dark night
As head of the state you shall even contemplate and work part of the night. This is the extra endeavor for you. (And your companions shall join you in this endeavor as needed (73:2-3)). Soon, your Lord will raise you to a Glorious Station
Say, "My Lord! Admit me in honor and let me depart in honor at every juncture of my life, and help me with strong support
(Time has come for you to) say, "The Truth has come to light, and falsehood has withered away. For, behold, all falsehood is bound to wither away
Thus, step by step, We have sent down in the Qur'an the cure of all ills of humanity. It is a Mercy for those who accept it. At the same time, it is a harbinger of loss for the oppressors, since it liberates the oppressed from their grasp
People without higher objectives easily exult and turn away when Our Laws make life pleasant for them. And they quickly despair when a hardship touches them
Say, "Everyone acts in a manner peculiar to himself. (Human beings tend to make their own rules of conduct), but your Lord is best Aware as to who has chosen the best path
(O Messenger) They ask you about the (Spirit, the Soul), the Revelation. Tell them, "Revelation is from your Lord's World of Command, of which you have been given little knowledge." The Spirit is the Divine Energy, something from which has been given to humans in the form of free will. The Soul is your "Self
(Revelation from Us is the extrinsic knowledge, as distinct from intrinsic inspiration. To make it more clear) if We so Willed, We could withdraw what We reveal to you, and you would find none to plead in your behalf before Us
The Revelation is a Grace from your Lord to you (and for all humanity.) Indeed, His Favor unto you (O Messenger) is great indeed! (6:116), (15)
Say, "If all mankind, in towns and villages of the world, get together to produce a Qur'an like this, they will utterly fail, however strength they exert in aiding one another." (2:23), (1)
We have used TASREEF to explain The Qur'an in many facets for mankind. However, most people (due to arrogance, prejudice or blind following) remain ungrateful by rejecting such Clear Guidance
(Instead of reflecting on it, they keep demanding physical miracles) saying, "We will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth
Or you have a garden of date palms and grapes vines and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst
Or you make the sky fall on us, as you keep warning us about retribution, or bring Allah and the angels face to before us." (2)
Or you should have a house of gold. Or you ascend to the sky. But, nay, we will not believe your ascension unless you bring a written book that we can read." Tell them, "Glory be to my Lord! Am I more than a mortal man, a Messenger
Yet whenever Guidance came to people, nothing has ever kept them from believing as much as this objection, "Would Allah send a mortal man as His Messenger
Say, "If angels walked about and dwelled in the earth, We would have sent an angel from the heaven as Messenger
Tell them, "Allah suffices as witness between me and you. Verily, fully Aware He is of His servants." (The outcome according to His Law will prove who is right)
The rightly guided is the one who follows Allah's Guidance. Anyone who quits His Way, has gone astray. You will not find any protectors for them outside His Laws. On the Day of Resurrection, We will gather them together prone upon their faces; blind, dumb, and deaf. (That is how they lived their life). Hell is their abode, and every time its flames abate, We shall increase for them its blazing flame
Such is their reward because they preemptively rejected Our Messages. And for having said, "When we are bones and fragments, shall we be raised from the dead as a new creation
Do they not realize that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth, is Able to create them anew in their own likeness again? He has appointed an irrevocable time to end the worldly life (and of Resurrection). Only those remain submerged in the darkness of ignorance who are bent upon doing wrong to their own "Self" (and thus remain ungrateful for the Benevolent Guidance)
Say, "If you owned the treasure-houses of my Lord's Bounty, you would try to hold on to them tightly for fear of spending too much. For, man has ever been self-serving
(We have been sending Prophets for the reformation of this mentality.) Indeed We gave unto Moses nine clear Messages. Ask then, the Children of Israel what happened when he came unto them and Pharaoh said to him, "Verily, O Moses! I think you are bewitched." (7)
Answered Moses, "You know well that no one but the Lord of the heavens and the earth has revealed these eye-opening Messages and, verily, O Pharaoh! I think that you are utterly lost
Pharaoh resolved to wipe off Moses and his followers from the face of the earth. But We drowned him and those with him, all together
After that We said to the Children of Israel, "Dwell now securely in the earth but remember that when the last promise comes to pass, We shall bring you as a crowd gathered out of various nations." (The first two Promises (17:5), (1)
Truthfully, We have sent it down, and with the Truth it has come down (to you O Prophet). For, We have sent you (O Prophet) as a herald of glad tidings and a Warner
With the Qur'an which We have gradually unfolded, so that you might convey it to mankind by stages. Behold, We have sent it down step by step, as one Revelation
Say, "Believe in it or do not believe." Those who have been endowed with innate knowledge and make use of it, recognize its glory and fall down upon their faces in prostration as soon as it is conveyed to them
They say, "Glory be to our Lord. Verily, the Promise of our Lord has been fulfilled
And so they fall down on their chins, weeping, and increasing in humility
Say, "Call Him Allah, or call Him Rahman, the Beneficent; to Him belong the best names. By whichever name you call Him, His are all the best attributes of perfection. And be not too loud in your call to the Divine System, nor speak in too low a voice, but follow a way in between
And say, "All Praise is due to Allah Who begets not an offspring, and has no partner in His Dominion, and has absolutely no weakness, hence no need of any aid." And so, extol His limitless Greatness. (Establish His Greatness in the Earth with all magnificence, as it is in the entire Universe)
All beauty and balance in the Universe is the living evidence that Allah is Praiseworthy. Praise be to Allah who has revealed this Book to His servant, and made it flawless
A Perfect Book, unerringly straight, meant to warn people of the destructive results of their wrongdoings. And to give good news to those who believe in the Message and make reforms in their individual and collective lives, that theirs shall be a generous Reward
A state of Bliss in which they shall dwell beyond the count of time
Furthermore, this Divine Writ is meant to warn all those who say, "God has taken unto Himself a son
No knowledge whatsoever have they of Him, and neither did their forefathers. An outrageous statement it is that comes out of their mouths, and nothing but falsehood do they utter
(O Messenger) Should you (in your compassion) grieve yourself to death if they are not willing to believe in this Message
We never ordained asceticism for mankind. It was something they invented (57:27)). Behold, We have Willed the earth to be pleasingly decorated. We make it a test for people to see for themselves as to which of them lives a balanced life. (18:30-31), (
And, verily, We shall reduce all that is on earth to barren dust
Do you think that the Dwellers of the Cave, the Upholders of Raqeem (the Inscribed Gospel) (were some supernatural beings) more wondrous than Our other signs? (Nay, strange legends became famous about them)
As they fled for refuge to the Cave (outside Ephesus), they prayed, "Our Lord! Bestow on us Grace from Yourself and endow us with insight into the right (and wrong) of all situations
And thereupon We veiled their ears in the Cave for some years. (They remained isolated, hiding from the soldiers of Emperor Decius during his reign, 249-251 C.E)
And then We caused them to rise (out of the Cave). We let them know for themselves which of the two groups, (the young men with their friends in town, or their opponents), had better availed the time. (The Dwellers of the Cave had maintained secret communication with like-minded people in Ephesus)
And now (contrary to hearsay) We shall relate to you (O Prophet) their true history. Behold, they were young men who truly believed in their Lord and We increased them in guidance
We strengthened their hearts, and they took a firm stand. They said to one another, "Our only Lord is the Sustainer of the heavens and the earth. Never shall we submit to any 'authority' other than Him. If we did or even uttered such wrong, we would be splitting our own personalities
The people of our nation are obeying false authorities instead of Him, without any clear evidence to support their behavior. And who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie about God
The young men conferred (with their friends, and among themselves), "Hence, now that you have withdrawn from them and all their submission instead of God, then seek refuge in the Cave. God will shower you with His Grace, and will set your affairs towards ease
And you might have seen the sun rising on the right side of the Cave, and set, aside from them, on the left while they lived on in that spacious chamber. (The Cave lay North South and while it was roomy from inside its entrance was small). It is a sign of Allah that (He arranged for them excellent camouflage and) whom Allah guides is the rightly guided, and whom He lets go astray for violating the Divine Laws of guidance, for such, you will find no protector who would point out the right way
You would have deemed that they were awake, even when they slept. (They remained alert round the clock). We caused them to frequently change their positions right and left. They had a faithful dog to guard the entrance, with its four paws outstretched, ready to hunt for them. The whole environment was awe-inspiring. Had you come upon them suddenly, you would have turned away from them in flight in awe
And so, when We caused them to rise (out of the Cave), they began to ask one another (about the next step). One of them asked, "How long have you been here?" "We have been here a day or part of a day!" they answered. Finally they said, "Your Lord knows best how long. (They were so committed to their mission that they hardly noticed how the days and nights went by). Let one of you go with these silver coins to the town, and look for the best available food, and bring you some provisions. But let him exercise caution, and by no means make anyone aware of you
For, behold, if they discover you, they will stone you to death or force you to revert to their religion, then you will never succeed
And in this way We caused them to be discovered (their mission had succeeded), and everyone realized that Allah's Promise is always true. There remained no doubt about the Revolution. (The Dwellers of the Cave were revered by their nation as the Divine Order was restored. Time went by and they passed on. The reverence of the people took a turn). Some people said, "Erect a building in their memory. God knows best their true stature." Others, whose opinion prevailed, said, "Indeed, we must raise a house of worship in their memory." The building in which they would submit to the One True God, like a Masjid. (But they converted the building into a monastery and placed huge tombstones with superstitious inscriptions, another RAQEEM but man-made. The sanctuary became a haven for nuns and monks)
Then, some would say they were three, and their dog was the fourth, and some would say five, and their dog the sixth. They only made wild guesses, and some of them said that they were seven and their dog was the eighth. Say, "My Lord is best Aware of their number." There are some who know* their right number but, argue not about them but a passing comment. You need not consult anyone about them (to avoid undue controversies)
(This is the news of the Unseen. Like, the next day is unseen for you.) Never say about anything, "Behold I will do it tomorrow." (Things may happen beyond one's control later)
Add to your statement, "If my promise is not contrary to the Divine Physical Laws." And remember your Lord if you forget your promise. Say, "I hope that my Lord will guide me even closer to the right course
And it is said they lived in the Cave for three hundred years. Others say, "Nay, add nine to that number
Say, "Allah knows best how long they remained there." His alone is the knowledge of the hidden reality of the heavens and the earth. How well does He see and hear! They have no guardian apart from Him and He allots no one a share in His Rule
(O Messenger) Convey to the world whatever of this Book is revealed to you from your Lord. (6:19). There is none that can alter His Words. And His Laws in Theory (Kalimatillah), and His Laws in Practice as implemented in the Universe (Sunnatillah), never change (6:34), (6:116), (10:64), (17:77), (18:27), (33:38), (33:62), (40:85), (48:23). Tell them that you can find no refuge outside His Laws
(There is a lesson of perseverance for you in the history of the Dwellers of the Cave). Hold fast to the company of those who remember their Lord morning and evening seeking His Approval. (6:52), (8:52-54), (89:29:30). And let not your eyes overlook them in quest for the beauties of this world. And pay no heed to any whom Our Law has made to forget Us because he only follows his desires, and abandons all that is right
Proclaim, "This is the Truth from your Lord. Whoever accepts it, let him accept it, and whoever rejects it, let him reject it." Verily, for all those who wrong their own "Self" We have readied billowing folds of fire to surround them. When they beg for water, they will be given their burning hot deeds that backfire on their faces, a drink of distress they gave others. (9:34-35). How dreadful a drink, and how terrible a resting place
But, behold, as for those who attain belief and do works that help others, verily, We never fail to reward such benefactors of humanity
Theirs shall be the Gardens of Eden with rivers flowing beneath. They will be adorned with bracelets of gold, and wear green robes of finest silk, brocade and velvet, reclining upon thrones of honor. What a wonderful reward, and how goodly a place to rest
(The real success belongs to those who work for both lives.) Cite for them the example of two men. To one of them, We had given two vineyards, and surrounded them with date palms and placed a field of grain in between
Both gardens produced plenty of fruit on time, as We caused a rivulet to flow through them
And so the man had fruit in abundance. One day he boastfully said to his friend, "I am more than you in wealth and in honor among people
And having thus wronged himself, he entered his garden saying, "I don't think that this will ever perish
He said, "I don't think that the Hour will ever come. And, if indeed I am returned to my Lord, I will surely find something even better as my resort
His friend differed with him, "Do you disbelieve in the One Who created you from dust, and then from gametes, and then shaped you into the current human form
As for me, God is my Lord and I will never accept any other god besides my Lord
And he continued, "Alas, when you entered your garden, you should have said, 'This is what Allah has given me according to His Laws for no one has Power but Allah.' You see that I have less wealth and fewer children than you." (Still I associate no one with Him)
He said, "So my Lord may grant me something better than your garden. (The luxuries of this life are vulnerable). He may send a calamity from the height to wipe out this garden, leaving it a heap of barren dust
Or, it may happen that the water level recedes low, out of your reach." (Therefore we must invest for the Eternity as well)
And thus it happened. One day, the arrogant man's fruitful gardens were indeed wiped out. And there he was, twisting and turning his hands in sorrow. He lost his property which was now tumbled to pieces in complete ruin. And he could only say, "Oh, I wish I never worshiped anyone (even my property) instead of my Lord
Now he had none to help him against the Divine Laws, nor could he help himself
Thus it is. The only invincible protection comes from Allah alone. He is the Best to grant recompense, and the Best to determine what must be
Cite for them the example of the materialistic life of this world. It is like the water We send down from the sky, and which is absorbed by plants of the earth. But in time they turn into dry stubble or hay which the winds blow freely about. Allah is Competent and all events take place according to His Laws over which He has full control. (Total preoccupation with the material aspects of life deprives people from growing in humanity)
Our Bounties and Blessings are for you to enjoy, but they are a means to a higher end (7:32)). Wealth and children are the joys of the life of this world. But good deeds that fulfill the needs of others, their fruit endures forever. Such actions are of far greater merit in the Sight of your Lord, and the best foundation of hope
Hence, know the Day when the tycoons of wealth and power will be shaken by Our Law, and the poor downtrodden will come at par with them. All humanity will stand equal. No person will stay behind in his or her birth right of dignity
All mankind will be one, as they were in the beginning (2:213). Before their Lord total equity will prevail as if all were lined up before Him (10:19). "Now, indeed, you have come to Us just as the initial state after We created you. This is so, although you thought that We had not set it to happen
The Book (Qur'an) will be laid open before all humanity and you will behold the guilty filled with fear what they see therein. Legislation at that time will be based on the Book. Those who were used to stealing the fruit of others' labor will be scared. They will say, "Oh, woe unto us! What kind of a Book is this! It leaves out nothing, be it small or great, but takes everything into account!" In the Divine System every deed, small or big will come forth (53:39-40). Universal Justice will prevail since your Lord does not wrong anyone. (This verse applies to the Hereafter as well in the form of the Divine Record Book, just as Hell and Paradise are frequently mentioned in the Qur'an applying to both lives)
Recall when We told the angels, "Bow yourselves before Adam!" They all bowed except Iblis. He was of the hidden selfish desires that drifted away from his Lord's Command. Will you still befriend him and his comrades? What a miserable exchange do the wrongdoers make for the right guidance
I never permitted any creatures to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation. And neither do I need to take as My helpers those beings (religious leaders) who lead people astray
Be mindful of the Day when He will say, "Call those whom you assigned as My partners." Then they will call upon them, but they will not hear their call. We shall set a gulf of doom between them
Those who thrived on the fruit of others' toil will gaze at the Fire, and will realize that they are bound to fall into it, and will find no way to escape
Indeed, for the benefit of mankind We use TASREEF to explain the Qur'an from various vantage points. However, man, above all other imperfections, is given to contention
For, what is there to keep people from attaining belief now that Guidance has come to them, and from asking the protecting forgiveness of their Lord? Unless they choose the fate of the ancient people to befall them or that the doom reaches them even faster
But We send the Messengers only as heralds of glad tidings and as Warners. Whereas the rejecters contend with false arguments, trying to refute the Truth, and to make My Verses and warnings a target of their mockery
And who does greater harm to himself than the one to whom his Lord's Messages are conveyed and he turns away from them, forgetting what he is doing and what wrong he has done before? Our Law makes their hearts and ears impermeable to reason and advice. No matter what you do to guide them, they will not allow themselves to be shown the right way
Yet, your Lord is the Truly-Forgiving One, full of Grace. He could task the rejecters right away for whatever wrong they commit, and punish them then and there. But He gives them a period of respite beyond which they shall find no refuge
Our Law of Requital annihilated many communities when they went on and on with their unjust systems. They were all given a due period of respite (in order to make amends) and We set up a time-limit for their annihilation
The Divine Revelation shows the Way and the outcome with conviction. When Moses was a young man, not yet commissioned as a Prophet, he was constantly in search of Truth (93:7). All Prophets were chosen by birth but assigned their mission at a later date. The young Moses knew that the human intellect was the source of conceptual knowledge whereas the Divine Revelation is the extrinsic knowledge from beyond human faculties.) And so, in the course of his quest for knowledge Moses said to his young friend, "I shall not give up until I reach the junction of the two streams, though I march on for ages in my quest." (INTELLECT AND REVELATION -- the two streams of knowledge)
But when Moses with his young friend reached the junction of the two streams, they forgot all about the fish, and it took its way into the sea and disappeared from sight. (Moses found himself caring little for the delicacies of life from then on)
And after the two had walked some distance, Moses said to his young friend, "Bring us our lunch, the journey has been tiring
Said his friend, "Would you believe it? When we rested at the rock, I forgot about the fish and none but Satan, my wandering thoughts, made me forget it. And it took its way into the sea. How strange
Moses said, "That is what we were seeking!" And the two turned back retracing their footsteps. (Moses retired to rest in deep thought)
(Moses wondered how exciting the merging of the two streams would be! And he imagined that) he found a servant of Ours, on whom We had bestowed grace from Our Presence and unto whom We had imparted knowledge from Ourselves
Moses (in his contemplation) said to the man, "May I follow you that you may teach me some of the knowledge and guidance which you have been taught
He said, "Verily, you won't be able to have patience with me
And how can you bear with that which you cannot comprehend
Moses said, "God willing, you will find me patient and I will not disobey you
The man said, "Well, if you go with me, ask me not any questions unless I choose to tell you about it
So they went on until they were in a boat and he made a hole in it. Moses said, "Did you make a hole to drown people? You have done something terrible
The man said, "Didn't I tell you that you could not bear with me
Said Moses, "Do not rebuke me for forgetting. And be not hard on me for my fault
So they went on till, when they met a lad, he slew him. Moses said, "What! Have you slain an innocent person who had slain none? Verily, you have done a horrible thing
The man said, "Didn't I tell you that you could not bear with me
Moses said, "If I ask you after this about anything, then do not keep me with you. By then you shall have received enough excuses from me
So they proceeded. When they reached a township, they asked its folk for food, but they refused them hospitality. Soon they saw a wall that was about to collapse, and he fixed it. Moses said, "If you had wished, you could taken a wage for that
He replied, "This is the parting between you and me! But I will explain to you the real meaning of things you could not bear with patience
As for the boat, it belonged to poor people working on the river, and I wished to make it defective. For, behind them was a king who was taking every (good) boat by force
And as for the lad, his parents were true believers whereas we had every reason to fear that he would bring bitter grief upon them by rebellion and disbelief
And so we desired that their Sustainer grant them instead of him, a child better in purity of conduct and affection
As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the town. And there was a treasure for them, beneath the wall. Their late father was a righteous man, and your Lord wanted them to grow up to full maturity and then extract their treasure as a Mercy from your Lord. I did it not of my own accord (but carried out the Divine Command). This is the explanation of things you could not stand." (As the pondering was over, Moses understood that Revelation is to the intellect what the sunlight is to the eye. Thus ended his intellectual journey. Later on Moses was commissioned to Prophethood and experienced the Divine Revelation first hand)
(O Messenger) They ask you about Zul-Qarnain. Say, "I will convey to you something by which he is worth remembering
We established him in power on earth and granted him the ways and means to accomplish his objectives
Zul-Qarnain, (King Cyrus the great of Persia, 590-529 B.C.) set out for an expedition. He chose the right means in whatever he did
(Conquering land to the West toward Lydia, he reached as far as the Black Sea.) The sun was setting and it appeared to him as if it was setting in the dark waters. (The local nation, given to wrongdoing, fought against him and lost). We said, "O Zul-Qarnain! Either punish or be kind to them
Cyrus said to them, "As for him who does wrong from now on, we shall punish him. And then he will be brought back before his Lord Who will commit him to greater retribution
But whoever will believe and work for the good of others, good will be his reward and we will treat him kindly
(After establishing peace in the West) he once again chose the right means to achieve a right end. (He set forth to an expedition towards the East)
Then he reached (Balkh in Afghanistan) the rising place of the sun, the easternmost point of his expedition. He found it rising on a people for whom We had appointed no shelter from it. (They built no houses and lived a nomadic life)
So it was, and We knew all about him and his resources. (He helped that nation with his abundant resources that We had given him)
And once again he chose the right means to achieve a right end. (North towards Caucasus)
When he reached the valley between two mountain ranges, he found people whose language was barely understandable to him
(Through interpreters) they presented a grievance, "O Zul-Qarnain! Behold, Gog and Magog are spoiling this land. They keep attacking and commit bloody crimes. May we, then, pay to you a regular tribute that you will erect a barrier between us and them
He responded, "The power in which My Lord has established me is better than tribute. Help me then with manpower; I will erect a strong barrier between you and them
Bring me pieces of iron." (His engineers worked their skills using dirt and molten iron and filled the gap between the mountains). When he had filled up the space between the two steep mountainsides, he said, "(Light a fire and) blow with your bellows!" When it was red hot, he said, "Bring me molten copper and tar to pour over it
Thus they (Gog and Magog) could not climb it, nor could they bore holes in it
Said the King, "This is a mercy from my Lord. Yet when the time appointed by my Lord shall come, He will make this barrier level with the ground. And my Lord's Promise always comes true. (This barrier will stay in place and crumble according to the Divine Laws in the Universe)
(Zul-Qarnain was correct that such obstructions would become immaterial with time.) We will let some nations to invade others on a day when the trumpets of war will be blown. Then We will gather them together in battle-fields. (Gog and Magog, the powerful imperialist nations will exploit one another and the weaker nations and great wars will take place)
Peoples who had been rejecting the Divine Writ that 'Mankind is one community,' We will cause them to face hell at the hands of one another
They whose eyes were veiled to see My Reminder, and who could not bear to hear
Do the disbelievers in My Reminder think that they can choose my servants as allies besides Me? Verily, We have readied hell as a welcome for the disbelievers. (No matter what coalitions they make, if they befriend systems other than the Divine Order, they will end up in hell)
Say, "Shall We inform you who the worst losers are in respect of their deeds
They are the ones whose effort in the life of the world remains misdirected. And yet they think that they are doing good work. (They work in the wrong cause, contrary to the Divine Reminder)
It is they who have chosen to deny their Sustainer's Messages and the truth that they are destined to meet Him. Hence, their works are vain, and on the Day of Resurrection We will assign no weight to them
That is their reward, Hell! For, they rejected the Truth, and ridiculed My Messages and My Messengers
But verily, as for those who attain belief and fulfill the needs of others, the gardens of Paradise will be there to welcome them
Therein shall they abide. They will not even desire a change
Say, "If all the sea were ink for my Sustainer's Words, the sea would indeed be exhausted before my Sustainer's Words are exhausted! And thus it would be if We were to add to it sea upon sea
Say (O Prophet), "I am but a mortal man like all of you. It is revealed to me that your God is the One and Only God. Hence, whoever looks forward to meeting His Sustainer, let him do works that help others, and let him admit no one as partner in the service of his Sustainer
H.Y.'A.S. Kareem the Honored, Hadi the Guide, Yamen the Bounteous, Aleem the Knower, Sadiq the Truthful
Relates to you a mercy of your Sustainer unto His servant Zachariah
When he called out to his Lord in the secrecy of his heart
He said, "My Lord! My bones have turned brittle and my head is shining with gray hair, and I have never remained unblessed in my prayer to you, my Lord
Now I fear what my relatives will do after me. (I am concerned about the heritage of my forefathers such as Jacob). But my wife is barren. Oh, Give me from Your Presence, a successor
Let him be my heir and the heir of the house of Jacob and make him, my Lord, worthy of Your acceptance
He was told, "O Zachariah! We give you the good news of a boy whose name shall be Yahya (John the Baptist). We have never given this name to anyone before
Zachariah exclaimed, "My Lord! How can I have a son when my wife is barren and I am already infirm with old age
He said, "Thus it is. Your Lord says, 'It is easy for Me.' I created you before, and you were nothing." (The infertility in his wife was treated)
Zachariah said, "My Lord! Give me a special message." He said, "The Message is that you shall not speak to people for three nights (and days) consecutively." (He was not to break the news too soon, before he and his wife Elizabeth got over their excitement). (3:40)
Then Zachariah came out from the shrine and told his deputies by signs, "Keep striving in your mission morning and evening that his Glory be manifest to beholders
(John was born according to the good news.) We told him "O Yahya! Hold fast the Scripture." And We had granted him wisdom and good judgment when he was yet a little boy
We gave him compassion and a spotless character. And he lived an upright life
He was dutiful toward his parents, and was polite, not rebellious or arrogant
Peace on him the day he was born, the day he died and the day he shall be raised alive
(O Prophet) Make mention of Mary in the Book when she withdrew from her people to an eastern location. (She left the sanctuary and went to her village in Nazareth)
(Since she was not used to mixing with people), she had chosen seclusion from them. Then We sent to her Our angel who appeared to her in the shape of a well-made human being (although he had no physical or material existence)
She exclaimed, "Verily, I seek refuge in the Most Gracious that you may be righteous
He said, "I am only a Messenger of your Lord who says 'I shall bestow upon you the gift of a son endowed with a spotless character.'" (Tasreef with (3:45) is very important here
She said, "How can I have a son when no man has ever touched me? For, never have I been a loose woman!" (
The angel answered, "Thus it is; but your Lord says, 'It is easy for Me, so that We make him a symbol for people and a grace from Us. (A symbol of belief and disbelief, with the grace of Revelation). And it is a thing decreed
And in time she conceived him and withdrew with him to a far-off place, (Bethlehem)
And when labor pains drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree, she exclaimed, "Ah, I wish I had died before this, and had become a thing forgotten, utterly forgotten
A voice came to her from beneath the palm-tree, "Grieve not! Your Lord has provided a rivulet beneath you
And shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you. It will drop fresh ripe dates upon you
Eat then and drink, and let your eyes be gladdened! And if you see any human being, convey this to him, 'Behold, I have made a vow of silence for the Beneficent. Hence, I may not speak to any person today
Later, she returned to her people carrying the child with her. They said, "O Mary! You have come with an amazing thing (breaking the rules of the shrine)
O Sister of Aaron! Your father was not a bad man, nor was your mother a loose woman, nor did she ever oppose the system
Then she pointed to him. They said, "How can we talk to one who is in the cradle, a young boy?" (In the cradle, idiomatically means a young person. Mary and Joseph had stayed in Bethlehem for several years)
But he spoke up, "Behold, I am a servant of God. He has given me Revelation and appointed me a Prophet
He has made me blessed wherever I may be. He has enjoined upon me to establish the Divine System and help set up the Just Economic Order as long as I live
And He has made me kind to my mother, and has not made me haughty, unblessed
Hence, peace was upon me on the day I was born, the day I die, and on the day I shall be raised to life again
Such was Jesus, the son of Mary and this is the Truth of this matter about whose nature they so deeply disagree
It does not befit God that He begets a son. He is Glorious, High above (what they say). When He decrees a thing, it starts happening
And (Jesus always said), "Verily, Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him alone. This is the Straight Path
And yet, the sects (that follow the Bible) differ among themselves. Woe then, unto all who deny the Truth when that awesome Day will appear
How plainly will they hear and see the truth when they come before Us! Today, however, they persist in doing wrong to themselves and are obviously lost in error
Hence, warn them of the Day of Regrets, when the case will be decided. Being negligent of their duty to investigate with reason, they do not believe in the reality as yet
Behold, We inherit the earth, and all who are thereon, and unto Us all will return
And call to mind, through this Book, of Abraham. Behold, he was a man of truth, a Prophet
He even confronted his father (Azar), "O My father! Why worship that which hear not and see not and can be of no avail to you?" (Azar, Terah, was the Chief Priest of King Nimrod Shaddad of Babylon and Ninevah, and was a master sculptor)
O My father! Behold, There has indeed come to me of knowledge that came not to you. Follow me then, and I will lead you onto a perfect way
O My father! Serve not the Satan. Satan, the selfish desire, is a rebel against the Beneficent
O My father! I am afraid that a retribution from (the Law of) the Beneficent might overtake you, and you be counted among the friends of Satan
He answered, "You dislike my gods, O Abraham? If you cease not, I will certainly cause you to be stoned to death! Now get away from me for good! " (As the Chief Priest, Azar had the power to declare someone apostate and condemn him to be stoned. For the Divine Statute of no compulsion in religion see)
Abraham said, "Peace be upon you! I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness. For, He is ever Kind to me
I am withdrawing from you all and from whatever you invoke besides Allah. I will call on my Lord. By imploring my Lord alone, I cannot go wrong
So, when he abandoned them and their deities besides Allah, We bestowed upon him with a son Isaac and a grandson Jacob. And each of them We made a Prophet. (Abraham had moved from Mesopotamia-Babylon to Syria, never to return again)
We showered them with Our Grace and We granted them a high and true renown
And make mention in this Book, of Moses. Verily, he was sincerely devoted and a Prophet bearing Our Message
We called and blessed him with Revelation by the Mount Sinai and made him draw near to Us to converse in secret. (Right side of the Mount allegorically indicates blessing)
And We bestowed upon him of Our Mercy his brother, Aaron, a Prophet as well
And make mention in the Book, of Ishmael. He was truthful in his pledge, and he was a Prophet bearing Our Message
He enjoined upon his people the establishment of the Divine System and of the Just Economic Order. He was highly acceptable in the Sight of his Lord
And make mention of Idris (Enoch) in the Book. Verily, he was a man of truth, a Prophet
And We raised him to a high station of honor
These are some of the Prophets whom Allah Blessed. They all were from the descendants of Adam, the early humans. The descendants of those whom We carried with Noah on the Ark, and the descendants of Abraham and Jacob, the Israel. We guided them and selected them (so that they could guide people). Whenever the Messages of the Most Gracious were conveyed to them, they would fall down prostrate in tears. (In total submission they put their hearts into their mission)
But after them came generations who abandoned the Divine System and followed after lusts. And, these will, in time, meet utter disillusion
Except those who repent by returning to the right track, truly believe and take corrective action. Such will enter the Garden and will not be wronged in the least
The Gardens of Eternal Bliss (Eden) that the Beneficent has promised to His servants in the realm of the Unseen. Verily, His Promise must always come to pass
They will hear no insult to intelligence nor vain discourse, but only salutations of Peace. And therein they will have their sustenance day and night. (Likewise, in the Ideal Society no person will sleep hungry and there shall be plenty of provision for all)
Such is the Garden which We give as an inheritance to those of Our servants who have lived upright (and thus earned it with their own hands)
And the angels say, "We, descend not but by the Command of your Lord. (Inspiration and optimism, motivation, courage, steadfastness, hope and good news are the angels of your Lord who support you when you walk aright). To Him belong our assignments of the past, present and future. Your Lord never does forget
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all things between them! Therefore, serve Him steadfastly and be constant in His service. Do you know anyone that can be named along with Him
Man (keeps thinking or) says, "What! When I am dead, shall I be raised up alive
But does not man reflect that We created him before, when he was nothing
So, by your Lord, without doubt, We shall certainly get them together including the rebellious ones; then We shall bring them crouching, around Hell
Then, We will drag out from among every sect the most stubborn in rebellion to the Beneficent
And certainly We know best those who are more worthy of being burned therein
Everyone of you (followers of the most stubborn rebels) will approach it (19:69), (19:86), (21:99)). This is a fixed decree of your Lord
And once again, We shall save the upright and leave the wrongdoers crouching in humiliation. (Those who walk aright will be kept so clear of hell that they won't even hear any commotion)
As it is, when Our Messages are presented to them in all clarity, the rejecters say to the believers, "Which of the two sides, yours or ours, has a better position and glamour
And yet, how many a communities Our Law of Requital has annihilated before them. They were better in equipment and glitter
Say, "The Beneficent gives respite to those who go astray. During this period of respite they either mend their ways or move on to see the promise of retribution in this life or the Hour of Doom. Then they know who is worse off and weaker in forces
Allah increases in Guidance, those who seek it and wish to walk aright. The lasting good deeds that fulfill the needs of others, are eternally rewarded by your Lord, and are best for eventual returns and better for resort
Have you seen the kind of person who denies Our Messages and says, "Surely, I will be given wealth and children." (He fails to realize that there is more to life than these blessings)
Do they know the realm of the Unseen? Have they taken a promise from the Beneficent
Nay, We shall record what he says, and prolong for him a span of torment
To Us shall return all that he talks of, and he shall appear before us in a lonely state
And they have chosen idols in various forms besides Allah, hoping that they would be a source of strength for them
But nay, they will reject their worship, and will turn against them
Are you not aware that Our Law unleashes all satanic forces upon the rejecters to impel them in fury against the Truth
So make no haste against them, for We mark the number of their days
On the Day when We shall gather the righteous unto Us, the Beneficent, like a delegation presented for honors
And drive the violators of human rights unto Hell as a thirsty herd is driven to a well
None will have the benefit of intercession unless he has entered into a bond with the Beneficent during the life of the world
As it is, some assert, "The Beneficent has betaken a son
Indeed, you have put forth something monstrous
Whereby almost the heavens are torn, and the earth is split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins
That men should ascribe a son to the Most Gracious
It is not befitting for the Majesty of the Beneficent that He should choose a son
There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the Beneficent as a servant
Indeed, He fully knows them, and has counted them one by one
And each of them will come to Him singly on the Resurrection Day
Verily, those who attain belief and work for the good of others, the Beneficent will endow them with love
And only to this end We have made this (Qur'an) easy to understand in your own tongue (O Prophet). That you might convey thereby glad news to the righteous and warn people given to futile contention
For, how many a generation has Our Law of Requital destroyed before their time! Can you perceive a single one of them now or hear a whisper of them
O Ideal Prophet
We have not bestowed upon you this Qur'an to cause you any hardship
But as a Reminder to the reverent, those who stand in awe of the Creator
A Revelation from Him Who created the earth and the high skies
The Beneficent, established on the throne of His Almightiness. (He maintains Supreme Control over all that He has created)
Unto Him belongs what is in the heavens, what is in the earth, and all between them, and all that is beneath the soil
And if you speak aloud, then verily, He knows the secret thoughts, as well as that is yet more hidden within man
Allah! There is no god but He. His are the most beautiful Names. (His alone are the attributes of perfection)
Has there come to you the history of Moses
When he saw a fire (in the desert), he said to his family, "Wait! Behold, I see a fire far away. Perhaps I can bring to you a burning torch from there or find some guidance at the fire (to get directions)
This is the story of the days when Moses had reached the converging point of the stream of the conceptual knowledge of intellect, and the stream of the extrinsic knowledge of the Divine Revelation (18:65)). When Moses reached the fire, a voice called out, "O Moses
Verily, I am your Lord! Take off your sandals, verily, you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa." (Your quest for the Truth is over. So lighten the burdens of your search. Now you are in the Sacred Valley of Revelation)
I have chosen you to be My Prophet. Listen, then, to what is being revealed
Verily, I, I alone am Allah, there is no god but Me. Therefore, serve Me alone, and from this very moment strive to establish the Divine Order in the land to practically remember Me
Behold, the revolution is surely coming. But I Will to keep it hidden for the time-being. (You will be the pioneer of a great revolution, the signs of which are not yet visible). The purpose of this revolution will be for every person to get the fair compensation of his hard work (and bring an end to the hegemony of Pharaoh and his people)
Let not those people join your mission who consider it an impossible dream. They accept only what resonates with their desires. Such people will do more harm than good to your Mission
What is your strength O Moses?" (Moses was then given complete Guidance and strong Logic, and was encouraged to ask any questions)
He said, "Your Guidance is my strength. It will help me in all walks of life. I will prove to be a competent shepherd for the Israelites, and will use it as the challenges come forth
Allah said, "You are now ready to embark upon your mission
He felt that the Message given to him was vibrant with life
He said, "Grasp it and fear not. We will keep it evergreen." Moses was told to hold fast to what he was taught to the extent that it became his first nature; even in frightening situations. And that he would come out unscathed from trying circumstances
The Light in your heart will shine forth in the power of your presentation of the Truth. Another clear evidence
We will show you some of Our great Signs (witness how the strength of the Truth can bring about great Revolutions (1)
Go to Pharaoh who is transgressing the limits
Moses said, "My Lord! Expand my chest with confidence, courage and steadfastness
Give me the strength that the formidable challenge becomes easy for me
Make me eloquent of speech
That my word reaches the depths of their hearts
And appoint a deputy for me from my folk
My brother Aaron
Strengthen me with him
Make him my partner in my Mission
That both of us strive hard together
And we raise every step remembering Your Commands
It is a great feeling that You watch us every moment
God said, "O Moses! All your requests are granted
We have blessed you before and prepared you for this day, (since you were born)
When We inspired your mother with this inspiration
Saying, "Place him (the baby Moses) in a box, and cast the box into the river. The river will cast it on to the bank, and it will be picked up by the one who considers Me and him (Moses) as his enemy. O Moses! I prepared you for this day with love, and reared you before My Sight
Your sister walked (to the Royal Palace) and said to the royals, 'I can tell you of a nursing mother who can take good care of the baby.' We thus returned you to your mother, that she may be consoled and stop worrying. When you grew up, you accidentally killed a man who was beating up another man (28:15). We resolved this matter for you when you were going through trying periods. Then you dwelt among the Midyanites (with Prophet Shoaib) for several years. (Then you walked between the two streams, one of intellect and one of Revelation, to the point where they joined (18:65)). And now you are here as ordained, O Moses
This is how I have made you for My service
Now go, you and your brother, with My Messages and stay vigilant about My Remembrance
Go, both of you, to Pharaoh. He has indeed transgressed all bounds
Speak to him nicely, so that he may take heed and fear the consequences of his actions
They said, "Our Lord! Verily, We fear that he might act hastily regarding us in abrupt tyranny
Answered He, "Fear not. Behold, I am with both of you, I Hear and I See
So go you both to him and say, "We are two Messengers of your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with us, and stop persecuting them forthwith. We have come to you with a Message from your Lord. And Peace be upon him who follows Right Guidance
Verily, it has been revealed to us that doom will be for him who is bent upon denial and turns away
Pharaoh said, "Who then is the Lord of you two, O Moses
He replied, "Our Lord is He who creates and shapes everything, assigns its role and guides it aright
(Pharaoh in front of his courtiers thought up a tricky question). He said, "What then is the state of the previous generations?" (The forefathers of the dignitaries sitting around, who never believed in your Lord)
(Pharaoh expected Moses to say that they would be in Hellfire, and that would infuriate the courtiers.) Moses responded, "The knowledge of that is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord neither errs nor forgets
He it is Who has made the earth a cradle for you, and has traced out ways thereon enabling you to go about therein by roads and channels. And He sends down from the sky water." And, by this means We bring forth different classes and pairs of plants
Saying, "Eat and raise your cattle. Verily, herein are signs for men and women of thought
From the earth We created you, into it We return you and from it We will bring you forth a second time
And (through Moses) We made Pharaoh aware of all Our Messages. (The Message plainly refuted Pharaoh's long-standing claim that he was the high lord of people since he owned the land, the rivers and the resources of Egypt (43:46-54), (79:17-26)). But he stubbornly rejected the Message
He said, "Have you come here to destabilize our country and drive us out of our land with your false religion and magical arguments, O Moses
In that case, We will certainly produce before you the like thereof! (Will answer your arguments and arrange a debate between you, and our priests). Set up an appointment between us and you. Neither we, nor you shall break this appointment. It will be at a location convenient to us both and where both parties will have even chances." (7:104-126), (10:76-8)
Answered Moses, "Your appointed time is the forthcoming Day of the Festival. And let the people be assembled after sunrise
Pharaoh turned and collected his strength. (In the next few days he summoned his master debaters, the priests from various towns). And then he came at the appointed time
Moses warned Pharaoh's debaters, "Woe unto you! Invent not a lie against God, lest He afflict you with suffering, for whoever invents such a lie is already undone
On hearing this, they debated among themselves about what they must do but they kept their talk secret
The chiefs, seeing their hesitation, said to the debaters, "Behold, these two are wizards of logic, capable of carrying the masses with them, destroying your time-honored traditions, and thus estranging you in your own country or causing a great rebellion that drives you out of the land
The chiefs took matters very seriously and commanded the debaters, "So arrange your plan, and face Moses and Aaron as a united front. Indeed, he is the victor today who gains the upper hand
The debaters asked, "O Moses! Do you begin or shall we go first
He said, "Nay, you go first." Their smart presentation appeared to him to put life into otherwise feeble arguments with their logic wandering in different directions. (They were throwing the ropes of falsehood against the Rope of Allah)
Moses feared in his heart that their expertise of playing with words might influence the audience
We said, "Fear not! Verily, it is you who will prevail
Present your case with confidence and the sheer power of Truth will swallow all their handiwork. Their fabrication is no more than a scheme of deception. And the liars succeed not against the Truth, however skillfully they design their strategy
Then down fell the debaters prostrating themselves, and exclaimed "We have come to believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses
Pharaoh said, "Have you come to believe in him before I give you permission? Verily, he must be your master who has conspired with you. I will cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides and then I will crucify all of you on the palm trunks. Then you will know for certain which of us can give the more severe and the more lasting punishment, (the Lord of Moses or me)
They answered, "Never shall we choose you above the clear evidence of the Truth that has come to us, nor prefer you over Him Who brought us into being! So issue whatever decree you will. Your judgment can only touch us in this worldly life
As for us, behold, we have come to believe in our Lord hoping that He may forgive us our faults. And that He may forgive us for the lies that you had forced us to speak. For, Allah is Best and Most Abiding
Verily, as for him who shall appear before his Sustainer while he had been violating human rights, for him shall be Hell. He will neither die there nor live. (1)
Whereas he who appears before Him as a believer who had been doing good to others, such people will have lofty ranks
And Gardens of Eden (Perpetual Bliss) beneath which rivers flow, therein to abide. That shall be the recompense of all those who have developed their personality. (They have actualized their "Self" by helping humanity with their wealth and person)
Finally, a time came when We commanded Moses, "Take away My servants by night and find for them a dry path through the Sea of Reeds. Fear not of being overtaken (by Pharaoh), and dread not the sea." (7:130), (2)
Pharaoh pursued them with his forces, but the high tide completely overwhelmed them, and covered them up
This is because Pharaoh had led his nation astray and had not guided them aright. (Therein is an example that the top leadership could make or break a nation)
O Children of Israel! We saved you from your enemy, and then made a Covenant with you by the right-hand slope of Mount Sinai, and gave you ample provision, meats and wholesome vegetation. (2:57), right slope
Saying, "Partake and enjoy the decent provisions which We have bestowed upon you. But do not disregard equity and none shall be deprived of the natural resources. Transgress not in this respect lest My disapproval should descend on you. And those nations on whom descends My disapproval do perish indeed
And verily, I am the Protecting Forgiver. There is plenty of room in My Laws to forgo wrongs of the past, so repent by coming back to the right path. Those who believe in My Laws, keep the collective good of the society in mind, and maintain that Order, will find themselves on the way to Success
(Once, Moses was a step ahead in excitement.) Said his Lord, "What has made you hasten from your people, O Moses
Moses answered, "They are doing fine following my footsteps. I have rushed to You my Lord, so that You may be well-pleased with me
Said He, "Our Law has tried your people after you left them, and As-Samiri has misguided them
Moses went back to his people angry and sad, "O My people! Has not your Lord promised you many a goodly promise? Did, then, the fulfillment of this promise seem to you too long in coming? Or did you wish that your Lord's requital come upon you, and so you broke your promise to me
They said, "We intended to break no promises. But this is what happened. We were loaded with the sinful burdens of the (Egyptian people's) ornament, and so we threw them into the fire, as suggested by this As-Samiri
Then As-Samiri (experienced in sculpting) made the effigy of a calf. It even brought forth a lowing sound with wind or when blown into. So they said, "This is your god, and the god of Moses, but he has forgotten
They knew full well that, like all false deities, the golden calf could not respond to queries, and had no control over their harm or benefit
And Aaron indeed had told them beforehand, "O My people! You are being tempted to evil by this idol. Behold, your only Lord is the Beneficent! Follow me then, and obey my order
They said, "We will by no means cease worshiping it until Moses comes back to us
When he returned, Moses asked, "O' Aaron! What stopped you when you saw them going astray
That you followed me not? Didn't you disobey my order
Aaron said, "O Son of my mother! Don't get mad at me, nor treat me harshly. I feared that you would say, "You have let the Children of Israel divide into parties and sects." (Moses accepted this explanation since sectarianism is no less a crime than idol worship in any form. Seizing the beard and head pertains to harsh interrogation)
Moses now turned to Samiri, "What do you have to say O Samiri
He answered, "I have gained insight into something which they have not. So I took hold of a handful of the Messenger's teachings and cast it away. This is what my mind prompted me to do
Moses said, "Go away then, for good! In this life it is for you to say, "Touch me not!" And moreover you have a promise that will not fail. (People will consider and treat you as untouchable as before, and the suffering of the Hereafter is inescapable). Now, look at your god to whom you were so devoted. Verily, We will burn it and scatter its ashes far and wide over the sea." (Moses wanted his people to behold the powerlessness of the false deities and their potential to divide humanity)
Moses continued addressing his people, "Your God is only Allah; there is no god but He. He embraces all things in His Knowledge
(O Prophet) We thus tell you some news of what happened in the past. And We have given you a Reminder from Our Presence
Whoever turns away from it, he will, verily, bear a heavy load on the Day of Resurrection
Abiding under it, an evil burden for them on the Day of Resurrection
The Day when the Trumpet will be blown. On that Day We will assemble the guilty with their eyes dimmed in fear of retribution
Whispering among themselves, "You have lived but ten days
We know best all they will say. The most perceptive of them shall say, "You have lived but a day." (75:2)
They ask you (O Messenger), "What shall become of the mountains, the tycoons of power and wealth?" Say, "My Lord will blow them away like dust. (18:47), (56:5), (77:10), (
And leave the earth plain and level." (Falsehood, deception and treachery shall vanish from the land)
Wherein you see neither curve nor ruggedness. (A life of truthfulness)
On that Day all people will follow the caller who has no crookedness in him. (Ta Ha, the Ideal Prophet's call. The Call that is straight, without crookedness (2:186), (7:86), (18:1), (33:46)). And they will follow the call without deviation. The most vociferous of leaders will subdue their voices before the Message of the Beneficent. You will only hear soft voices, gentle footsteps
On that Day, intercession will be of no avail except if one stands up as a witness and is accepted according to the Law of the Beneficent. (None will have the benefit of intercession unless he has entered into a bond with the Beneficent during the life of the world)
This information is given by Him Who knows their past and their future, while none encompasses His Knowledge
All faces will be humbled before the Ever-Living, the Self-Subsistent Maintainer of the Universe. And undone will be the violators of human rights
Whereas anyone who has done his best to help people, and is a believer in the Divine Values, need have no fear of being wronged or deprived of merit
And thus have We sent this down, an Arabic Qur'an, and explained therein warnings in many ways, so that people walk aright or that it makes them rise to a new level of awareness
Know, then, that Sublimely Exalted is Allah, the Ultimate Sovereign, the Ultimate Truth. (O Prophet) Hasten not in the learning and implementation of the Message of the Qur'an before a particular revelation to you is completed. These Messages given to you shall be established in stages, but always say, "My Lord! Increase me in knowledge
(Without Divine guidance of Revelation man is easily fallible.) And indeed, long ago We made a covenant with Adam (the mankind) that he would hold fast to Our Commands, but he forgot, and We found no constancy in him. (Adam = Mankind (2:30-3)
Recall when We said to the angels, "Bow before Adam, they bowed except Iblis; he refused." (Divine Laws in the Universe have been made of service to man but his selfish desire rebels against himself)
And thereupon We said, "O Adam! Verily, this is an enemy to you and your wife so let him not drive the two of you out of this Garden so that you are landed into difficulty. You shall then have to toil hard for getting your sustenance
Behold, you are living the life of Paradise (on this very earth) where you are guaranteed never to go hungry and never to walk improperly clothed
Neither do you go thirsty, nor are you exposed to the burning sun." (Well provided with food, clothing, shelter, the basic needs)
But Satan whispered to him (The selfish desire was teaching him a sinister lesson), "O Adam! Shall I lead you to the tree of eternal life and ownership that is ever-lasting
Man and woman both ate the fruit of the Tree. People started dividing among themselves and their basic necessities of life ceased to remain guaranteed. They had to toil and contend with one another to earn their livelihood. This exposed the flaws in their character. They tried to hide their selfish behavior with superficial courtesy. Adam and his mate had disobeyed their Lord and gone astray
Thereafter his Lord elected him and accepted his repentance and guided him
He said, "Go down hence, O humans, males and females, foes to one another competing for sustenance! Nonetheless, there shall most certainly come to you guidance from Me. And whoever follows My Guidance will not go astray, nor will face hardship." (Nations who adopt Divine Principles, their economy will be abundant)
But whoever will turn away from My remembrance, thus ignoring My Commands, his will be a narrow life. (Such individuals and nations will live in economic and moral poverty). And I shall bring such of them blind to the Assembly on the Day of Resurrection. (17)
He will wonder, "My Lord, why did you gather me blind when I used to see
God will reply, "Thus it is. Our Messages came to you but you were oblivious to them. (Being blind of reason, you disregarded them). And thus, this Day you will be left in oblivion
Thus do We reward him who wastes his own "Self" and believes not in the Messages of his Sustainer. Indeed, the suffering for them in the life to come shall be severe and enduring
Is it not a guidance for them to know how many a generation Our Law destroyed before them, amid whose dwelling-places they now walk? In this, behold, are Signs for men and women of thought
Now if it were not for a decree that has already been issued by your Lord, setting a term, (the Law of Respite), the Ultimate Requital would have come upon them at once
Hence, (O Prophet) be patient about what they say. Strive in the Way of your Sustainer beginning before dawn to before sunset and even hours of the night, practically all day, that the Divine System becomes a living witness of His Praise. So that you attain true happiness (with success in your noble mission)
And turn not your eyes towards the splendor of the worldly life We have caused many to enjoy. (15:88). Thereby We put them to test. (A chance for them to walk aright or turn away (104:6-7)). The provision of you Lord is better and more lasting
Enjoin upon your family and followers that their central duty remains the establishment of the Divine System. We do not ask you to provide for Us, We provide for you. (The Divine System will take care of everyone's needs). And the future belongs to those who walk aright
And they say, "Why does he not bring us a miracle from his Lord?" But has there not come to them a clear evidence of all the truth that was in the former Scriptures? (All Divine Scriptures have been miracles in their own right)
Had Our Law annihilated them with some punishment before this, they would have said, "Our Lord! If only you had sent a Messenger, so that we might have followed Your Messages before we were thus humbled and disgraced
Say, "Everyone is hopefully waiting (what the future may bring); wait then, for you will come to know who are on the even path, and who are rightly guided
Closer draws to people the time of their reckoning, and yet they turn away stubbornly heedless of it
Whenever a new Reminder comes to them from their Lord, they listen to it with playful amusement
With their hearts preoccupied with fleeting delights, the wrongdoers confer secretly, "Is he not just a human being like you? Will you yield to his spellbinding eloquence with your eyes open
The Prophet said, "My Lord knows every word that is spoken in the High and the Low. He is the Hearer, the Knower
Nay," they say, "Muddled dreams! Nay, he has but invented it! Nay, he is but a poet! Let him then bring us a miracle (as we have heard), like the ones that were given to Prophets of old
Not one of the communities before them which Our Law destroyed, believed (in their Messengers). Will these, then, believe
(O Prophet) Before you We sent none but men to whom We granted Revelation. (Tell the deniers), "If you do not know this, ask the followers of previous Revelations
We gave them not bodies that won't require food, nor were they immortal
We always fulfilled Our Promise to them. We saved them and all those who were worthy to be saved according to Our Law and We destroyed those who had wasted their own "Self
O Mankind! Now We have revealed unto you a Book that is all about you and it will give you eminence. Will you not, then, use your sense? (21:24), (23:7)
Our Law of Requital has dashed into fragments many nations because of their unjust systems and We replaced them with other people
And as soon as they began feeling Our Mighty Requital, behold them fleeing from it! (7)
(It was said) Flee not, but return to the good things of life you were given, and to your mansions, in order that you may be called to account. (How you amassed this wealth and luxury)
They said, "Ah! Woe to us! We did indeed wrong others and ourselves
And that cry of theirs did not cease until We made them as a field mown down, as silent as ashes
We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without Purpose. (11:7), (4)
If We had wished to find a pastime, We could have found it in Our Presence, if such had been Our Will at all
Nay, We hurl the true against the false, and it crushes it and verily falsehood has to vanish. It is only harmful for yourselves to fabricate falsehood. (Some people conjecture that the Universe is a dream, a play or a mere shadow of the World of Ideas. But We have designed it such that the Reality advances and falsehood vanishes)
Unto Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth. All creation dwells in His Dominion and none is ever too proud to obey His Laws, nor do they get tired
They (extol His Glory) strive night and day towards the fulfillment of His plan and do not pause
And yet, some people choose 'gods' from the earth thinking that systems devised by them can make the humanity rise
If there were other gods besides God, there would have been chaos in both, the heavens and the earth. Glorified is Allah, the Lord of Supreme Control, above all that they contrive. (6:3), (16:51), (
(The Ultimate Sovereignty, befits only Him.) He cannot be called to account for what He does, whereas they will be called to account
And yet they choose deities instead of Him! Say, "Bring your evidence. This is the demand of those with me and this has been the demand of those who were with previous Prophets." (23:117). Indeed, most of them do not recognize the Truth hence, they stubbornly turn away from it
We sent no Messenger before you without having revealed to him, "There is no god but Me, therefore you shall worship Me alone
And some say, "The Beneficent has taken unto Himself a son. Glory to Him! Those whom they call His offspring are His servants raised in honor
They exceed not what He has spoken to them, and they act by His Command
He knows their future and their past. They cannot intercede, except that they may stand up as witnesses for those who have earned a bond of His Approval in the worldly life (19:87). And they stand in awe and reverence of His Glory
Any person who claims, "Behold, I have divine powers beside Him," We reward him with Hell. Thus We repay the wrongdoers
Are not the disbelievers willing to consider that the heavens and the earth used to be one solid mass that We exploded into parting (79:30) and We made out of water every living thing? (24:45). Will they not then (some day) believe? (Numerous celestial bodies came into being and started swimming along in their orbits (21)
And We have set firm mountains on the earth, lest it sway with them (16:15). And We have made therein broad roadways so that they might find their way
And We have rendered the sky a canopy well guarded. (The atmosphere in the Height keeps in safe balance the gases and temperature, and protects you from the incoming meteorites). Yet they turn away from the signs that these things point to
And He it is Who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. They swim along each in an orbit
(All things in the Universe are but mortal). We have never granted everlasting life to any human before you. If you die, can they be immortal
Every living being is bound to taste death. We test you through the evil and good aspects of things by way of trial. To Us must you return. (Life and death afford humans the opportunity to do good deeds and achieve eternal rewards)
(O Prophet) whenever the rejecters see you, they make you a target of their mockery, saying, "Is this the one who talks of your gods?" And yet, it is they who deny all mention of (the True God) the Beneficent
Man is a creature of haste. I will show you more and more of My signs, but ask Me not to hasten
And they say, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are men of truth
If those who are bent upon denial, but knew that they will not be able to repel the fire from their faces and from their backs, and they will not be helped
Nay, but it will come upon them suddenly, that it will stun them. They will be unable to repel it, nor will they be given any more respite
Indeed, (O Prophet) even before your time Messengers have been mocked, but in the end, the mockers were overwhelmed by the very thing they ridiculed (the Divine retribution)
Say, "Who guards you in the night and in the day from the Beneficent?" (It is His Mercy that He does not take you to task for every transgression (4:31), (16:61), (35:45)). Yet, they stubbornly turn away from remembrance of their Sustainer
Do they have gods who can shield them from Our Laws? Their perceived deities cannot even help themselves nor can they be defended against Our Laws
Nay, We let these people and their ancestors enjoy the good things of life for a long time. Don't they see that Our Law visits the earth and We gradually reduce the land in their control? Can they prevail against Our Laws? (Don't they see that every day on earth brings them closer to the end)
Say, "I warn you on the strength of Divine Revelation!" But the deaf to reason cannot hear the call, however often they are warned
And if a breath of your Lord's retribution were to touch them, they would say, "Oh, woe unto us! Verily, we were wrongdoers
We will set up the Scales of justice on the Day of Resurrection, and no person will be wronged in the least. Though the good or evil be of the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it forth. We are Sufficient for reckoning and none can take account as We do
And, indeed, We gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion of right and wrong, and a Light and Reminder for those who wished to walk aright
(For those) who stood in awe of their Lord even in privacy, and feared the approaching Hour of accountability
Now this (Qur'an) is a Blessed Reminder that We have revealed. Will you then reject it? (After learning the consequence of those who had denied the Revelations unto Moses and Aaron)
And, indeed, long before, We showed Abraham his direction and We were Aware of his potential
He said to his father and his folk, "What are these images and statues that you sit around worshiping
They responded, "We found our ancestors worshipers of them
He said, "Indeed you are in plain error as your ancestors were
They said, "Are you telling us some serious truth or are you one of those jesters
He said, "Nay, your Lord is the Sustainer of the heavens and the earth, Who initiated them from nothing. I am of those who bear witness to this Truth (on the basis of reason)
And by Allah, I have planned to deal with your idols when you turn back and leave the temple". (You will see if they whom you believe to guard you can guard themselves or not)
Then he reduced them to fragments except the big one, so that they might turn to it
They said, "Who has done this to our gods? He must indeed be of the wrongdoers
Some said, "We heard a youth talking about them; he is called Abraham
The custodians of the temple conferred and said, "Then bring him before the people's eyes, so that they might bear witness
(And when he came) they asked, "Is it you who has done this to our gods, O Abraham
Abraham grabbed the opportunity of driving home the point, "Whoever did it, did it. This is their chief. Ask them if they speak
They were taken aback, withdrew themselves, thought and said to one another, "Verily, you yourselves are the wrongdoers." (You disregarded the security of the powerless idols)
They were utterly confounded in shame, lowered their heads and said to Abraham, "You know that they speak not
Abraham said, "Do you then worship instead of Allah that cannot benefit you or harm you
Unbecoming it is for you and condemnable are all that you worship instead of Allah! Will you, then, use your sense
The priesthood of the temple (in their vested interests) instigated the masses, "Burn him alive and uphold your gods if you are going to take any action
But We said, "O Fire! Be you cool, and security for Abraham." (The fire of their rage was cooled down in time (29:24-26)
And whereas they schemed against him, We made them the true losers. (They failed to value a man of his stature)
And We rescued Abraham and (his nephew and close companion) Lot to the land that We blessed for all people. (They migrated from their homeland of Ur in Mesopotamia, today's Iraq, to Syria-Palestine that was blessed with a long line of Prophets)
We bestowed upon Abraham, a son Isaac and a grandson Jacob. We made all of them great benefactors of humanity as they addressed the inequities in human thought and behavior
We made them leaders who set the standards of leadership. They guided people as We commanded, into doing collective good for the society, and to establish the Divine System with a Just Economic Order. They were true servants of Ours
Later We commissioned Lot to Prophethood and gave him wisdom and knowledge. (After his best efforts failed to reform the community that indulged in abominations) We saved him from their wrath. Verily, they were a rebellious nation who were given into, and lost in, evil
We brought Lot in unto Our Grace. He too was a man of quality
The same goes for Noah long before. He called on Us, and We saved him, his household and followers from the great distress of persecution
We delivered him from the people who rejected Our Commands. They were a people given to inequities and oppressing the weak and We caused all of them to drown
And David and Solomon ruled in great justice. They gathered the straying sheep, the masses of their kingdom, when they were bent upon destroying their own crop of prosperity. We are Witness to their benevolent governance
We gave Solomon great understanding of the affairs of the state, and each of them We endowed with wisdom and knowledge. We made the most powerful tribal leaders loyal to David, and they fully complemented his efforts. The strong tribe of At-Taeer and the common citizens were supportive of him. It was We Who did all these things
We taught him the science of armor to protect you from each other's foolhardy violence. Are you then thankful
We made the gusting winds subservient to Solomon as his ships sailed to the land We had blessed. And of everything We are Aware. (When you discover some of Our Laws, you call it Science, and Solomon made good use of it)
We humbled the most rebellious tribes, and made them compliant to him. Some of them dived for him in the sea and carried out other duties, besides. But it was We Who kept watch over them
And, Job called unto his Lord, "Affliction has befallen me, but you are the Most Merciful of the merciful (38:41)!" (He was going through the agony of being lost away from his folk)
We responded unto him and relieved his agony from which he suffered. We re-united him with his folk and his followers had doubled in the meantime. That was Grace from Us, and a thing to be commemorated by all those who serve Us
Also remember Ishmael, Enoch and Ezekiel, all were among the steadfast
And so We admitted them in Our Grace for they were men of quality
And Zan-Noon, he of the great fish (Jonah of Ninevah), (disappointed with their persistent rejection) left his people in anger. He thought that since he was not violating any Command, We would not bring him to task. Then from the darkness of error he called, "There is no god but You! Limitless is Your Glory! Verily, I have done wrong!" (Jonah, in his best judgment, had migrated before the Divine Decree came (37:)
And so We responded to him and saved him from grief. Thus We save from grief those who believe in Our Laws
And Zachariah called unto his Lord, O My Sustainer! Leave me not childless! However, I do realize that You will remain when all else has ceased to be! You are the Ultimate of the inheritors. (3)
And so We responded to him, and bestowed upon him Yahya, after making his wife fit to bear him a child. And verily, they (parents and son) used to race in doing good works, and remembered Us in situations of hope or fear. And they were always humble before Us
And remember her (Mary) who guarded her chastity (under very adverse circumstances). We breathed into her of Our Energy, and caused her, together with her son, to become a symbol of Our Grace unto all people
Verily, O Mankind! This community of yours is one single community, since I am the Sustainer of you all. So, serve Me alone
But people have torn their unity wide asunder, (forgetting that) unto Our Law and ultimately unto Us are they bound to return
And yet, whoever works for the good of others believing in Our Value System, his or her efforts will never be disowned. Behold, We are recording it in their favor
Hence, it has been unfailingly true of any community whom Our Law has annihilated, that they would never return to glory (unless)
And until Gog and Magog are let loose upon them and swarm down from every corner. (Imperialist nations run over and dominate them. And then after some passage of time the desire for freedom and glory germinates in their hearts once again)
The time of the True Promise is coming closer. The eyes of the rejecters will stare in horror, "Oh, woe unto us! We lived in slumber. Nay, we were only hurting our 'Self
They will be told, "You and those whom you served instead of Allah, are but the fuel of Hell; that is the destiny you chose to come to
If your leaders had foresight, they would have saved themselves and their people from this fire. If they were really deities, they wouldn't have come here. But the leaders and their followers will abide therein
Sobbing and wailing will be their lot therein; and nothing else will they hear
(The upheavals of the Revolution would only be a smooth transition for) those who have been trying to create balance in the society and improving the lot of humanity. Behold, to them kindness and compassion has gone forth from Us. They will be far removed from there
They will not hear the slightest sound thereof, while they enjoy an abode where they get all they desire
The supreme horror will cause them no grief, since the angels (of peace, fulfillment, and delight) will welcome them, "This is your Day of triumph that you were promised
On that Day We shall roll up the Sky as a written scroll is rolled up. Then, just as We initiated the first Creation, We shall create a new Universe. This is a Promise incumbent upon Us. Truly We shall fulfill it. (The earth will see a new Dawn. Top leaders, tyrants, and tycoons of wealth will lose their high empires of influence. It will be a whole new life for the inhabitants of the earth, united one community as they were once (2:213), (10:19), (14)
And, indeed, after advising mankind, We laid it down in all the Books of Divine Wisdom that My able servants will inherit the earth
Herein, behold, there is a clear Message for people who would truly serve God
And thus, (O Prophet) We have sent you not but as a Mercy for the Worlds. (Mankind will become one Community through the Book revealed to you)
Say, "It has been revealed to me that your God is One God. Will you then surrender to Him
If they still turn away, then say, "I have conveyed the Message to all of you alike. But I do not know whether near or far is that which you are promised
Verily, He knows all that is said openly, just as He knows all that you conceal
And I know not whether this interval is a test for you or the merciful period of Respite
Say, "My Lord! Help us establish Your Rule." And, "Our Lord is the Beneficent Whose help is sought against whatever falsehood you ever ascribe to Him
O Mankind! Be mindful of your Sustainer so that you may journey through life in blissful honor and security. (If you failed to bring the house of humanity to order), the Hour will quake the earth with awesome wars
On the Day when you behold it (wars of such intensity that) even a nursing mother would forget her infant, and the pregnant would abort her fetus. And it will seem to you that all mankind is drunk, although they will not be drunk. But the Divine Requital is a tremendous thing
And yet, among people are those who argue about Allah without attaining knowledge, and follow every rebellious satanic force
For the rebellious desire it has been decreed that whoever befriends it, verily, it will mislead him and guide him to the retribution of the Flame
O Mankind! If you are in doubt that humanity will one day stand at its feet, and that you will be resurrected back to life after death, consider the process of your own evolution. We have created you in stages: From dust, then from male and female gametes, then from a zygote, then from an embryo, shapely and first shapeless. We thus clearly explain things for you. The embryo and then the fetus stay in the womb until an appointed term according to Our Laws. Then We bring you forth as infants and carry you to maturity. While some of you die young, others live to the feeblest old age so that they know nothing after knowing much. (Resurgence of humanity can take place just as) you, O Prophet, see a dry barren land, but when We send down water on it, it vibrates with life and grows all kinds of beautiful plants
All this happens because Allah alone is the Ultimate Truth and He alone revives the dead and because He has Supreme Control over all things and events
And know that the Hour is bound to come, beyond any doubt, and that Allah will indeed resurrect all who are in their graves. (And He will raise humanity onto their feet, just as He will raise the dead from their state of disintegration whether in graves or in the oceans, in ashes, their scattered pieces sprayed about, or in the bellies of the fish and the birds)
And yet, among people are those who argue about Allah without attaining knowledge, guidance and without any light-giving Revelation
Turning away in pride to divert people from the Path of Allah. Disgrace is in store for them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection We will make them taste the doom of burning
Saying, "This is what you sent before with your own hands, for Allah is no oppressor of His servants
And among people there is the one who serves Allah conditionally. If things go his way, he is content. But if some adversity touches him he turns on his face. (4:143). Thus he loses both, in this life and the life to come. That is the sheer loss
He calls on, instead of Allah, that which neither can harm him nor benefit him. This is indeed the utmost one can go astray
He calls unto him whose harm is nearer than his benefits; verily, an evil master, and an evil follower
Verily, Allah will admit those who have attained belief and fulfill the needs of others, into Gardens beneath which rivers flow. This is Allah's Intention, and so shall it be done
If anyone thinks that Allah cannot help him in this world and in the life to come, let him reach out unto the heaven by any other means and thus try to make headway. And then let him see whether his approach will dispel the cause of his anguish
And thus We have revealed the Qur'an in simple and plain verses. Allah Guides him who seeks Guidance
And verily, as for those who have attained faith in this Divine Revelation, and those who follow the Jewish faith, and the agnostics, and the Christians, and the Zoroastrians and the idolaters, verily, Allah will decide between them when the Ultimate Truth will become manifest to them as humanity rises to its feet, and finally on the Day of Resurrection. Behold, Allah is Witness over all things and events. (2:136), (11:12)
Don't you see that all things and beings in the heavens and in the earth, the sun and the moon, and the stars and the mountains, and the trees, and the animals, and a great many human beings pay adoration to Allah? And there are a great many human beings who make themselves worthy of Requital. And those whom the Divine Law shall disgrace, none can raise them to honor. For, Allah carries out all actions according to His Laws
There are two contrary kinds of man who contend about their Sustainer. Those who are bent upon denying the Truth will have garments of flames they cut out for themselves, and burning despair will they cause to be poured on their top priorities
Causing all their inner arsenal and their exterior proclamations to melt away to naught
Time is coming to restrain the criminals in rods and chains. (2)
Whenever, in their anguish, they try to come out of it, they shall be returned to it, "Taste the doom of burning
Whereas, behold, Allah will admit those who have attained belief and helped others, into the Gardens with rivers flowing beneath. Therein (like royals) they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and where silk will be their garment
For they were willing to be guided towards the best concepts and the best ways of expression. Thus they were guided onto the path that leads to the Praised One. (QAUL includes concept and expression)
Verily, those who reject the Truth and bar people from the Path of Allah, and from the Center of Divine Ideology, the Sacred Masjid, must know that We have appointed it for all mankind alike. This is the Inviolable House of worship and security for the locals as well as the visitors (2:125). Whoever seeks to relegate it from Ideology to ritualism, directly or through side cannels, We will make him taste an awful doom. (Zulm = Relegation from the rightful place)
Behold! We pointed the site of the Sacred House (Ka'bah) to Abraham, saying, "Associate none with Me, and keep My House clean of human dogmas for those whose Divine Ideology of Monotheism will revolve around this Center for all mankind. Train the visitors to stand up for Truth, and bow to and prostrate before Divine Commands." (2:125), (2:197), (3:95-9)
And announce to mankind the duty of Pilgrimage. They will come to you on foot, and on every kind of fast mount, coming from every far-away point on earth
So that they might see with their own eyes and experience what benefits the Divine System holds for them (in addition to uniting them in the common bond of humanity). And they shall commemorate Allah's Name collectively during the specified days of Hajj; and over the livestock He has bestowed upon them. Then host one another with the livestock (to make the Congregation self-sufficient in the food resource). Eat and feed the distressed poor (regardless of whether they are in the congregation or elsewhere)
As they host one another, they shall consult to clean out their societies of individual and collective vices. And, design ways to fulfill their obligations as human beings. Then they shall walk around the Ancient House in their resolve
All this is the purpose of Hajj. Whoever will honor these Directives and Limitations, it will be well for him in the Sight of his Lord. The livestock here is lawful food for you except for those already prohibited (2:173), (5:3), (6:145), (16:115). You shall avoid idol worship in any form, and abstain from bearing false witness. Avoid all things that bring your progress to a standstill. Lying, bearing false witness and flamboyant behavior are specifically forbidden at this congregation to prevent nullification of the grand objective (Rijs, Awthan, Zoor encompass all the stated meanings)
Turn to Allah alone, associating none with Him. For whoever ascribes partners to Allah, it is as if he has fallen from the sky and the birds snatch him or the wind blows him to far-off places
Such is his state. And anyone who honors the symbols set up by Allah must know that mere honoring these symbols is of no value without righteousness of the heart
(The livestock during Hajj are a symbol of devotion to God.) In them are benefits for you. They carry you and your loads and their only place for sacrifice or donation is this Ancient House
And to every community We have ordained rites that they might extol the Name of Allah over the sustenance He gave them from the livestock. But your God is the One and Only God. Therefore, submit to Him alone (22:67). And give glad news to all those who are humble
The truly humble are those whose hearts tremble with awe whenever Allah is mentioned (8:2). And they steadfastly bear whatever ill befalls them. And they constantly strive to establish and consolidate the Divine System and spend the wealth that We have given them, on their fellow human beings
And the camels! We have appointed them among the symbols (of obedience) to Allah; in them is much good for you. (They carry you and your loads and then help you host one another). So mention Allah's Name over them when they are drawn up in lines (for sacrifice). And after they have fallen to the ground lifeless, eat from their flesh, and feed the contented poor who beg not as well as the poor who ask. Remember that Allah has subjected these animals to you so that you may be practically grateful
Neither their meat nor their blood reaches Allah. What reaches Him is your sincere devotion. He has thus subjected them to you that you manifestly establish the Greatness of Allah in the land for everyone to behold (the objective of Hajj). And to see how magnificent the Guidance is that He has bestowed upon you (2:185). And (O Prophet) give glad news to all benefactors of humanity
Verily, Allah will defend the community of true believers. Behold, Allah does not love those who betray the Divine System ordained in this Book and thus show ingratitude for the magnificent Guidance they have received. (Hence, His Promise to defend will not apply to such people)
Permission to fight is granted to those against whom war is wrongfully waged. And Allah is indeed Most Powerful for their aid
Those who have been evicted from their homes unjustly, for no reason other than saying, "Our Lord is Allah!" For, if Allah had not enabled people to defend themselves against one another, monasteries, and churches, and synagogues, and masjids, where the Name of Allah is oft mentioned, would surely have been destroyed. And Allah will certainly help those who help Him. For, Allah is Mighty, Powerful
Those who, if We give them power in the land, establish Salat - the Divine System - set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat (in which wealth circulates freely to nourish every member of the society, and the basic needs of all individuals are taken care of). Their rule ensures that the Divine Moral Values are promoted, and what the Qur'an forbids, is discouraged. And in their governance all affairs are decided according to Allah's decrees (in the Qur'an)
(This is the framework of the Constitution that would finally take effect.) If they deny you (O Prophet), so did, before them, the people of Noah, Aad, and Thamud
As did the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot
And the dwellers of Midyan. And Moses was also denied (by Egyptians). And I gave the rejecters a period of respite, but then I took them to task. And how awesome was My rejection of them
And how many a township have We (Our Law of Requital) annihilated, for they oppressed people and violated human rights! And now they lie deserted, with their roofs caved in! And how many a well lies abandoned, and how many a castle in ruins that once stood high
Have they never journeyed about the earth, letting their hearts gain wisdom, and causing their ears to hear? Indeed, it is not their eyes that become blind, but blind become their hearts that are in the breasts
And so (O Prophet) they challenge you to hasten the doom, but Allah never fails to fulfill His Promise. A day of your Lord is like a thousand of your years. (32:5), (70:40). (Before your Lord, is the eternal Now. He is Above temporal and spatial bounds)
(As you sow, so shall you reap", is a rock-solid Law, as evidenced by the history of the rise and fall of nations.) How many communities have gone before whom I gave respite although they were transgressors, but then My Law of Requital seized them. For with Me is the end of all journeys
Say, "O Mankind! I am but a plain Warner to you
And know that communities who attain belief and augment the human potential, shall be granted the protection of forgiveness and a most excellent provision (in both worlds)
Whereas those who strive against Our Messages seeking to defeat their purpose, they are destined to face the Insurmountable Barrier
Yet whenever We sent any Messenger or Prophet before you, satanic people tried to confound the central aims of the Message in his very life-time. But Allah rendered null and void all the aspirations they had. And Allah makes His Messages clear in and by themselves, for Allah is All Knowing, Wise. (Satanic people then tried to alter his teachings after he passed on. Allah, then, sent another Messenger to restore the purity of His Messages (6:113). Until the Final Message was revealed and Allah Himself guaranteed its preservation
(Allah allows) these satanic people to advance their aspirations so that He might make this conspiracy a test for people and distinguish (the true believers in the Divine Revelation) from those who have a disease in their hearts. Verily, those who relegate the Divine Revelation in favor of human aspirations create great schism and sectarianism. (Zulm = Relegation from the rightful place)
Those who are blessed with true knowledge, will recognize your Lord's Truth, accept it, and then settle it in their hearts and humbly submit to Him. Surely, Allah alone is the Guide of those who truly believe, to the Straight Path. (
And those who disbelieve in the Divine Word (by failing to sort out the human aspirations), will remain in suspense until the Hour befalls them suddenly, or there comes to them the doom of a disastrous day
On that Day all Dominion will visibly belong to Allah, and His Law and His Judgment will prevail in the human society as well (through this Divine writ). Then those who believe in this Divine Revelation and contribute to the advancement of the society, will be in the Gardens of Delight, in this world and in the Hereafter
Whereas for those who are bent upon denying the Truth and belie Our Messages, there shall be a humiliating suffering in store
And as for those who forsake the domain of evil in the Cause of Allah and are then slain or die, Allah will most certainly provide them a goodly sustenance. For, verily, Allah, He alone is the Best of providers
Allah, the Knower, the Clement, will admit them to a place they will love
Thus shall it be. As for him who responds to aggression only to the extent of the attack that was leveled against him, and is then again treacherously attacked, Allah will certainly help him. For Allah is Mild, Forgiving
This is because just as Allah merges the night into the day and merges the day into the night, (likewise, there are Divine Laws for fluctuation of people's fortunes) - And because Allah is Hearer, Seer
Thus it is - Allah! He is the Ultimate Truth. That on whom they call instead of Him is sheer Falsehood, and because Allah, He alone is the High, the Great
Have you not seen how Allah sends down water from the sky and then the earth becomes green? Verily, Allah is Unfathomable, Aware
Unto Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And, verily, Allah is the Self-Sufficient Absolute, the Owner of Praise
Have you not realized how Allah has made everything in the earth subservient to you? And the ships run upon the sea by His Command, and He holds back the celestial bodies and high atmosphere from coming down on to the earth except in accordance with His Law. Verily, Allah is Compassionate, Merciful to people
And He it is Who gives you the gift of life, then He will cause you to die, and will then give you life again. Yet, ungrateful is man (not using the gift of life to its maximum potential)
We have let every community hold some rites that they observe (as a diversity of humanity (49:13)). So, let them not involve you in their arguments, just call them to your Lord (2:177). For, behold, you (O Prophet) are indeed on the Right Way
And if they argue with you, say, "Allah is best Aware of what you do
Allah will judge among you regarding all your differences when humanity stands up to its feet, and finally on the Day of Resurrection. (2:213), (2)
Do you not know that Allah is fully Aware of all that is in the High and the Low? All that, behold, is in the Divine Database. Verily, all this is easy for Allah
And yet, they (who, seeing His Dominion of the Universe, claim to believe in Him, often) idolize instead of Allah that wherein He has placed no power, and they know nothing about them. (They blindly follow their ancestors' ways (10:39). There is no helper for those who relegate the reality to conjecture
And when Our Messages are conveyed to them in all clarity, you can notice a denial in the faces of those who are bent upon rejecting the Truth. They would almost attack those who convey Our Messages to them. Say, "Shall I, then, tell you something worse than what you feel now? The Fire! Allah has promised it for those who are bent upon denying the Truth. How miserable a journey's end
O Mankind! Here is an example for you to listen and ponder! Behold, those beings you invoke instead of Allah, cannot create as much as a fly, even if they were to join all their forces to do so. And if a fly robs them of anything, they cannot get it back from it. Weak indeed is the seeker and weak indeed the sought
They esteem not Allah as He must be esteemed. In fact, Allah is the One, Mighty, All Powerful. (
(In His Almightiness) Allah chooses Message-bearers from among the angels as well as from among mankind. Behold, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing
He knows all that is of the past, the present and the future. For, to Allah all things return (and go back to Him as their Source)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, and serve your Lord. And do good for the community so that you may achieve a blissful prosperity
Strive hard in Allah's Cause, with all the striving that is due to Him. It is He Who has elected you to carry the Message and has placed no hardship in religion, the creed of your father Abraham (2:143), (2:288). It is He Who has named you Muslims in the bygone days and now in this Revelation. That the Messenger may be a witness for you, and you be witnesses for all mankind! (You shall be the watchers over peoples that no community oppresses the other). So, establish the Divine System and set up the Just Economic Order, and hold fast unto Allah. He is your Lord Supreme, and how excellent is this Giver of support
Successful indeed are the believers
Who humbly and whole-heartedly follow Divine Commands
And who turn away from all that is senseless. (And they value time)
They are the setters up of the Just Economic Order of ZAKAT (in which wealth circulates in the society and nourishes every individual)
And who are mindful of their chastity
Not giving way to their desires with any but their spouses - that is, those whom they each other rightfully possess. Behold, they are free of all blame. (4:3), (4:24), (
Those who cross these limits, are transgressors
True believers are faithful to their trusts and to their pledges
They guard the Divine System
It is they who shall be the inheritors
It is they who will inherit the Paradise wherein they shall abide (in both lives (7:43), (43:72)
Now, indeed, We created the human being from the essence of clay
Then placed him as the male and female gamete (the product of conception) in a safe lodging
Then We fashioned the gametes into zygote, a clot, then the hanging little lump, the embryo. Then We created bones within the embryonic lump, and then clothed the bones with flesh. (Thus We designed it into a fetus). And then We made it into a new creation (the human infant). So Blessed is Allah, The Best of creators. (33)
And then, behold, after all this you are destined to die
And then, behold, on the Day of Resurrection you are raised again
And, indeed We have created above you seven celestial orbits, and We are never unmindful of creation
And We send down from the sky water in due measure, and We lodge it in the earth. But, behold, We are Able to withdraw it
And from it, We produce for you gardens of date-palms and grapes, wherein you have abundant fruit and you eat thereof
As well as a tree that grows in abundance in (the lands adjoining) Mount Sinai, yielding oil and relish for all to eat
And, behold, in the cattle too there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink of that which is in their bellies. You derive many benefits from them, and also consume their meat
On them and on the ships you are carried
(We took care of your physical and mental needs.) And, indeed, We sent (Our first Prophet), Noah to his people and he said, "O My people! Serve Allah. You have no god other than Him. Will you not then be mindful of Him and walk aright
But the leaders among his community who refused to acknowledge the Truth, said, "This is only a man like you who wants to become prominent among you. God could have sent angels if He willed (to convey a message to us). We never heard this from our forefathers
He is nothing but a madman, so watch him for a while
Said he, "My Lord! Help me, for they accuse me of lying
Then We revealed unto him thus, "Build, under Our eyes and according to Our revealed instructions, the ark. Then, as Our Command comes to pass and the torrent gushes forth, take on board a couple each of the domesticated animals. As well as your family and followers except him against whom the Word has already gone forth (for his persistent denial). And do not plead with Me on behalf of the oppressors. Verily, they will be drowned
When you have settled in the ship along with your companions, say, "All Praise is due to Allah Who has saved us from the oppressors
And say, "O My Sustainer! Enable me to disembark with Your blessing. You are the Best Director of destinations
Behold, herein are Messages indeed, for Our Law keeps testing nations (for viability)
(And after those people of old) We gave rise to new generations
And always We sent to them a Messenger of their own. (Without exception each of these Messengers said), "Serve Allah. You have no god other than Him. Will you not then be mindful of Him and walk aright
(And invariably) it was their leaders who refused to acknowledge the Truth and denied the Meeting in the Hereafter. Simply because We had granted them ease and plenty in their worldly life. Every time such people would say, "This is only a man like you who eats what you eat and drinks as you drink
And indeed, if you obey a mortal like yourselves, you will surely be the losers
Does he promise you that, after you die and become dust and bones, you shall be brought forth again
Impossible, impossible indeed, is what you are promised
There is nothing but our life of this world. We die and we live, and we shall not be raised again. (We see people dying and children being born every day)
He is just a man who has invented a lie about Allah. We are not going to believe in him
(Whereupon the Messenger) would say, "My Lord! Help me, for they accuse me of lying
(And Allah) would say, "In a little while they will be sorry
And then the Blast of (Our Requital) overtook them, justly and inevitably, and We made them as rubbish of dead leaves. (11:68). And so - away with people who wronged their own "Self
Then after them We brought forth other generations
No nation can advance its term, nor delay it. (The Laws of the rise and fall of nations are unchangeable (7:34), (1)
We sent Our Messengers in succession. Whenever a Messenger came to a nation, they denied him. Our Law of Requital caused them to follow one another in disaster, and We made them history. And so - away with people who would not believe
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our Messages and a clear authority from Us
To Pharaoh and his chiefs; but they showed arrogance. For, they were megalomaniacs
And so they said, "Shall we believe in these two mortals like us whose nation are our slaves
Thus they denied them, and earned their place among the doomed
For, indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture, that they might go aright
And We made the son of Mary and his mother a symbol (of Our Grace). And, We gave them abode on an elevated resort, affording rest and security and fresh water springs. (As they migrated from Canaan after the attempted crucifixion)
(This was a brief resume of some of Our Messengers. We had said to them), "O Messengers! Partake of the decent things of life and work for the betterment of humanity. Verily, I am Aware of what you do
And verily, this community of yours is one community and I am your Sustainer. So, walk aright remaining conscious of Me." (Since all Messengers were one Brotherhood unanimous in purpose, all mankind must consider one another as brothers and sisters)
But they (who claim to follow you O Messengers) have torn their unity wide asunder, piece by piece into disputing factions, each faction rejoicing in its beliefs
But leave them alone, lost in their ignorance until a time. (And the Truth will ultimately prevail (22:17)
Do they think that, since We continue to provide them with wealth and children
We are being swift to them with good things? Nay, but they perceive not
(It is people who must hasten to do good and become worthy of good things.) Verily, those who are reverently conscious of their Lord
And those who have conviction in the Messages of their Lord
And those who do not associate anyone with Him
And those who give (in the Cause of Allah of their wealth and person) whatever they can, and are still afraid (that they have not done enough and) because they have to return to their Lord
It is they who race with one another to improve the quality of life for humanity, and it is they who are worthy of winning good things
We do not hold responsible any person beyond his or her capacity. Our Commands are meant to expand your human potential. (2:286), (6:153), (7:42). And with Us is the Database that speaks the Truth (about what you can and cannot do). And none shall de wronged
Nay, but their hearts are in ignorance of this Qur'an, and they are too busy doing other things and will keep doing so
When We grasp their rich elite with retribution, they will moan and groan
Groan not in supplication this day! You will surely, not be helped by Us
My Messages were conveyed to you, but you used to turn back on your heels
In arrogance, talking nonsense about these Verses like people telling fables far into the night
Have they not pondered the Word? Is the Revelation something that never came to their remote forefathers, ( Noah, Abraham, Ishmael, and others)
Or do they not recognize their Messenger, that they deny him
Or do they say, "There is madness in him?" Nay, he brings them the Truth, and most of them are haters of the Truth. (They want him to make compromises (10:15), (11:113), (1)
And if the Truth had followed their whims (2:120), verily the heavens and the earth and all beings therein would have fallen into ruin. Nay, We have given them their Reminder, but they turn away from their Reminder that can give them eminence. (7:176), (21:1)
(O Messenger) Do you ask them for any tribute? (They must know that) your Sustainer's tribute is best, for, He is the Best of providers
And, verily, you call them onto a Straight Path
But, behold, those who disbelieve in the life to come are bound to deviate from that Way
Even if We had mercy on them and relieved them of their suffering, they would obstinately persist in their transgression wandering to and fro
And, indeed, We tested them through suffering, but they did not humble themselves before their Lord, nor implored Him
Until when We open for them the gate of severe retribution, behold, they will be then completely demoralized
(O Mankind) He is the One Who has created for you hearing and sight, and mind (the faculties to perceive and conceive). But, how seldom do you show gratitude by really using them
And He it is Who has multiplied you on earth (as unity in diversity), and unto Him you will be gathered
And He it is Who gives life and death and to Him is due the alternation of Night and Day. Will you not, then, use your sense? (His Laws govern the life and death of individuals and nations, just as He alternates night and day)
Nay, they say what the people of the olden times used to say
They say, "What! After we die and become mere dust and bones, shall we then, be raised again
Indeed, this we have been promised, we and our forefathers, long ago. These are nothing but tales of the ancient
Say, "Unto whom belongs the earth and all that lives thereon, if you happen to know
They will reply "Unto Allah." Say, "Will you not then, bethink
Say, "Who is the Sustainer of the seven heavens and Lord of the Tremendous Throne?" (1)
They will answer, "Unto Allah (all this belongs)." Say, "Will you not then be mindful of Him
Say, "In whose hand is the mighty Dominion over all things, and who protects, while against Him there is no protection? - If you happen to know the answer
They will reply, "Unto Allah (all that belongs)." Say, "How can you then belie yourselves
Nay, We have given them the Truth, yet, behold, they are intent upon lying to themselves. (Acceptance of His Rule in their lives hurts their vested interests (21)
Never did God take unto Himself a son, nor was ever any god beside Him. For, had there been any, each god would have taken along its creation and overcome the other. Allah is High Above all that they allege
Knower of the Invisible and the Visible! And Exalted He is above the partners they attribute to Him
(The believer should) pray, "My Lord! If you let me witness (in my life-time) what the wrongdoers are warned against
My Lord! Then let me not be among them
For, behold, We are Able to show you that against which they are warned
(Nevertheless), counter evil with something that is better. We are best Aware of what others say and do
And say, "My Lord! I seek refuge with you from the prompting of the satanic forces of dissension (in my heart and among the enemy)
And I seek refuge with you, my Lord, lest they come near me
(Those who keep belying themselves), when death comes to one of them, say, "My Lord! Send me back" (2)
That I may do good works in that I left behind! But, nay! It is a mere word of no significance that he speaks. And behind them is a barrier until the Day they are raised
And when the Trumpet is blown, there will be no relationships between them that Day, nor will they ask about one another
Then those whose scales (of good deeds) are heavy; they are the successful
And those whose scales are light, it is they who have wasted their "Self", and abide in hell
Their faces in agony as the fire burns them therein
(And it will be said), "Were not My Revelations conveyed to you, and did you not deny them
They will say, "Our Lord! Our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we became a people astray
Our Lord! Bring us out of here, and if we return to our old behavior, then indeed we shall be wrongdoers
He will say, "Dump yourselves therein and plead not with Me
Behold, there were among My servants such who used to say, 'Our Lord! We have come to believe, so forgive us and bestow Grace upon us, for, You are the Best of the merciful
But you ridiculed them, to the extent that it made you forget My Message while you were laughing at them
This Day I have rewarded them for their patience. They verily are the triumphant
He will ask, "What number of years have you spent on earth
They will say, "We stayed a day or part of a day. But ask those who keep count
He will say, "You stayed only a little, if you had only realized then
Do you think that We have created you without purpose, and that you will not be brought before Us
Know that Allah is Exalted, the King, the Truth. There is no god but He, the Lord of the Honored Throne
Hence, anyone who calls upon gods besides Allah, has no evidence of it. And his account rests with his Lord? Verily, such deniers of the Truth will not attain the ultimate prosperity
And say, "My Lord! Grant me the protection of forgiveness absolving my imperfections and bestow Grace, for You are the Best of the merciful
This is a Surah that We have sent down with a decree of Law. Clear Commandments have been given in it for you to bear in mind
The adulteress and the adulterer, flog each one of them with a hundred stripes. And let not compassion sway you in their case from carrying out Allah's Law, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a group of believers witness the penalty
The adulterer couples with none but an adulteress who worships her desire. And with the adulteress none couples but the adulterer who worships his desire. And it is forbidden to the believers. (2)
(Protecting the honor of a woman is extremely important.) Those who accuse chaste women and then fail to produce four witnesses (the court of law shall order) eighty lashes to such accusers (24:23). And, never in the future accept their testimony. They indeed have drifted away from morality. (Fasiq = One who drifts away from -from what? Will depend on the context)
Except those who afterward repent and reform. For, verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
As for those who accuse their wives, but have no witnesses except themselves, then let the accuser call Allah four times to Witness that he is indeed telling the truth
And the fifth time, that Allah may reject him if he is telling a lie
But punishment shall be averted from her if she calls Allah four times as Witness that he is indeed telling a lie
And the fifth time, that Allah may reject her if he is telling the truth. (The court shall then punish neither the husband nor the wife and it infers that the same procedure applies if the wife accuses her husband)
And were it not for Allah's Favor upon you and His Grace upon you, and that Allah is Clement, Wise
Verily, there are numerous among you who would slander others. Deem not that this (Law of eighty lashes and calling Allah to Witness) is harsh for you. Nay, it is good for you since every slanderer will have to account for what he earns through this dragging violation of human dignity. In the Divine System an awesome punishment awaits anyone who magnifies the slander (trying to make it believable)
Why do not the believing men and believing women, whenever such a rumor is heard, think the best of one another and say, "This is an obvious falsehood
Why do they not (demand of the accusers that they) produce four witnesses? For, if they do not produce such witnesses, it is the accusers who are, in the Sight of Allah, liars indeed
And were it not for the Favor and Grace of Allah upon you, in this world and in the Hereafter, an awful suffering would have afflicted you for the slanders you fall for
When you welcome slander on your tongues and utter with your mouths something of which you have no knowledge, thinking it is a light matter, know that in the Sight of Allah it is an awful thing
(And once again), why do you not say, whenever you hear such a rumor, "It is not befitting for us to talk about it. Glory to You (Our Lord), this is a monstrous calumny
Allah admonishes you that you repeat not the like thereof ever, if you are indeed believers
And Allah clearly explains His Verses for you. Allah is the Knower, the Wise
Verily, those who love to see immorality spread among the believers, shall be punished (by a court of law) in this world and in the life to come. For, Allah knows and you know not
Had it not been for the Favor of Allah and His Mercy unto you, and that Allah is Compassionate, Merciful, (your social fabric would have been undone)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Follow not the steps of satanic people in the community. Anyone who follows Satan's steps, should know that he advocates evil and vice. Had it not been for the Favor of Allah, and His Grace unto you, none of you could have grown in goodness. Thus it is - but anyone can develop the "Self" (attain Self-actualization) by following Allah's Laws (given in the Qur'an). Allah is Hearer, Knower (Most Perceptive of your psychosocial needs)
Development of the personality takes place by respecting the Divine Moral Values and helping people with your wealth and person (2:232), (4:49), (9:103), (24:21), (24:30), (53:32), (91:9-10), (92:18)). Let not those among you who have been blessed with resources and ease of life ever stay behind in spending on: Their families, Relatives, Those who have lost their jobs, Whose running businesses have stalled, Whose hard earned income is insufficient to meet their needs, and Those who have forsaken the domain of evil or persecution in the Cause of Allah. Let them pardon and overlook the imperfections of the needy. Listen! Do you not love that Allah should forgive you, absolving your imperfections? Thus it is - Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
But, verily, those who accuse chaste women, mentally preoccupied, believers in Divine Moral Values, shall be rejected from the Grace of Allah in this world and in the life to come. And awesome suffering awaits them. (For eighty lashes from the court see)
(Suffering) on the Day when their tongues and their hands and their feet will testify against them about all that they did. (And a time will come when methods of investigation will become far advanced)
On that Day Allah will pay them their just due, and they will come to know that Allah! He is the Manifest Truth
Evil women keep company with evil men, and evil men keep company with evil women. Likewise, men and women of good character are companions to one another (9:71), (9:112). The latter are innocent of whatever people might say about them. For them is the absolution of their imperfections and honorable provision
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Enter not the houses other than your own until you have obtained permission and greeted their folk with peace. This is better for all of you if you bear in mind
And if you find no one in the home, do not enter it until permission has been given to you. And if you are asked to go back, then go back. This will be most befitting for your "Self". Allah is Knower of the actions that strengthen or enfeeble your personality
There is no blame on you if you enter vacant houses in which some of your property is placed. Allah knows what you do in public and in private
Tell the believing men to lower their gaze, and guard their modesty. This helps them grow in character. Verily, Allah is Aware of what they do
And tell the believing women to lower their gaze, and guard their modesty. That they should not display their beauty and ornament beyond what is decently and spontaneously apparent in daily lives. Hence, let them cover their bosoms with their sash (Dupatta). And let them not display their beauty in the presence of anyone other than their husbands or fathers or husbands' fathers, or their sons or their husbands' sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons or sisters' sons, or their womenfolk, or their close dependents and attendants free of sexual desires. Or children who know nothing of women's privacy; and they should not strike their feet so as to reveal their hidden beauty and ornaments. And, turn to Allah together, O Believers, in order that you may succeed (in establishing a benevolent society)
And marry the single among you, (whether they are widowed, divorced or bachelors). And those who are still being kept as slaves, male or female, such of them as are fit to marry. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them with His Bounty, for, Allah is of Infinite means, All-Knowing
And those who cannot find a match must keep chaste until Allah grants them sufficiency out of His Bounty. And if any of the male and female slaves desires a deed of freedom, write it out for them if you ensure good for them by way of rehabilitation. (4:5-6). Give them from Allah's wealth that He has given you. Never hold your slave maidens for worldly gains from preserving their chastity by marrying if they so desire, lest they resort to lewdness. If anyone forces them, then after this compulsion Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful to them. (And He will hold the one who forces them, accountable)
And indeed, We have revealed to you Messages clearly showing the Truth, and many a lesson from the generations before you. Herein is Enlightenment for those who wish to journey through life in blissful honor and security
Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. (And the Qur'an is the Light of Allah (5:15), (42:52)). The example of His Light (the Qur'an) is that of a lamp that is placed inside a niche enclosed in glass that shines like a radiant star. This lamp is kindled from a blessed tree - olive - neither of the East nor of the West. Its Light issues forth in all directions. The oil glows by itself even though no fire has touched it. Light upon Light. Allah guides to His Light anyone who seeks guidance. And Allah sets forth allegories for mankind. And Allah does know all things (and how to make you understand that light needs no aid to show itself (20)
This Light-giving Lamp glows in houses that Allah has caused to be exalted, that His Name be celebrated in them. In them He is glorified in the mornings and in the evenings. (The dwellers therein strive to raise His Name)
(These are not the communities of monks but) they are such whom neither trade nor sale can divert from the remembrance of Allah. They keep striving to consolidate the Divine System and set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat in the society. They are people filled with awesome consciousness of the Day when hearts and eyes will be horrified
That Allah may reward them for the best of what they did and increase for them His Bounty. For, Allah grants sustenance of mind and body according to His Laws, beyond count
But as for those who reject the Message, their deeds are like a mirage in the desert. The thirsty one supposes it to be water till he comes unto it and finds nothing. However, he does meet Allah's Law of Requital to compensate for his deeds. And Allah is Swift at taking account
Or total darkness in the midst of a deep ocean, with waves upon waves and a thick cloud above - darkness upon darkness. When he holds out his hand, he can barely see it. Allah's Law does not give light to him who disregards His Light
Do you not realize that Allah, He it is Whom all beings in the heavens and the earth glorify, and the birds, with their wings outspread, as they fly in columns. All of them know their SALAT and TASBEEH (mission and strife). Allah is Aware of what they do to fulfill His Plan
And unto Allah belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth, and unto Allah is marching everything
Have you not seen how Allah drives the clouds, then gathers them, then makes them layers, and then you see the rain coming forth from them? He sends down, from the heights, hail and loads of snow to cover some ground and leave some uncovered, according to His Laws. The flashes of lightning and the brightness of the snow dazzle the sight, all but snatching it away
Allah causes the revolution of the night and the day. Herein indeed is a lesson for men and women of vision and understanding. (Of straying and guidance, of death and life, of calculating time, of rest and work etc)
And Allah has created every living creature from water. (Life began in water 21:30). Some of them crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. Allah creates things with a Purpose and according to His Laws. He has Supreme control over all things and events and verily, Allah is the Appointer of due measure of all things
Verily, We have sent down Messages clearly showing the Truth, but Allah guides onto a Straight Path him who wishes to be guided
For, some people say, "We believe in Allah and the Messenger and we obey." Then after that a faction of them turns away. Such are not believers
And so it is that whenever they are called to Allah and His Messenger to judge between them, some of them turn away
However, if the truth is on their side, they come to him in full submission
Is there disease in their hearts? Or do they bear any doubts? Or do they fear that Allah and His Messenger might deal unjustly with them? They (who wish to obviate justice) are themselves unjust
Whenever invited to Allah and His Messenger to judge in their affairs, the true believers say, "We hear and we obey." They are the ones who will ultimately prosper
Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, and fears violating Allah's Commands, and walks aright, such indeed are the triumphant
Whereas there are some who swear by Allah solemnly that, if you order them, they will go forth to any mission. Say, "Swear not! Obedience is virtuous. Verily, Allah is Aware of all you do
Say, "Obey Allah and obey the Messenger - the Central Authority. But if you turn away, remember that he is only responsible for the duty placed on him, and you for the duty placed on you. If you obey him, you will go aright. The Messenger's duty is only to convey the Message clearly
Allah has promised that those of you peoples who will believe in the Divine Laws and strengthen human resources, He will surely make them rulers in the earth - Just as He granted rule to the previous nations (28:6), (33:27). He will surely establish for them the System of life that He has approved for them, and will replace their fear with peace and security. All this because they serve Me alone. They ascribe no partner to Me. But all who, after this, deny these Laws will drift out (of the community of living nations. The 'belief' in this verse does not pertain to any dogmas and tenets, but to the realization that the entire Universe is operating under the unchangeable Physical Laws of One Supreme Authority, thus providing the basis for all Science and Technology)
Hence, (O Believers) establish and consolidate the Divine System, set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat, and obey the Messenger. (The eternal Messenger now is the Final Revelation of Allah). That is how you will flourish in the world as the fetus flourishes in the mother's womb. (Rahm = Womb)
And think not that the rejecters of the Divine Laws can escape in the earth. Fire shall be their home (in both lives), and it is indeed a miserable abode
(Your social mannerism begins at home.) O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Let your servants and children who have not yet come of age ask your permission before coming in to see you on three occasions: Before you engage in your assignments at dawn, at noon when you are resting with light clothes, and after you have completed your assignments at night. These are your three times of privacy. At other times it is not wrong for you or for them to move about freely, attending to one another. In this way, Allah makes clear to you the revelations, for, Allah is All Knowing, Wise
And when the children among you come of age, let them ask your permission every time just as those who have grown up before them (24:27). Thus Allah makes His revelations clear for you. Allah is Knower, Wise
And the elderly women who have no interest in getting married, there is nothing wrong for them if they lay aside their outer garments in such a way as not to show adornment (24:31), (33:33). Even so, it is best for them to maintain modesty. Allah is Hearer, Knower
(Feeding of the disabled must be a matter of priority in your society.) There is no blame on the blind, nor is there blame on the crippled, nor there is blame on the sick or handicapped, to eat from your houses. Just as there is no blame on you for eating at your own homes, or your fathers' homes, or your mothers' homes, or your brothers' homes, or your sisters' homes, or your paternal uncles' homes, or your paternal aunts' homes, or your maternal uncles' homes, or your maternal aunts' homes, or the homes you manage and hold the keys of, or the home of a friend. You do nothing wrong by dining together or apart. But whenever you enter houses, salute one another with a blessed, goodly greeting from Allah. Thus Allah makes clear the revelations for you, so that you may understand (the goodness in them)
Only those are true believers in Allah and His Messenger who do not leave without permission when they are with him in a community meeting. Those who ask permission are the ones who believe in Allah and His Messenger. So when they ask your permission (O Prophet) in order to handle some of their affairs, grant them permission to whomever you can. Remember (their welfare during their absence) asking forgiveness for them, for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Deem not the Messenger's summons among you as your calling one of another (62:9). Allah knows those of you who sneak away under shelter of flimsy excuses. And let those who conspire to evade his orders beware of a consequent tribulation or an awful retribution
Absolutely, unto Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth (53:31). He knows your condition (capabilities, limitations, intentions and actions. He knows where you stand). The Day when all people return to Him, He will make them truly understand what they were doing in life. Allah is the Knower of all things and events
Most Blessed is He Who has revealed to His servant, the Criterion of the right and the wrong so that to the entire world it might be a warning
(The Sender of this Criterion is) He to Whom belongs the Kingship of the heavens and the earth. He has chosen no son, nor does He have a partner in His Kingship. He it is Who creates all things in precise design and gives them the potential to become what they are meant to be
And yet, there are people who, instead of Him, choose deities and masters that create nothing and are themselves created. And they have it not within their power to avert harm or cause benefit even to themselves. They have no control over death and life, nor can they raise the dead (people and nations)
Those who are bent on denying the Truth say, "This (Qur'an) is a lie that he has devised with the help of other people." Wrong is what they do and falsehood is what they utter
And they say, "Fables of ancient times which he has written down as they are dictated to him morning and evening
Say, "He Who knows all the mysteries of the heavens and the earth has revealed it to me. He is Forgiving, Merciful." (May He forgive you for saying this)
Yet they say, "What sort of Messenger is this who eats food and goes about in the market-places? Why is not an angel sent down to him to act as a Warner together with him
Or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why has he not a garden for enjoyment?" The wicked say, "You are but following a man bewitched
See what sort of examples they apply to you! They have strayed far too much to find a way
Blessed is He Who can Will for you far better than all that, Gardens with flowing rivers and assign you beautiful palaces
Nay, but they deny the oncoming Hour, and for those who deny the oncoming Hour, We have readied a Flame
When the Flame sees them from afar they will hear its rage and its roar
And when they are flung into a narrow space linked together in chains, they will plead for extinction there and then. (Distress of Hell is constricting while the Bliss of Paradise is Spacious)
This Day plead not for a single extinction, but plead for repeated (revivals and) extinctions. (Therein they merely survive, neither living nor dying (14:17), (2)
Say, "Is this better or the Garden of Immortality which is promised to those who walk aright? That is their reward and the ultimate destination
Therein abiding, they have all that they desire. A promise from your Sustainer that must be fulfilled and it is worth coveting
And on the Day when He summons them, together with the idols they had set up besides Allah, He will say to the idols, "Did you mislead these servants of Mine, or did they go astray from the Way on their own
They will say, "Glory to You! It was not befitting for us that we should take for protecting masters others than Yourself. But You did bestow on them and their ancestors, good things in life to the extent that they disregarded the Reminder and became a lost folk
It will be said to the idolaters of all forms, "Now your idols have proved you liars in what you say. So you cannot avert your penalty nor get help." And whoever among you wrongs others and thus wrongs himself, We shall make him taste of the great torment
And the Messengers whom We sent before you (O Prophet) were all mortals who indeed ate food and went about in the market-places. It is thus that We cause you human beings to be a means of testing one another. Are you able to pass this test with patience? For, your Sustainer is All Seeing. (Human beings are expected to evaluate the Message by way of REASON, and not by way of miracles and supernatural phenomena)
Those who do not believe that they are destined to meet Us, say, "Why do not angels come down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?" Assuredly, they think too highly of themselves and they are uttering a gross insult
Yet on that Day when they shall see the angels, it will not be a pleasant news for violators of human rights who used to thrive on others' toil. They will exclaim, "Can there be a barrier between the angels and us
And We will look at the deeds they have done, and will make their work scatter like ashes and dust
Whereas on the same Day those who have earned the Paradise, well is their abode with fairest places for rest and repose, and good news upon good news will be theirs
The Day the heaven with the clouds will be rent asunder, angels will be sent down, a grand descent in ranks
On that Day it will become obvious to all that the Sovereignty belongs to the Most Gracious alone. Hence, a Day of distress it will be for all those who had been rejecting the Truth
When the Day comes, the transgressor will bite his hands in anguish, exclaiming, "Oh, I wish I had taken a Path with the Messenger
Oh, woe unto me, I wish I hadn't taken so-and-so for a friend
Indeed he led me away from the Reminder after it had come to me. Ah, the Satan is always man's deserter in the hour of need
And the Messenger will say, "O my Lord! These are my people, the ones who had disabled and made this Qur'an of no account." (MAHJUR = They had immobilized it like villagers who bind a cow by tying her front foot to her horn)
Thus have we made for every Prophet enemies among the guilty, those who have been used to thriving on the fruit of others' toil. (6:112), (22:52-54). Yet, Your Lord is Sufficient for a Guide and Helper. (The Divine Message being a great Equalizer of humanity strikes at the vested interests of the exploiters)
Now they who are bent on denying the Truth ask, "Why has not the Qur'an been revealed to him all at once?" So it has been! (It has all been revealed upon the Prophet's heart in the Night of Ruling (97:1)). For, in order to strengthen your heart We have already arranged it in the Right Order. And We have caused you to convey it to people in stages, step by step
And no question do they bring to you but We bring to you the Truth and the best explanation. (We reveal to you the best TAFSEER, the explanation of the Qur'an from within itself)
Those who will be gathered prone on their faces to Hell, it is they who will be worst in station, and as to the Path, they are most astray
Recall that We indeed gave Moses the Scripture, and appointed his brother Aaron as minister to him
Then We said, "Go you both to the people who defy Our Laws!" Then We annihilated them (the deniers), a complete annihilation
And Noah's folk: When they had denied the Messengers (denying him was denying the eternal Message of Allah), We caused them to drown and made them a symbol for all mankind. For, We have readied an awful doom for all who do wrong
And (Our Law also struck) Aad and Thamud, and the people of Ar-Rass, and many generations in between. (The people of Ar-Rass used to dig deep wells, and irrigate their flourishing crops. They lived in the current province of)
Each of them We had warned with examples, and each of them We brought to total ruin
And indeed they have passed by the township (Sodom) that was rained with a miserable rain. Have they never seen it with eyes of the heart? But nay, they expect not to be raised again. (They do not believe in the Law of Requital and deem that such things happen only by chance)
Hence, whenever they see you, they make you a target of their mockery saying, "Is this the one whom Allah has sent as a Messenger
He would have led us far away from our gods if we were not staunch to them." They will know, when they see the doom, as to who is more astray from the Path
Have you seen him who has taken as god his own desire? Can you be an advocate responsible for him
Or do you think that most of them really hear and use their reason? Nay! they are but like cattle. Nay, they are farther astray. (The cattle at least follow the Divine Laws instinctively)
Are you not aware of your Lord by His Works? - How He spread the shade. And if He Willed, He could have made it still! Then We have made the sun its pilot. (He could have designed the Solar System differently with the earth remaining stationary)
And then We gradually withdraw it to Us, a gradual withdrawal
And, He it is Who makes night a robe for you, and sleep a rest, and makes every day to be a resurrection
And, He is the One Who sends the winds, glad news of His coming Grace, and We send down pure water from the sky
That We may give life with it to a dead land, and We provide drink for Our creations, a great many animals and human beings
And verily, many times We have repeated all this to mankind, so that they might bear in mind. Yet most people refuse to be anything but ungrateful (for such Light-giving Guidance)
Now had We so Willed, We could have continued to raise up a Warner in every single community. (But, time has now come for the Eternal, Universal Message, the Qur'an)
Hence, (O Prophet) Disregard the likes and dislikes of the rejecters, but strive hard against them by means of this, with utmost striving. (Jihadan Kabira = The Great Jihad by means of this Qur'an)
And He it is Who has given freedom of movement to the two kinds of great bodies of water; one is palatable and fresh, the other salt and bitter. Yet, He has made a barrier between them, a partition that is not to be passed. (35:12). (Please see (18:60) for two streams in a different implication
And He it is Who has created the human being from this very water, (21:30), (24:45) and then He has established relationships by lineage and by marriage, for, your Lord is the Designer of all things. (The best relationships are established on the basis of Ideology (3:102)
Yet they serve instead of Allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them. Indeed, the rejecter of the Truth, (regardless of his origin and relationship), joins hands with another rejecter against his own Sustainer. (Zaheer = Helper. Ideology vs. relatives (11:45)
Yet We have sent you (O Prophet) only as a bearer of glad news and a Warner
Say, "I ask you no reward for it but this: That whoever wishes, may take a Path to his Lord." (3)
And put your trust in Him Who lives, and dies not, and strive to manifest His Praise. He suffices as the Knower of where His servants trail behind
He who has created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six stages, and is established on the Throne of Supreme Control, the Beneficent! About Him, ask the One Who is Aware (reflecting on this Revelation and on the Universe)
Yet when it is said to them, "Adore the Beneficent!" They say, "What is the Beneficent? Are we to adore just what you say?" And it merely increases them in disgust
Blessed is He (the Beneficent) Who set up in the sky great constellations, and put therein a radiant Lamp, and a Moon giving light
And He it is Who causes the night and the day to succeed each other. (Therein is sufficient sign) for him who is determined to understand the Truth, and who is determined to be appreciative of the Guidance
The true servants of the Beneficent are those who: Walk upon the earth humbly. And when the ignorant ones address them, they say, "Peace!" (3:138), (22:4)
And who adore their Lord at night, preparing themselves to make a rightful submission and take a rightful stand
And who say, "Our Lord! Avert from us the doom of Hell, for its doom is bound to be a dire torment
Verily, it is a miserable abode and station
And those who when they spend their wealth, are neither wasteful, nor stingy. (2:219). And (they know that) there is always middle ground between the two extremes
And those who call on no deities along with Allah. Nor take a life that Allah has forbidden except in the course of justice (through a court of Law). Nor do they commit adultery - and whoever does this, will drag down his own humanity
The retribution on the Day of Resurrection will be doubled for him and therein he will abide in lasting humiliation
Except him who repents and believes in the Permanent Moral Values and takes corrective action. For such, Allah will replace the ill effects of their deeds with the balancing effects of good deeds. For, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
And whoever repents and takes corrective action, verily he turns toward Allah with true repentance
Now those who: Never give false witness. Do not participate in assemblies of vanity. And when they pass near senseless play, pass by with dignity
And who, whenever they are reminded of even the Revelations of their Lord, do not fall at them deaf and blind (with deaf and blind acceptance)
And who say, "Our Lord! Grant us that our spouses and children be a joy to our eyes (that they excel in character). And make us the foremost among those who walk aright
They, such are these who will be rewarded with a high station of honor for their steadfast commitment (to their Lord). Therein they will be met with salutation and peace
Therein to abide. What a goodly destiny! And what a high station
Say (to the believers, O Prophet), "No value would My Lord attach to you if you did not invite people to Him." (And tell the rejecters), "Since you have indeed denied the Truth, the requital will be stuck to your being forever
S.M. Toor-e-Sina and Moses - Recall Mount Sinai where Moses was given the Statute Book
Now these are verses of the Final Statute Book, clear in itself and clearly showing the Truth
(O Prophet) Will you, (in your compassion), torment yourself to death because they refuse to believe in it
Had We so Willed, We could have sent down to them a Sign from the sky, to which they would have bent their necks in humility. (But, that is not Our Design. We expect them to use their reason)
And so whenever a Reminder comes to them from the Beneficent, they turn away from it
Thus indeed have they rejected this Message. But in time they will come to understand what it was that they ridiculed
Do they not see the earth how much of every fruitful kind We cause to grow therein
This is indeed a Sign, yet most of them are not believers (in the Almightiness of their Lord)
But, verily, your Lord is Almighty, Merciful. (Whether they believe or not He provides them with means of sustenance)
And recall when your Lord called Moses, "Go to the nation of the oppressors
To the people of Pharaoh so that they may walk aright
Moses said, "My Lord! I am afraid they will accuse me of lying
I shall be embarrassed and I might not speak confidently, so send for Aaron to help me
And they stick a charge against me, so I fear they will kill me
Allah said, "Nay! Both of you go with Our Messages. We are with you
Go together to Pharaoh and say, "We are Messengers from the Lord of the Worlds
And, "Let the Children of Israel go with us
Pharaoh said to Moses, "Did we not rear you as a child among us? And you lived with us many years of your life
And you did what you did, killing a man from our nation. You are of the ungrateful
Moses said, "Indeed I did it but I am lost how it happened!" (I only struck him once with a fist and he died)
Then I fled from you in fear. Now Allah has given me a Command and appointed me one of His Messengers
And this, the past favor you so tauntingly remind me! Yes, you raised me in your palaces. But it was so since you enslaved the Children of Israel
Pharaoh said, "What is the Lord of the Worlds
Moses said, "Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them; if you allow yourselves to be convinced."
Pharaoh said to the people around him, "Don't you hear what he says
Moses said, "Yes, He is your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors
Pharaoh said, "Your Messenger that has been sent to you is a crazy man
Moses said, "He is the Lord of the East and the West and everything in between. You would know if you use reason
Pharaoh said, "If you choose a god other than me, I will put you in prison
Moses responded, "Even if I bring to you all evidence of the Truth
He said, "Bring your signs if you are truthful
Moses presented the Absolute Truth, vibrant with life. (7:107-108), (20:17-2)
He presented his powerful logic that shone bright
Pharaoh said to his chiefs, "He is a magical debater
He intends to make you ineffective in your own land by causing a popular rebellion. What do you advise
They said, "Put him and his brother on hold and send couriers into cities
That they bring all expert religious debaters to you." ('Sahir' = spellbinding speaker)
The debaters got together at the appointed day and time
People were given an open invitation to assemble there, "Are you all gathering
Pharaoh continued, "So that when the debaters win, we carry them in a procession
When they came, they said to Pharaoh, "Will there be a reward for us if we are the winners
He said, "Yes, and you will have high ranks in my court
Moses said, "Begin however you wish to begin
They put forward their logic and swore, "By Pharaoh's majesty! We will be the victors
Moses responded with the mighty Truth, and right away it swallowed their false logic
The debaters fell prostrate in awe
Saying, "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
Pharaoh said, "You believe in him before I grant my permission? He is surely your chief who has taught you spellbinding eloquence. You shall find out soon. I will cut off your hands and feet alternately and verily I will crucify you everyone
They said, "We have nothing to lose, we will turn to our Lord and return to Him anyway
We hope that our Lord will forgive our faults, since we are the foremost of the believers
We revealed to Moses, "Take away My servants by night, for, behold, you will be pursued
In the meantime, Pharaoh sent couriers to the cities
This is a low contemptible gang
And indeed they are offenders against us
And, we are indeed a ready army
Thus We drove them (Pharaoh and his chiefs) out of the gardens and springs
And treasures, lofty positions and beautiful estate. (Destined to be drowned in hateful pursuit of Moses and his followers)
Thus were those things taken away from them and We caused the Children of Israel to inherit such blessings. (Instead of returning to Egypt they would rule the land including Sinai, Jordan, Palestine, Northern Arabian Peninsula until their zenith during the times of David and Solomon about 940 B.C. (7:136), (7:137)
And they (Pharaoh's armies) overtook them at sunrise
When both parties saw each other, the companions of Moses said, "Behold, We are indeed caught
He answered, "Nay indeed! My Lord is with me and He will guide me
Then We revealed to Moses, "Strike the sea with your staff. (Seek for them a dry path with confidence. Cross over the dried up Sea of Reeds (20:77), (44:24)). The morning found the two parties apart like two hills with a basin in between
And We caused the pursuers to draw near to that place
And We saved Moses and those with him, every one of them
(And as the high tide came), We drowned the others
Herein is indeed a lesson. Yet, most people are not believers in the Law of Requital
And verily, your Lord! He is indeed Almighty, Merciful
And convey to them of the history of Abraham
When he said to his father and his people, "What is it that you worship
They said, "We worship idols and we are very devoted to them
He said, "Do they hear when you call them
Or do they benefit or harm you
They said, "Nay, but we found our forefathers doing this
He said, "Have you, then ever considered what it is that you have been worshiping
You and your forefathers
Now verily, they (all kinds of idols) are enemies to me, for I am devoted only to the Lord of the Worlds
The One who created me, and He guides me
And is the One Who provides food and drink to me (and to you)
And when I get sick, then He is the One who restores me to health
And Who will cause me to die and then bring me back to life
And Who I ardently hope, will absolve my imperfections on the Day of Judgment
My Lord! Grant me wisdom and good judgment, and count me among those who have perfected their "Self
And grant me the ability to convey the Truth even to those who will come after me
And include me among those who will inherit the Garden of Bliss
And forgive my father (by letting him become worthy of it). For, verily he is of those who go astray. (9:114), (14:41), (
And put me not to embarrassment the Day when people are raised
The Day when wealth and children will not avail anyone
And when only he will prosper that brings to Allah a noble heart
And the Garden will be brought close for those who walk aright
Whereas the blazing Fire will appear plainly before those who had lost themselves in error
And it will be said, "Where is all that you used to worship and obey
Instead of Allah? Can they help you or help themselves
Then they will be hurled into Hell, the leaders and their straying followers
And the party of Iblis, all together
And right away, blaming one another, they will exclaim
By God, we were in manifest error
When we ranked you with the Lord of the Worlds
It is these guilty leaders who misled us
Now we have no intercessors
Nor a close friend
Oh, if only we could have another chance that we could be among the believers." (23:99)
In all this, behold, there is lesson but, most of them still are not believers (in the Law of Requital)
And verily, your Lord! He is Almighty, Merciful. (He gives you sustenance for body and mind)
The people of Noah too denied the Messengers
When their brother Noah said to them, "Will you not walk aright
Behold, I am a Messenger to you, worthy of your trust
Be mindful of Allah and pay heed to me
And no reward, whatever, do I ask for it. My reward rests with none but the Lord of the Worlds
So be mindful of Allah and pay heed to me
They answered, "Shall we put our faith in you even though the low class people are following you
Said he, "I do not care what their professions are and what they have been doing before
Their accountability is up to my Lord. If only you understood (that the most honored in the Sight of Allah is the one who is best in conduct)
Hence, I shall not drive away the believers
I am only a plain Warner
They said, "O Noah! If you do not refrain, you will surely be stoned to death
Thereupon he prayed, "My Lord! Behold, my people are accusing me of lying
Hence, judge between me and them openly, and save me and my company of believers
And We saved him and those who accompanied him in the laden Ark
Then afterward We drowned the others
In this, behold, there is a sign, even though most of them are not believers (in the Law of Requital)
But, verily, your Lord is Almighty, Merciful (His Rule is the Rule of Law, and not that of dictatorial whims)
Aad also rejected the Messengers
When their brother Hud said to them, "Will you not walk aright
I am a Messenger to you, worthy of your trust
Be mindful of Allah and pay heed to me
And no reward, whatever, do I ask for it. My reward rests with none but the Lord of the Worlds
You build on every height monuments of vanity
And make for yourselves mighty castles; will you thus become immortal
And you seize people cruelly, without any restraint. (Oppressing people into slavery to build these gorgeous buildings for you)
Be mindful of Allah and heed me
Be mindful of Him Who helped you with good things you know and the know-how and skills
He Who has helped you with, livestock and human resources
And gardens, and water springs
Verily, I fear for you the requital of an awesome day
But they answered, "It is the same for us whether you counsel us or not
This has been our life-style for generations
And we shall never be doomed
So, they rejected him and We destroyed them. Therein, behold, is a sign, even though most people are not believers (in the Law of Requital)
But, verily, your Lord is Almighty, Merciful. (His Mighty Rule is the Rule of Law)
Thamud also denied the Messengers
When their brother Saleh said to them, "Will you not walk aright
Behold, I am a Messenger to you, worthy of your trust
Be mindful of Allah and heed me
I ask you no reward, whatever, for it. My reward rests with none but the Lord of the Worlds
Do you suppose that you could continue in security as it is (with your unjust system) forever
In gardens and water springs
And fields, and these palm trees and delicious fruits
And that you will always skillfully carve out of the mountains luxurious mansions
Be mindful of Allah and heed me
And obey not the command of those who trespass the bounds of justice and equity
Those who spread corruption in the land, and reform not
But they replied, "You are but one of the bewitched
You are just a mortal like us. So bring us a miracle if you are a man of truth
He said, "Behold, this she-camel. (She represents the weak and poor). She being (ownerless) has the right to drink at the well, just as you have the right to water (your flock) at the time of watering
Do not harm her, or the retribution will seize you on an awesome day
But they killed her and made way for their own humiliation. (The usual rendering here of FAASBAHOO NADIMEEN that they regretted, repented or became penitent seems to be incorrect, since in that case the Most Gracious might have forgiven them)
So, the Retribution seized them. Herein is indeed a sign, yet most people are not believers (in the Law of Requital)
And, verily, your Lord! He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful. (He is Merciful that His Rule is the Rule of Law)
And the people of Lot also denied Messengers
When their brother Lot said to them, "Will you not walk aright
Behold, I am a Messenger to you, worthy of your trust
Be mindful of Allah and heed me
And no reward whatever do I ask you for it. My reward rests with none but with the Lord of the Worlds
Of all the creatures in the Worlds, you approach males
And leave those whom your Lord has created for you to be your mates. You are people who cross all bounds of decency
They said, "O Lot! If you desist not, you will be driven out of the town
He said, "Behold, I am of those who deplore your actions
O My Lord! Save me, my family and my followers from the consequences of what they do
So, We saved him and his followers, all of them
All but the old woman (the wife of Lot) who chose to stay behind
And then We utterly destroyed the others
And We rained on them a rain, the dreadful rain (from the volcano) on those who all had been warned
Herein indeed is a sign, but most of them were not believers in the Law of Requital
Your Lord is Almighty, Merciful. (His Mighty Rule is the Rule of Law)
And the dwellers in the wood dales (of Midyan) denied the Messengers. (The Nation of Midyan lived between Madinah and Damascus since around 2000 B.C. They were the descendants of Prophet Abraham's son MIDYAN from his third wife QATOORA. Prophet Shoaib was raised among them around 1300 B.C)
When their brother Shoaib said to them, "Will you not walk aright
Behold, I am a Messenger to you, worthy of your trust
Be mindful of Allah and heed me
I ask you no reward whatever for it. My reward is with none but with the Lord of the Worlds
Always give full measure, and do not cause loss to people
And in all your dealings, weigh with a just balance
And do not deprive people of what is rightfully theirs. And desist from creating corruption and disorder in the land
Be mindful of Him Who created you and the generations before
They said, "You are but of the bewitched
For, you are nothing but a mortal like us. And, behold, We think that you are one of the liars
If you are truthful, let fragments of the sky fall upon us
He replied, "My Lord is best Aware of your actions
But they persisted in denial. Then the Day of overshadowing gloom seized them. It was the suffering of an awesome day. (Historically, a dark extensive cloud rained upon them heavily and incessantly. It is sometimes referred to as the Day of the Canopy)
Herein, behold, is a sign, and most of them were not believers (in the Law of Requital)
Behold, your Lord! He is Almighty, Merciful. (His Rule is the Rule of Law)
Now, behold, this Qur'an is the Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds
The trustworthy Divine Energy (angel Gabriel) has brought it down.
Upon your heart (O Prophet), so that you may be of the Warners
(In a language that is clear and easy to understand.) In the plain Arabic tongue. (Universality of the Message 7:158, 25:1. Ishmael, Hud, Saleh, Shoaib, all of them preached in the Arabian Peninsula. And since Aramaic and Hebrew are ancient Arabic dialects, all the Hebrew Prophets, in this sense, conveyed the Divine Message in the Arabic tongue)
And verily, it (the Qur'an) has been announced in the previous Scriptures
Is it not an evidence enough for them that learned men among the Children of Israel have recognized it
But if We had revealed this to any of the non-Arabs
And had he read it to them, they would have had reason to disbelieve it
But to the guilty people, it just passes through their hearts (as a foreign tongue even though they might be Arabs)
They will not believe in it until they suffer the dire consequences
The Requital will come upon them suddenly, when they least expect it
Then they will say, "Could we have a respite
Do they wish that Our Requital come to them quickly
As you see, Our Law of Respite allows them to enjoy Our bounties for years
And then comes that which they were promised
Then, of what avail will be their past enjoyments
(It is Our Law that) We never annihilated a township but it had its Warners
Reminder! Therefore, this (Qur'an) is. We are never unjust
Gabriel has come down with it (26:193).) It is not something that the mischievous diviners and clairvoyants bring
It is beyond their stature, nor is it in their power
(Soothsayers, diviners, fortunetellers etc., unless they reform), They are banished from hearing and understanding the Revelation. (15:17-18),
Hence, (O Human) Call not any other deity with Allah, or you will be of the doomed
And warn first those who are close to you
(O Prophet) Lower your wing in kindness to those who believe and follow you
To them who deny you, say, "I am free of responsibility from what you do
Put your trust in the Almighty, the Merciful
Who sees you whenever you take a stand
And move among those who adore
Verily, He, only He is the Hearer, the Knower
Shall I inform you on whom the devils descend
They descend on every lying, self-deceiver
They listen for lies and rumors, and most of them make up lies
As for poets, the strayers follow them. (Poets claim that they speak out of intuition or inspiration. Their followers succumb to emotional deceit)
Haven't you seen how they stray in every valley of thought, like a camel with false thirst
And how they say what they practice not
Except those poets who believe in the Revelation. They (do what they say and) help create balance in the society. They engage much in the remembrance of Allah. They help create a social order in which oppression is requited and thus prevented. They stand up for human rights. The wrongdoers will soon find out how their plans would be reversed on themselves
S. Toor-e-Sina, Mount Sinai. (The initiation of Revelation to Moses, and now), These are Messages of the Qur'an, the Book clear in itself and clearly showing the Truth
A Guidance and a glad tiding for the believers (in it)
Who establish and consolidate the Divine System and set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat. They have conviction in the life to come (that the human "Self" lives on after death, and that all actions meet a just requital)
Those who do not believe in the eternity of the "Self", will obviously deny the continuation of life after death. Our Law makes their deeds of instant gratification pleasing in their eyes and so they keep stumbling blindly to and fro
It is they whom the worst suffering awaits, and they will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter
Surely, you are receiving the Qur'an from the Presence of One Wise, Aware
(Moses was also given a clear book. When he and his family were in a cold and dark valley), Moses said, "Behold, I see a fire. I may bring you news from there (about our location). Or bring you a burning torch so that you might warm yourselves
But when he came close to it, he was called, "Blessed are all who are in and near the Light! And Exalted is Allah, Lord of the Worlds." (See (9:32) for the allegory of Fire + Light = Divine Guidance. (7:)
O Moses! It is I, Allah, the Almighty, the Wise
Allah (revealed Guidance to Moses and) said, "Now rehearse the Truth." When Moses did that, he felt that he had the vibrant Force of Truth in hand. Yet he was awe-struck by the uphill task before him, like grabbing a huge dragon. God said, "O Moses! Fear not - behold, the Messengers fear not in My Presence." (Please note 'kaannaha jann' = as if it was a dragon, concerning the 'asa' or staff in (27:10). Additional Tasreef: (7:108), (20:17-24), (26:10-15), (26:32-33)
Nor anyone who has replaced the wrong with good should have any fear. For, verily I am Forgiving, Merciful
Now, when you present the Light in your heart with forceful Logic, it will shine with unblemished Truth. Take the Nine of My Messages to Pharaoh and his people - for, verily they are a nation drifting away from the Right Path." ((28:32). Nine, and not ten Commandments
But when they received Our Light-giving Messages, they said, "This is clearly a spellbinding deception
And they rejected the Messages wrongfully and out of pride, although they were convinced within themselves. And behold what happened in the end to the corrupters
And indeed, We bestowed upon David and Solomon knowledge and they used to say, "Praise be to Allah Who has blessed us more than a great many of His believing servants
Solomon was David's heir in continuation of Allah's Revelation. He said, "O People! We have been given a great cavalry of ready horses with the best knowledge of training them, and given every blessing. This evidently is a great Bounty on our nation." ((21:79), (34:10). Solomon ruled as King from 965 to 926 B.C
Solomon's army included warrior tribes of the woods and the mountains, dwellers of townships, and great riders of the tribe of Taer. They were well disciplined, and dedicated to any appointed mission
Once (when Solomon was on an expedition to the South), they came upon the valley ruled by Queen An-Naml. The Queen, (realizing the power of Solomon), ordered her armies, "Go back in your barracks, lest Solomon and his armies crush you without knowing that we are a peaceful tribe
Solomon smiled joyously at her words and said, "My Lord! Enable me to be grateful for your blessings upon me and my parents. Enable me to work for the betterment of humanity and thus please You. Include me, by Your Grace, among your righteous servants
(Leaving the peaceful tribe of An-Naml alone, Solomon marched forward.) As he examined the cavalry, he said, "How is it that I do not see the commander
(Absconding from the marching army was a breach of discipline.) Solomon said, "Unless the commander presented a good reason I would punish him or demote him to a low rank
But before long
Behold, the country is ruled by a Queen who has been given everything and she has a tremendous throne
I found her and her people worshiping the sun instead of Allah. Their ego makes them think that they are doing right. Satan (the priesthood of the Sun Temple) hinders them from the Right Path. So they cannot find the Right Way
They do not understand that they must adore Allah Who brings forth from His Unseen treasures in the heavens and the earth, and Who knows all that you hide and declare
(They need to know that) there is no god but Allah, the Lord of the Supreme Control
Solomon listened to the report and decided to carry out further investigation to ascertain the truth. Said he, "We shall see whether you have told the truth or are one of the liars
(He gave a letter to the Commander of the cavalry to take to the court of Sheba, and to watch their response), "Go with this letter of mine and make sure you convey it to them, and then come back with the answer they give
The Queen said, "O Chiefs! Behold, a very noble letter has been conveyed to me
It is from Solomon and it says, 'With the Name of Allah, the Instant and Sustaining Source of all Mercy and Kindness
Exalt not yourselves against me, but come to me as those who surrender.'" (The Kingdom of Queen Bilqis Sheba of Yemen-Abyssinia had hostile plans towards the North)
She said, "O Chiefs! Advise me in this matter. (You know that) I take no decisions without you
They said, "We have the power, we are tough in warfare, and the command is yours. Think about (other aspects of the situation) and order as you will
She said, "Behold, when kings invade a town, they ruin it and humiliate its dignitaries. This is what they shall do
Hence, I am going to send a gift to them and see the response that our envoys bring." (The intelligent Queen made a prudent decision disregarding the advice of her loyal chiefs. She was cognizant of King Solomon's might, and she was impressed by the benevolent message in the letter)
The envoys reached Solomon with the gift and a letter from the Queen. Solomon said, "What! Do you want to please me with a gift of vanity? Allah has given me better than what He has given you (material wealth and Guidance). Nay, it is you who may exult in your gift." (Historically, the gift was studded with precious jewels and diamonds. Solomon, being a Prophet of God and a powerful emperor expected the Queen to denounce her hostile intentions in the region and to reflect about the One True God)
Solomon said to the envoys, "Go back to them, (and tell them that) we verily will come to them with forces they cannot withstand. We shall drive the leaders out of power and humiliate them to shame." (Historically the Kingdom of Sheba flourished from 1100 to 115 B.C. At their zenith they were the richest nation in the world. Their economy was based on excellent agriculture and international trade. They had the most advanced irrigation systems of the times, with great water dams. Their Kingdom included today's whole of Yemen, Somalia and Ethiopia, and boasting a strong army, they frequently had expansive designs further south and up north. As the inevitable result of worshiping multiple false deities, including the sun, their society was not without inequities of caste and creed. Solomon, the King and the Prophet, planned to subdue the Sheba Empire to thwart their aggressive designs and to protect the region from oppression. And he succeeded magnificently. Queen Bilqis of Sheba and her nation embraced Solomon's Message and reverted to the worship and obedience of the One True God)
(When Solomon found out that the Queen was coming), he said, "O Chiefs! Which one of you can present the best plan to get her throne before they come to me surrendering?" (1500 miles between Ma'arib, the capital of Sheba to Jerusalem)
One of the strong commanders of the mountain division said, "My troops can accomplish this mission with lightening speed, before you rise up to think of and assign anyone else. Behold, I am competent and trustworthy for this job
Another powerful commander, who had knowledge of the correspondence, said, "I can accomplish the mission even sooner, before your gaze returns to you (before you having to rethink)." (Solomon dispatched the forces, and the mission was smoothly accomplished. The Queen's throne was brought to Jerusalem before she arrived and) he saw it set in his presence. He said, "This success is a blessing from my Lord, that He may try me whether I am grateful or ungrateful. Whoever is grateful is grateful for his own good, and whoever is ungrateful, should know that my Lord is Self-Sufficient, Supremely Honorable
Solomon then said, "Alter her throne for her that we may see whether she gets the point and comes to guidance or she remains unguided." (Solomon's workmen had erased the images of the sun god, inscribed sensible inscriptions and made the throne look even more gorgeous)
So, when she came, she was asked, "Is your throne like this?" She said, "It seems that this is it! We already knew that the Truth is on your side and my chiefs and I have surrendered to it." (The previous knowledge about Solomon's character and Kingdom, the distinguished letters he wrote to her and reports by her envoys, and now his superb court had convinced the intelligent and open-minded Queen)
King Solomon redirected her from worshiping others than Allah. She had been one of the disbelieving folk, before. (Solomon advised her that obeying the Laws of Allah could bring not only the best provision in the world but insure eternal success. Queen Sheba embraced the Message and stopped worshiping the sun, and other creations of Allah)
She was escorted to the palace. It was said, "Enter the hall." When she saw the smooth polished glass floor, she thought that it was a pool of water and she was spellbound. ('Kashafat 'an saqaiha' idiomatically means that she was spellbound, and not that she bared her calves; a common error of many translators. For example, tying one's hand to the neck means miserliness). Solomon said, "This is a palace paved smooth with slabs of glass." She said, "I have been doing wrong to myself, and now I submit with Solomon to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds." (She realized that following the Divine Laws ensures the best bounties in this life as well. There are some historical accounts that Solomon and Bilqis got married. But the Rabbinical Talmudic traditions propose that they committed adultery then and there, out of which Nimrod Nebuchadnezzar, the tyrant emperor of Babylon was born! That is of course inconceivable of a Prophet of God)
And, indeed, We sent to Thamud their brother Saleh saying, "Serve Allah alone." They had become divided into two contending classes (the rich and the poor)
Saleh said, "O My people! Why do you hasten to commit evil instead of doing good? Why do you not (mend your ways and) ask Allah to forgive you, so that you may become worthy of His Mercy
They answered, "We consider you, and your companions a bad omen for us." He said, "Your omen is determined by Allah's Laws. Nay, you are but a folk who are being tested
Now there was a gang of nine leaders in the city who spread disorder in the land, and blocked all reform
They called a meeting and after swearing to one another in the name of Allah, said, "Indeed, we shall ambush him and his family by night, and afterward we shall boldly say to his tribe, We know nothing about their death. And, behold, we are men of truth
And so they devised an evil scheme. But Our ever-vigilant Law of Requital invariably has counter designs. And they perceived it not
Behold, then, how their scheme ended. Our Law annihilated them (the corrupt leaders) and their nation, all of them. (The excuse of the masses that their leaders had led them astray will be of no avail 14: 21-22, 34:31)
And now their dwellings are empty, ruined as an outcome of their violation of human rights. Herein, behold, is a sign for those who make use of what they learn
And We saved those who believed in Our Laws and walked aright
And Lot! (We saved likewise) as he said to his people, "Will you commit this abomination while you see and understand
You approach men with lust instead of women. Nay, you are people who disregard what you know
But the answer of his people was nothing but, "Expel Lot's followers from your town! For, they are people who show off to be pure
Thereupon We saved Lot, his household and his followers but his wife - whom We knew was destined to remain behind for her disbelief
And We rained a rain upon them. Dreadful is the rain for those who have been warned
Say, "All Praise to Allah and salutation on His servants whom He has raised in ranks!" Is Allah Best or the 'partners' people ascribe to Him
Nay, who is it that has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down for you water from the sky? And with it We cause to spring forth beautiful orchards. It was never of your doing to make the trees in them grow - any god beside Allah? Nay, they who think so are people who are deviating (from reality)
Nay, who is it that has made the earth habitable, and caused rivers to run through it, and has set upon it firm mountains, and has set a barrier between two great bodies of water - any god beside Allah? (25:53). Nay, most of them do not use their knowledge
Nay, who is it that responds to the distressed when he calls out to Him, and removes the distress, and made you mankind inheritors of the earth - any god beside Allah? (24:54-55). How seldom do you keep this in mind
Nay, who is it that shows you the way in the darkness of land and sea, and sends forth the winds as heralds of His Grace - any god beside Allah? Sublime, Exalted is Allah from all that they associate with Him
Nay, who is it that initiates creation, then reproduces it? And who is that provides for you from the heaven and the earth - any god beside Allah? Say, "If you think so bring your evidence if you are men of truth
Say, "None in the heavens and the earth knows the Unseen - none whatsoever but Allah. Nor do they perceive when they will be raised
Nay, their knowledge of the Hereafter stops short of conviction. Nay, they are in doubt concerning it. Nay, they block their mind in blindness from realizing (the unwavering Law of Requital)
And so, they who are bent upon denial say, "What! After we have become dust, and our forefathers, shall we indeed be brought forth again
Indeed we were promised this, and our forefathers. It is nothing but fables of ancient times
Say, "Travel in the land and see what has been the end of the guilty
And grieve not for them, nor distress yourself because of their plots
And they say, "When is this promise to be fulfilled, if you are men of truth
Say, "You are already going through some of the suffering you challenge
Now verily, your Lord is indeed limitless in His bounty to mankind, but most of them do not give thanks (by sharing with others)
But, verily, your Lord knows what their hearts conceal, and all that they proclaim
And there is nothing hidden in the heaven and the earth but it is in a clear Record
Behold, this Qur'an explains to the Children of Israel most of wherein they differ (such as the nature of Jesus)
And, verily, it is a Guidance and Grace for all who believe in it
Verily, your Lord will judge between them in His Wisdom, for, He is the Mighty, the Knower
Hence, put your trust in Allah alone, for, behold, you are taking stand on Truth self-evident
But verily, you cannot make the dead (or the "living-dead") hear, nor can you make the deaf of heart to hear the call when they turn back to retreat
Nor can you lead the blind of reason out of their error. You can only make those hear who believe in Our Signs, so they submit
Now, when the Word stands fulfilled against them (humanity paying no heed) We bring forth from among the humbled ones who tell them (by way of rebellion) that mankind has not had conviction in Our Laws. ((6:65). 'Dabbatam-min
And times shall come when defiance of Our Laws will cause forces from every nation to assemble in alliances and meet one another in combat
Till when they come worn out, (the Truth will become manifest to them, saying), "Did you deny My Messages because you failed to use your knowledge? Or what else was it that you were doing
And the Word shall be fulfilled about them since they had oppressed one another. And then, they will be dumbfounded
Do they not see that We have made the Night for them to rest in and the Day to give them light? Verily, in this are signs for any people who will believe. (The Divine Laws are as operational in the human society as they are in the Universe)
And on the Day when the Trumpet is sounded, everyone of the elite and of the humbled will be horrified, except such as Allah wills to exempt. And, all will present themselves to Him in humility. (6:74), (18:99), (20:102), (2)
And the powerful elite that you deem firm as mountains, will float around like weightless clouds. Such is the Design of Allah Who disposes off all things in perfect order. Verily, He is fully Aware of what you do
In those times nations that do good to humanity and make way for peace and security, will be best rewarded. (21)
But they who cause inequity in the world, will fall prone into the fire of humiliation. "Are you rewarded other than what you did
Say (O Prophet), "I am commanded to serve the Lord of this town (Makkah) - Him Who has made it sacred, and unto Whom all things belong. And I am commanded to be of those who surrender to Him
And to convey this Qur'an (to mankind). Whoever, therefore, goes right, goes right only for the good of his own "Self". And as for him who goes astray, say, "I am only a Warner
And say, "All Praise is due to Allah! In time He will make you see the Truth of His Messages, and then you shall recognize them." And your Lord is not unmindful of whatever you all may do
S.M. Toor-e-Sina, Moses. Commandments were given to Moses at Mount Sinai
Now these are Messages of the Book clear in itself and it makes things clear
We narrate to you some history of Moses and Pharaoh, setting forth the Truth for the benefit of those who will believe
Behold, Pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into castes. A tribe among them (the Israelites) he oppressed, killing their sons and sparing their women. Verily, he was of the corrupters. (2:49), (7)
But it was Our Will to bestow favor unto those who were oppressed in the land, and to make them leaders, and to make them inheritors
And to establish them in the earth, and to show Pharaoh (the King) and Haman (the Chief Adviser and High Priest) and their troops what they feared from the Israelites (rebellion)
We inspired the mother of Moses, "Nourish him and when you worry for his life, then (place him in a box and) cast him into the river, and have no fear nor grieve. We shall bring him back to you and make him one of Our Messengers
And the family of Pharaoh picked him up, not knowing that he would become an enemy unto them and a source of grief. That is because Pharaoh, Haman and their troops were a folk bent on committing fault upon fault
Now the wife of Pharaoh said, "A joy to the eye for me and you! Slay him not. He may well be of use to us, or we may adopt him as a son." And they perceived not (the future)
And the heart of the mother of Moses became void. She almost gave away his identity had We not strengthened her heart, so that she might remain a firm believer
And so she said to his sister, "Follow him -and the girl (the 12 year old Miriam) watched him from afar, while they were not aware
Now from the very beginning We caused him to refuse suckling from foster mothers. She (Miriam, the sister of baby Moses) said, "Shall I tell you of a family that can raise him for you and take good care of him
And thus We restored him to his mother so that her eye might be gladdened and that she might grieve no longer, and that she might know that Allah's Promise always comes true. But most of them know not
Now when Moses reached full strength and maturity, We blessed him with wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward those who live a balanced, virtuous life
And one day the young Moses entered the city at a time when most of its people were resting unaware of what was going on in the streets. And there he encountered two men fighting with each other. One was of his people (a Hebrew) and the other of his (Egyptian) adversaries. His tribesman cried out to him for help against the one who was of the enemies - Whereupon Moses struck him with his fist and thus, (accidentally) brought about his end. But then he said to himself, "This is of Satan's doing! Verily, he is an open enemy, a misleader." (Moses, not yet commissioned to Prophethood, was denouncing his emotions)
And he prayed, "My Lord! Verily, I have hurt my 'Self'. Forgive me then." And He forgave him - for, indeed, He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. (Moses had intended only to help the weak and not to kill the other man)
He said, "My Lord! For You have bestowed Your Grace on me, nevermore shall I be a supporter of the guilty
And next morning he was in the city, fearful and vigilant when, behold! The man who had asked him the day before cried out to him for help. Moses said to him, "You are indeed one erring manifestly
But then, as soon as he was about to lay his hands on their enemy the man said, "O Moses! Would you kill me as you killed a person yesterday? Your aim is to become a tyrant in the land, for you care not to be of those who set things right
And then and there a man came running from the other side of the city, and said, "O Moses! Behold, the chiefs are considering your case with a view to killing you. You better leave immediately. Verily, I am of those who wish you well
So he escaped from there, fearful, vigilant. He said, "My Lord! Save me from the oppressive people
As he turned his face towards Midyan, he said to himself, "It may well be that my Lord will guide me onto the right road
Now when he arrived at the wells of Midyan, he found a crowd of people watering their herds and flocks. And he found two women who were keeping away their flocks. He asked, "What is the matter with you?" They said, "We cannot water our flocks until the shepherds take back their flocks. And our father is a very old man
So he watered their flocks for them; then he turned back to the shade (of the tree he had been relaxing under). And he said, "My Lord! I am in dire need of any good that You bestow upon me and any opportunity that You provide me for doing good
Shortly afterwards, one of the two maidens came to him walking shyly, and said, "Behold, my father invites you, so that he might duly reward you for having watered our flocks for us." As soon as Moses came unto him and told him the story, he said, "Have no fear! You are now safe from those oppressive folk
Said one of the two maidens, "O My father! Hire him! For, the best one you can hire is the competent, the trustworthy
He (the father) said, "Behold, I am willing to let you marry one of these two daughters of mine on the understanding that you will remain eight pilgrimages (years) in my service. Then if you make it ten, it will be a grace from you. I do not want to impose any hardship on you. God Willing, you will find me righteous in all my dealings
He (Moses) said, "Be that the agreement between me and you. Whichever of the two terms I fulfill, there will be no injustice to me. And Allah be Witness to all that we say." (Moses married Shoaib's daughter Zipporah and in time they had two sons)
And when Moses had fulfilled his term, and was traveling with his family, he saw a fire on the slope of Mount Toor of Sinai. He said to his family, "Stay here. Behold, I have seen a fire. I hope to bring you some information from there, or a burning torch, that you may warm yourselves
But when he came close to it, he was called from the right side of the valley in the blessed field, from the tree, "O Moses! Behold! I, verily I am Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
(God said), "Rehearse your supporting power of Truth." Moses felt as if the mission assigned to him was like holding a huge dragon, and he retreated hesitating. (See (27:10) 'kannaha jann' -'as if it was a dragon, applies to the living Truth as well as to the great mission). We said, "O Moses! Draw near (to conviction), and fear not - for, behold, you are secure from harm." (7:107-108), (20:17-24), (26:32-3)
The Guidance enshrined in your heart will shine unblemished when you present it with confidence. And guard your heart against all fear. Then these two shall be your evidences from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs, (the Divine Truth and your confident presentation). Verily, they are people drifting away from Moral Values
Moses said, "My Lord! I killed a man among them and I am afraid they will kill me
And my brother Aaron - he is far better in speech than I am. Send him, therefore, as a helper, so that he might more eloquently bear witness to my speaking the truth. I am afraid that they will accuse me of lying
God said, "We shall strengthen your abilities with your brother, and We will give both of you power that they will not be able to touch you. By Our Commands! You shall triumph, - you two as well as those who follow you
But as soon as Moses came to them with Our clear Messages, they said, "This is a mysteriously fabricated lie. We have never heard such sermon from our ancestors
And Moses replied, "My Lord is best Aware as to who comes with Guidance from Him, and to whom the future belongs. Verily, the oppressors do not attain a happy state of mind
Pharaoh said, "O Chiefs! I did not know that you could have any god other than myself. Well, then, O Haman! Kindle me a fire for baking bricks and then build me a lofty tower so that I may have a look at the god of Moses - although, behold, I deem that he is of the liars
Thus Pharaoh and his forces continued to behave with unjust pride in the land - just as they thought that they would never have to appear before Us
And so We seized him and his armies, and threw them into the sea. And behold, what happened to those oppressors in the end
And We made them leaders, a pattern, of those who take people to the Fire, and no help shall they find on the Resurrection Day
In this world We did cause a rejection to follow them, and they shall be among the despised ones on the Day of Resurrection
And, indeed, We had given the Scripture to Moses, after We had annihilated several earlier communities, - to give Insight to people, and Guidance and Mercy, that they take heed
And (O Prophet) you were not present on the Western slope (of Mount Sinai) when We expounded the Commandments to Moses, nor were you among those who witnessed his times
Nay, but between them and you We brought forth many generations, and long was their life-span. And neither did you dwell among the people of Midyan, conveying to them Our Messages. Nay, but We have been sending Messengers
And neither were you present on the slope of Mount Sinai when We called Moses. But you are sent as an act of your Lord's Grace, to warn people to whom no Warner has come before you, so that they may reflect. ((32:3), (36:6). Prophet Ishmael, the ancestor of Arabs, cannot be considered a Prophet to them since Children of Ishmael multiplied and inhabited Arabia as the Arab community long after his death. See (2:125) and introduction to Surah 11 Hud
Otherwise, if disaster struck them as a result of their own actions, they might say, "Our Lord! Why did You not send a Messenger to us, that we might have followed Your Revelations and been of the believers
And yet, now that the Truth has come to them from Us, they say, "Why is he not given the like of what Moses was given?" (The supernatural miracles they had heard about). But, did not the generations before this Revelation reject the Truth of what Moses was given? They used to say, "Two examples of delusion, supporting each other (Moses and Aaron)! And they went ahead, "Behold, we refuse to accept either of the two (brothers)
Say, "Produce then, a Book from Allah that would offer better Guidance than either of these two (the Torah and the Qur'an) - and I shall follow it! Do it if you are men of truth
And since they cannot respond to this challenge of yours, know that they are only following their desires. And who could be more astray than he who follows his own desire, devoid of Guidance from Allah? For, Allah does not intervene to guide people who displace Reason with desire
Now, indeed, We have caused this Word to reach mankind step by step, so that they might take it to their heart. ('Wassalna' embraces 'step by step)
As for those whom We have given the Scripture before (and who understand that this Qur'an is a Divine Revelation like the ones before it) come to believe in this one as well
And whenever it is conveyed to them, they say, "We believe in it, for it is the Truth from our Lord. Indeed, even before it we have been of those who submit (to a Supreme Authority)
These will receive a twofold reward because they persevere, counter harsh behavior in a kind manner and distribute Our provision of guidance and sustenance among others
(Additionally) whenever they hear vain talk of ridicule, they withdraw from it decently and say, "To us our deeds and to you yours; Peace be upon you, we do not seek to join the ignorant
Verily, you cannot guide aright everyone you love, but it is Allah Who guides him who wishes to be guided. And He is best Aware of those who will be rightly guided. (2:272), (4:88)
They (the Quraish) say, "If we were to follow the Guidance to which you invite us, we would be torn away from our land." Why - Have We not established for them a Secure Sanctuary, to which are brought all kinds of produce, a provision from Our Presence? But most of them do not make use of what they know
And how many a town We annihilated, which exulted in their life of ease and plenty! Such that most of their dwelling places have remain deserted after them. For it is indeed We alone Who shall remain when all else have passed away
Yet, your Lord never destroyed townships unless He sent a Messenger in their midst (the big city) who conveyed Our Commands to them. And never did We destroy the townships unless the people thereof violated human rights
And whatever you have been given is a comfort and decor for the life of the world. And that which Allah has is better and more lasting. Will you not, then, use sense
Is, then, he to whom We have given a goodly promise which he shall see fulfilled comparable to the one whom We have given the good things of this life, but who on the Resurrection Day, is to be among those brought up for punishment
On the Day He will call unto them, and will ask, "Where, now, are My 'partners' that you imagined
Those against whom the charge will be proved, will say, "Our Lord! These are the ones we misled. We misled them only because we were astray ourselves. We now disown them before you. It was not us they worshiped
And it will be said, "Call upon all your 'partners'" - but the 'partners' will not answer them. Whereupon they will see the suffering - Ah, if they had allowed themselves to be guided
And on the Day when He will call them and say, "What answer did you give to the Messengers
On that Day all arguments (they used to contrive) will be dimmed for them, nor will they ask one another
But anyone who (in this life) repents and truly believes and helps others may well find himself among the successful
Your Lord does create and choose according to His Laws. No choice do they have (against the Divine Laws). Glorified is Allah and High above all that they associate with Him. (In the ongoing Evolution in the Universe, species and nations advance according to the Law of Natural Selection)
And your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal. (He is fully Aware of the subtle and manifest processes towards the fulfillment of His Plan)
For He is Allah, other than Whom there is no god. Unto Him is due all Praise, at the first and at the last. For Him is the Command, and to Him you shall be brought back
Say, "Will you consider this: If Allah were to make the Night last over you till the Resurrection Day, what god is there other than Allah, who can give you light? Will you not, then, listen to the Truth
Say, "Will you consider this: If Allah were to make the Day last over you till the Resurrection Day, what god is there other than Allah, who can give you a Night in which you can rest? Will you not, then, see the Truth
For it is out of His Grace that He has made for you Night and Day - that you might rest therein, and that you may seek of His bounty - and so that you may be grateful
And (think again) the Day He will call them, He will ask, "Where are My 'partners' whom you imagined
And from every community We shall draw a witness (their Prophet) and We shall say to the rejecters, "Bring your proof for what you used to claim." Then shall they know that the Truth is indeed with Allah, and all they used to fabricate will forsake them
Now, behold, Qaroon (Korah) was one of the people of Moses but he exalted himself and oppressed them (his own Hebrews). We had granted him such riches that his treasure-chests alone would have been a burden for a body of strong men ('miftah = key. 'maftah = chest under lock and key). Behold, his people said to him, "Exult not, for Allah does not love those who exult (in riches)." (Korah, a cousin of Moses, was the chief slave driver for Pharaoh, and for his wealth and advisory position he was next in power only to Pharaoh, and equal to Haman. Historically, this legendary "Trio" of despotism + priesthood + capitalism, has always joined hands in the exploitation of the masses)
But seek with the wealth Allah has bestowed upon you, the Home of the Hereafter. And do not forget your portion in this world. Be kind to people, as Allah has been kind to you. Do not create corruption and disorder in the land (such that the poor becomes poorer). Allah does not love the corrupters
He replied, "This wealth has been given to me because of the knowledge that is in me." Did he not know that Allah's Law of Requital had annihilated, before him, whole generations which were superior to him in strength and richer in what they had amassed? But such guilty need no questioning since their guilt is obvious and yet, they are not exempt from the Law of Respite
And so once he came out to his people in all his pomp. And those who cared only for the life of this world said, "Ah, we wish we had the like of what Qaroon has been given. Indeed, he is extremely fortunate
But those who knew better said, "Woe unto you! Merit in the Sight of Allah is far better for anyone who believes and works for equity among people. (The real wealthy is one who believes in Divine Laws, helps the needy, and creates balance in the society). This reward is reserved for those who do not fall for instant gains, and work hard steadfastly
And thereupon We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling. And he had none and nothing to help him against Allah's Laws, nor could he help himself
And those who had envied his position only the day before were saying the next morning, "Ah, it is indeed Allah Who makes the provision plenty or scarce for His servants according to His Laws. Had Allah not been kind to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us! Ah! The rejecters of the Truth can never attain lasting contentment
That Home of the Hereafter We shall give to those who do not seek to exalt themselves in the earth, nor do they seek corruption and disorder. And the Future belongs to those who walk aright
Anyone who brings actions that benefited others, the reward to him is better than what he has done. And anyone who is unfair in his dealings with others, such will be punished, but not more than the like of what they have done
Verily, He Who has made this Qur'an a binding duty upon you (O Believers), will assuredly direct you to the Destination of Bliss. Say, "My Lord is best Aware as to who is rightly guided and who is obviously lost in error." (The Path to the Destination of Bliss has been well expounded in this Book)
(O Prophet) you never expected that this Book will be bestowed upon you. But it is a Mercy from your Lord (to all humanity). Hence, never uphold those who deny the Truth
And let them not divert you from Allah's Revelations after they have been sent down unto you. But, invite people to your Lord and be not of the company of those who uphold systems other than the Divinely ordained System of Life
(Keeping pristine the Divinely ordained System of Life) call not upon human 'authorities' and man-made systems as gods side by side with Allah. There is no god but He. Everything is mortal except His Eternal Self. To Him belong all Governance and all Judgment, and unto Him you shall be returned
L.M. Allah, Aleem the Knower, Hakeem the Wise, says
Do people think that they will be left (at ease) simply because they say, "We believe", and will not be put to a test? (Nay! Mere belief such as belief in Blood Atonement will never suffice for Salvation and Success (2:214), (3:141), (9)
Yes, indeed, We did test those who lived before them. And so, most certainly, Allah will distinguish between those who are truthful from those who are liars
Do those who treat others unfairly think that they can escape Us (Our Laws)? Bad, indeed, is their judgment
One who looks forward to meeting with Allah, should have conviction that the end is bound to come - and He is the Hearer, the Knower
Hence, whoever strives (in the Cause of Allah), strives for the good of his own "Self". Allah is altogether Independent of His creation
As for those who come to believe and help others, We shall blot out their previous misdeeds, and We shall certainly reward them generously for what they do
(As among the best deeds) We have enjoined upon the human being kindness to parents. But, if they strive to make you ascribe divinity side by side with Me, this will conflict with your knowledge. Then, obey them not, for it is unto Me that all of you must return, whereupon I shall truly make you understand what you used to do
Those who accept the Divine Revelation and help create balance in the community, We will include them among those who have fulfilled their personalities
Now of mankind there are such who say, "We do believe in Allah." But when they are made to suffer in Allah's Cause, they think that persecution at the hands of people is Allah's punishment. And if help comes from your Lord, they say, "Behold, we were with you all the while." Is not Allah best Aware of what is in the hearts of all creatures
Verily, Allah knows those who believe, and verily He knows the pretenders
And some rejecters tell the believers, "Follow our way and we will bear your faults." Never in the least will they bear their faults. Behold, they are liars indeed
And they will bear their own burdens, and in addition, the burden of misguiding others. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will be called to account for the lies they invented
And, indeed, We sent Noah to his nation, and his Message survived among his followers a thousand years less fifty. The flood overwhelmed the rejecters, for they used to violate human rights
And We saved him and his followers on the ship and We made this a lesson for all people
(Over a thousand years after Noah, about the same location in Ur, Mesopotamia) Abraham - when he said to his people, "Serve Allah and be mindful of Him. If you bring this fact in the realm of your knowledge you will see that it is better for you
You worship idols instead of Allah and spread false news about their powers. Behold, those you worship instead of Allah (such as the priesthood of the temple), do not own your provision. (If you establish the Divine System), Allah will guarantee honorable provision for you. Then, serve Him alone and be grateful by sharing His bounties with others. Unto Him you shall be brought back
And if you deny - well, nations before you have denied the Truth (and suffered the consequences). The duty of a Messenger is only to convey the Message clearly
Do they not see how Allah originates creation, then repeats it? (Think of the emergence of organic matter, its decay and then re-emergence of life). This, verily, is easy for Allah
Say, "Travel in the earth and find out how He originated creation. And how afterward, Allah brings forth entirely new forms. Verily, Allah is the Designer of all things
He requites individuals and nations according to His Laws, and bestows Mercy according to His Laws. And you are obliged to draw consequences from Him
And never - not in decline and not in rise - can you hope to defy His Laws, and there is no protector or helper for you other than Allah. (In the context of change and evolution, the earth and the sky are here metaphorically applied to the low or high state of nations)
And thus it is: Those who deny Allah's Messages and meeting with Him - it is they - who shall abandon all hope of My Grace. And for them is an awful doom. (They disbelieve in the glad tidings and in the Law of Eternal Recompense)
(Abraham explained these facts to his people) but their only answer was, "Kill him or burn him alive!" But Allah saved him from their fiery rage. Behold, in this story there are signs for believers (such as, when people have no sensible answers, they resort to threats and violence (21:6)
And Abraham said, "You have chosen idols (and their priests) instead of Allah, out of regard for your social bonds, good enough only in this worldly life. But then, on the Resurrection Day you shall reject one another and curse one another. And the Fire will be your destination, and there shall be no helpers for you
And Lot believed in him all along. Abraham said, "I will quit this domain of evil and migrate in the Cause of my Lord, for He is Almighty, the Wise." (37:99). (From the Kingdom of Nimrod Shaddad, Abraham emigrated to Syria-Canaan. Lot who was Abraham's nephew, was later commissioned as a Prophet and sent to Sodom and Gomorrah by the Dead Sea)
And We bestowed upon Abraham (a son) Isaac, and (a grandson) Jacob, and caused Prophethood and Revelation to continue among his progeny. And We gave him his reward in this world, and verily, in the life to come he shall be among those who have perfected their personality
And Lot said to his nation, "Verily, you commit lewdness such as no people in Creation ever committed before you
Do you not indeed approach males, and cut off the way of Nature? Do you not commit highway robbery? And do you not commit shameful vices openly in your assemblies?" But his people's only answer was, "Bring down upon us the punishment of Allah if you are a man of truth
He prayed, "My Lord! Help me against people who spread corruption and disorder
When Our Messengers brought the glad news to Abraham (of a son Isaac), they also said, "We are appointed to herald the annihilation of that town, for its people are wrongdoers." (Abraham lived in Hebron, Palestine about 1800 B.C. From the heights in Hebron they could see the Valley of Sodom by the Dead Sea)
Abraham said, "But Lot is also there." They said, "We know fully well who dwell there. We will certainly save him, his household and his followers - all but his wife - she will be of those that stay behind (since she has stayed behind in belief)." ('Ahl' of a Prophet includes his household and his followers. (7:80-84), (11:70-89), (15:59), (21:71-76), (26:161-167), (27:5)
When Our Messengers came to Lot, he was grieved on their account, for he could not protect them. But they said, "Fear not, nor grieve! Behold, we are appointed to save you, your household and your followers, except your wife who is of those who stay behind
Verily, we are about to herald the heavenly Requital upon the people of this town because of their drifting away from Divine Values
And so it was - Therein indeed, We have left a Clear Sign for people who use their intellect. (The Dead Sea to this day is known as 'Bahr Lut' = The Sea of Lot and it remains devoid of plant and fish life)
And unto Midyan We sent their brother Shoaib (Jethro). He said, "O My people! Serve Allah, and look forward to the Last Day, the life to come, and do not act wickedly on earth spreading disorder and corruption
But they denied him. Thereupon a dreadful rainstorm and earthquake overtook them, and morning found them dead, prone in their homes
And (the tribes of) Aad and Thamud! Their fate is manifest to you from their ruined dwellings. Satan had made their doings seem goodly to them, and thus had barred them from the Path. And they were people who were endowed with vision
And such is the story of Qaroon (Korah) and Pharaoh and Haman! (They represented wealth, tyranny and priesthood, respectively, that go hand in hand in exploiting people). To them had come Moses with all evidence of the Truth, but they remained arrogant in the land. And surely, they could not escape. (
For, every one of them We took to task for his trailing behind in human virtue. And so, upon some of them We let loose a deadly storm wind; and some of them were overtaken by a sudden blast; and some of them We caused to be swallowed by the earth; and some of them We caused to drown. And it was not Allah who wronged them, but it was they who wronged themselves. (The Law of Requital never discriminates between people, whether individuals or nations)
The likeness of those who choose patrons other than Allah, is that of the spider which makes for itself a house. And, behold, the frailest of all houses is the spider's house, if they would make use of what they know. (Its web easily traps the weak but cannot withstand the least bit of pressure)
Verily, Allah knows whatever they call upon instead of Him - for, He is Almighty, Wise
And so We cite examples for mankind, but men of Science will make best use of their intellect. ('Aalim = Scientist. (30:22-23)
(It is they who can best understand that) Allah has created the heavens and the earth with a definite Purpose. Verily, in that is a Sign for those who wish to attain conviction in the Truth
(O Prophet) convey to people all that is revealed to you of the Book, and establish the Divine System. For, verily, establishment of the Divine System will shut off lewdness, stinginess and behavior contrary to the Divine Values. This is so, because Allah's Law is the Greatest Law that can give you eminence. And (O People) Allah knows whatever you contrive on your own. (21:10), (21:24), (23:70), (43:43-44), (70:21-27) - 'Fahasha' includes miserliness and 'Munkar' is all behavior that goes against Divine Values given in the Qur'an
(The Divine System will be the Living Truth in itself, so) argue not with the People of the Scripture except in a most kind manner. Tell those who adamantly relegate the Truth, "We believe in the Divine Origin of what has been bestowed upon us, as well as what has been bestowed upon you. For, our God and your God is One and the same and to Him we surrender." ((2:79). 'Zulm' = To relegate or displace something from its rightful place
And thus it is! We have bestowed this Book upon you (O Prophet). And many of those whom We gave the previous Scriptures will come to believe in it. (5:48). Also, many of your people will believe in it. And none could knowingly reject Our Messages except such as would deny an obvious Truth
For, (O Prophet) you were never able to read a book or Scripture before this (Qur'an), nor could you write anything with your own hand. Or else, they who try to disprove the Truth might have some cause to doubt it. ((2:23). 'Biyameenik' = With your right hand = With your own hand
Nay, but this consists of Messages clear to the hearts of all who are gifted with the knowledge of discretion. And none could knowingly reject Our Messages except such as would relegate the Truth
And yet they say, "Why are not miracles bestowed upon him from his Lord?" Say, "These Verses are in themselves miraculous Signs concerning Allah and with Him are the miracles (you behold in the Universe). And as for me, I am but a plain Warner (drawing your attention to His Signs and to the consequences of your actions)
Why - Is it not enough of a miracle for them that We have bestowed upon you this Book that is conveyed to them? For, verily, herein is Grace, and a Reminder, a giver of eminence to people who will accept it
Say, "Allah suffices as Witness between me and you. He knows everything in the heavens and the earth. (6:136). Those who are bent upon believing in falsehood, and thus denying Allah - it is they, they who shall be the losers
Now they challenge you to hasten the requital. And indeed, if the term had not been set for it, that requital would have come upon them. (The Law of Respite applies to all people). Certainly, it will come upon them all of a sudden, while they perceive not
They keep asking you to hasten the requital, but verily, Hell surrounds the rejecters of the Truth every moment of their lives. ((79:36), (82:16). And every action is getting instantly imprinted on each "Self
The Day will come when suffering overwhelms them from above them and from beneath their feet, and He will say, "Taste now the fruit of your own doings
O You servants of Mine who have attained belief! Behold, vast is My earth; serve Me then, Me alone! (Live by Divine Values and work for the establishment of the Divine System wherever you may live)
(To that noble end strive with all you have, even with your lives since) every living being is bound to taste death. And then, all of you will be returned to Us
Whereupon to all those who have attained belief, and worked for the betterment of humanity We shall certainly assign mansions in the Garden underneath which rivers flow, therein to abide. How excellent a reward for the workers
Those who are steadfast in adversity and in ease, and put their trust in their Lord
How many are the creatures that carry not their own sustenance? It is Allah Who provides for them and you, for He is the Hearer, the Knower. (Establishment of the Divine System ensures honorable provision for everyone (6)
And thus it is - if you ask them, "Who is it that has created the heavens and the earth, and made subservient the sun and the moon?" They will answer, "Allah". How come, then, are they lost in the wilderness of thought! (The Creator must be the Law-giving Authority to mankind as He is in the entire Universe. (21:20-22), (23:84-88), (31:25), (3)
Allah widens His provision to His servants (societies) according to His Laws, and He restricts it accordingly. For, Allah is Knower of all things (not excluding the best socio-economic Order for mankind)
And thus it is - if you ask them, "Who is it that sends down water from the height, and gives life with it to the earth, after it is has been dead?" They will surely answer, "Allah." Say, "(Since this is so) all Praise is due to Allah alone!" But the majority of people fail to use their intellect (and realize that His Guidance can revive the living-dead and the 'dead' nations)
For, (if they did, they would understand that) the life of this world is nothing but a pastime and play - whereas, behold, the life in the Home of the Hereafter is the true life, if they but knew (that their actions in this short life will determine their Eternal abode)
And so (are they lost in this passing delight that), when they embark on a boat, they call unto God, sincere in their faith in the Divine Laws. But as soon as He has brought them safe ashore, behold, they resume their idolatry in various forms
And thus they show ingratitude for all that We have given them, and go on thoughtlessly enjoying life. But soon will they know
Have they not seen that We have set up a Sacred Sanctuary that We made a source of peace and security for people - while - all around them people are being carried away by fear and insecurity? Will they still believe in falsehood, and thus deny Allah's Blessing? (The Divine System frees people from fear and insecurity)
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than he who invents a lie and attributes it to Allah, or denies the Truth when it comes to him? Is not there a home in Hell for those bent upon rejection
As for those who sincerely strive for Us, We surely guide them onto paths that lead to Us. (New channels keep opening for them leading them out of the spider's web onto the Straight Path). Indeed, Allah is with the benefactors of Humanity
L.M. Allah Aleem the Knower, Hakeem the Wise, narrates that
The Romans have been defeated
In the lands close-by - yet it is they who despite this defeat of theirs, shall be victorious
Within ten years! For with Allah is the Command in the Past and in the Future. And on that day the believers too will have cause to rejoice
By Allah's Help - for, He gives success to people according to His Laws. He is the Mighty, the Merciful
This is Allah's Promise. Never does Allah fail to fulfill His Promise. But most people know not (that His Laws never change)
They know and care only about the apparent instant gratifications of the life of this world, and remain oblivious to the Eternal life to come
Have they never learned to think for their own "Self"? Allah has not created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them without Truth and for a Purpose and an appointed time. Yet, verily, a great many of people deny that they are destined to meet their Lord
(Reflecting on your own existence, the Universe, and on history can show you the Truth.) Have they not, then, traveled in the land and seen what happened in the end to those who lived before them? They were more powerful than these are, and they left a stronger impact on the earth, and built it up better than these are doing. And to them came their Messengers with all evidence of the Truth. It was not Allah Who wronged them, but it was they who used to wrong their own "Self". (
And once again - miserable is the end of those who deal with others unfairly, and since they denied Allah's Messages and ridiculed them (they failed to reform)
(All this happens to nations according to Divine Laws that are operational in the entire Universe.) He initiates the creation, and then repeats. Ultimately, all of you will be returned to Him
And on the Day when the Hour will come those who have committed crimes against humanity, will be struck with despair
Their 'idols' will not be able to stand up for them, rather, they will reject one another
On the Day the Hour comes, they will part company. And people will be sorted out
As for those who attained belief and fulfilled the needs of others, they will be made happy in a Meadow of delight. (4)
Whereas those who rejected Our Messages in word or denied them in action, and denied the inevitable life to come, such will be given over to doom
Extol, then, Allah's limitless Glory evening and morning. (Find eminence through His Reminder in the twilight and dawn of your lives, whether individuals or nations. (21:10), (23:71), (2)
Seeing that the heavens and the earth bear an open testimony that all Praise is due to Him, whether you observe them in the darkness of the night or in full blast of the daylight
He it is Who brings forth the living out of the dead and brings forth the dead out of the living. And gives life to the earth after it had been lifeless. And thus it is - that you will be brought forth. (And thus can His Guidance revive nations)
And among His Signs it is that He created you out of dust - and then, behold, you become human beings ranging widely. (6:2), (6:99), (7:11), (15:26), (21:30), (2)
And among His Signs is this: He created for you mates from yourselves, so that you might find comfort in them. And He ordained between you love and kindness. In this, behold, are Signs for people who think. (AZWAJ = Husband + Wife, that are mates to, and complement each other towards fulfillment of each other's personality)
And of His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your tongues and colors. Herein, behold, are Signs for those who make best use of what they learn
And among His Signs is your sleeping during the night or the day, and your quest of His Bounty. Herein indeed are Signs for people who hear and listen
And among His Signs is this: He displays before you the lightning, for a fear and for hope, and sends down water from the height, giving life to the earth after it had been lifeless. Herein, behold, are Signs for people who use their intellect
And among His Signs is this: The Sky and the Earth stand by His Command. In the end, when He will call you forth with a single call, behold, you will emerge from the earth
For, unto Him belongs every being in the heavens and the earth. All are obedient to Him
And He it is Who initiates creation in the first instance, and then brings it forth anew, and it is most easy for Him. His is the Sublime Similitude in the heavens and in the earth. ((30:11). Light of the heavens and the earth He is (24:35)). He is the Mighty, the Wise
He gives you an example from your own society. Would you agree to make your employees equal partners in the provision We have bestowed upon you? Are you as mindful of them as you are mindful of yourselves? (So do you conceive of a 'discriminating' God!) Thus do We explain Our Messages for people who use their intellect
But nay, the transgressors follow their own opinions without knowledge. But who can guide him whom Allah has let go astray for violating His Laws of Guidance (4:88)? For such there are no helpers
Therefore, set your purpose for the Upright System of Life. That resonates with Allah's Law of Origination (of the Universe) including the origination of mankind. Allah's Law of and for His Creation is unchangeable and, therefore, trustworthy. This Universal System is Perfect, but most people know not. (Allah has initiated the Universe with a Sublime Plan wherein all things are committed to His Law, and mankind being a part of that Plan, must live by His Law)
Turn unto Him alone then, and be mindful of Him, and establish the Divine System and be not of the MUSHRIKEEN who ascribe authorities along with Him
The MUSHRIKEEN who split up their religion, and become sects - each sect delighting in whatever beliefs they have. ((3:104), (6:160), (23:53), (42:13). Sectarianism is invariably based upon taking humans as 'authorities
Now when harm touches people they call unto their Lord, turning to Him alone. But as soon as He lets them taste Grace from Him, behold, some of them revert to worshiping their 'idols
This is how they show ingratitude for the Guidance We have given them. Enjoy yourselves awhile, but soon you will come to know
Have We ever sent down to them any authority that tells them to commit SHIRK (associate others with God)
And thus it is: When We let people taste Grace they are quick to rejoice therein. But when adversity befalls them as a result of their own works - behold, they are in despair! (Constancy in personality is attainable only by living upright)
Have they not seen that Allah enlarges the provision on whatever nation it is, according to His Law, and restricts it likewise? Behold, herein indeed are Signs for nations who will believe in the Divine Laws
Hence, give to the relative his God-given Right, and to the needy, and whose business has stalled, and who has lost his job, and whose hard-earned income is insufficient to meet the basic needs, and the homeless son of the street, the needy traveler and the one who has traveled to you for help. This is best for those who seek Allah's Approval, for, it is they who are truly successful. (The Divinely ordained Economic Order will ensure equity and prosperity for all)
And the wealth you give in usury in order that it may increase on other people's money has no increase with Allah. But that you give in charity, seeking Allah's Approval, these are the ones who will have their return multiplied. (2:275-276), (
Allah is He Who has created you and then has provided you with sustenance, and then will cause you to die, and then will bring you to life again. Are there any of your 'partners' who can do any single one of these things? Glorious is He, and Sublimely Exalted Above the 'partners' they associate with Him
Rampant corruption and disorder have appeared in the land and in the sea because of what people keep doing. He will let them taste some of their doings, so that they might return to the Right Path
Say, "Travel in the land and notice the outcome of nations before you. Most of them worshiped idols in various forms (and ran man-made systems)
Set your purpose resolutely for the Perfect Religion, before the Inevitable Day comes from Allah. On that Day people will be in two groups
Whoever rejects the Truth will suffer from that rejection, whereas all who do constructive deeds, will make goodly provision for themselves
That He may reward out of His Bounty, those who accept the Message, and work to help others. Verily, He does not love those who refuse to acknowledge the Truth
And of His Signs is this: He sends forth the winds that bear glad tiding, so that He might give you a taste of His Grace. And that ships might sail at His Command and so that you might go about seeking His Bounty, and that you might have cause to be grateful
And indeed, We did send Messengers before you to their respective people - and they brought them clear evidence of the Truth. And then, We (Our Law of Requital) inflicted Our retribution on those who stole the fruit of others' labor and violated human rights. And We have made it incumbent upon Us to help the believers
(Divine Guidance is a blessing for humanity just as) it is Allah Who sends forth the winds that raise clouds, and then spreads them along the high atmosphere according to His Laws. And causes them to pile up and then break and you see the rain pouring down from within them. And when He makes it to fall on His servants by His Laws, behold, they rejoice
Even though before that, before it was sent down upon them, they were in despair
Behold then these Signs of Allah's Grace - how He revives the earth after it had been lifeless. Verily, He is the Reviver of the Dead, and He is the Appointer of due measure of all things. (Similarly, His Guidance can revive individuals and nations)
But thus it is: if We send a wind and they behold it yellow (sand-storm), verily, they still continue in rejection of the Truth (that all things in the Universe take place according to Divine Laws)
And verily, you cannot make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf of heart to hear the call when they turn their backs and go away
Nor can you bring the blind of heart out of their straying. You can make none to hear except those who believe in Our Messages (using their Vision) and are willing to live in submission to God
It is Allah who creates you weak (as infants), then gives you after the weak state strength, then substitutes after the strength weakness and gray hair. All this happens according to His Laws of Creation. And He is the Knower, the Able
(Since your life is short, your time is precious.) On the Day when the Hour rises, the guilty will swear that they lived in this world no more than an hour, (and that they didn't have time to reform). In fact they were wandering aimlessly through life
But those who have been endowed with knowledge and conviction will say, "Indeed you did last within Allah's decree, until the Resurrection Day. (Your "Self" never died). Now, this is the Resurrection Day that you never acknowledged
And so on that Day no apologies of the wrongdoers will avail them, nor will they be allowed to make amends
And verily, We have given numerous examples in the Qur'an for mankind. But even if you came with a miracle, those who are bent on denying would say, "You are only falsifiers
In this way does Allah seal the hearts of those who wish not to learn
Remain then, steadfast and remember that Allah's Promise is always True. So let not those who have no conviction disturb your mind
L.M. Allah Aleem the Knower, Hakeem the Wise, narrates that
These are the Messages of the Book, full of Wisdom
Providing Guidance and Mercy to those who wish to live a balanced life and do good to humanity
Such people strive to establish the Divine System and set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat. For, it is they who have conviction in the Eternity of the human "Self" and, hence, in the life to come
They are the ones who are on the Guided Path of their Lord and they are the ones who will be ultimately successful
But among people, there are those who invest their time in HADITH which is unfounded, so as to lead those without knowledge away from the Path of Allah, making mockery of it (the Qur'an). For such there is shameful punishment in store
Whenever Our Verses are conveyed to such a purchaser of Hadith, he turns away in arrogance as if he never heard them - as if there were deafness in his ears. So give him the tidings of a painful doom
Whereas those who believe in the Word of Allah and fulfill the needs of others, for them are the Gardens of delight
To abide therein according to Allah's true promise. For, He is the Mighty, the Wise
He has created the skies without any pillars and supports that you can see, and has placed firm mountains upon the earth, lest it sway with you, and He has dispersed therein all kinds of creatures. And We send down water from the sky, and thus We cause plants of every goodly kind to grow therein. (Mountains resulted millions of years ago as the earth was cooling off and the earth crust was shrinking (1)
All this is Allah's creation. Now show Me what others instead of Him may have created. Nay, but those who relegate the Truth are obviously lost in error
And indeed, We granted this Wisdom to Luqman, "Be practically grateful to Allah, for whoever is grateful is but grateful for the good of his own "Self". And whoever chooses to be ungrateful, must know that Allah is Self-Sufficient, Owner of all Praise
And, behold, Luqman, enlightening his son, said this to him, "O My dear son! Never associate anyone with Allah, for, verily, SHIRK (believing in Law-givers besides Him) is a tremendous wrong
(And O My dear son! Allah says) - We have ordained upon man goodness to his parents. His mother bore him by bearing strain upon strain, and his utter dependence on her lasted no less than two years. (2:233), (46:15). Hence, be grateful to Me and to your parents, and remember that your ultimate destination is with Me
Yet, if they strive to make you ascribe partners to Me, that shall be obviously contrary to what you have learned - then obey them not. However, let your company be kind to both in this world. Follow the path of those who turn toward Me. In the end the return of you all is unto Me, and then I shall explain to you what you truly accomplished in life
O My little son! Verily, know that something even as tiny as a mustard seed, deep inside a rock, or in the Highs or in the Lows, Allah will bring it forth. For, behold, Allah is Sublime, Aware
O My dear son! Strive to establish the Divine System wherever you are, and advocate the doing of what is right and forbid the doing of what is contrary to the Permanent Values. And remain steadfast in the face of whatever may befall you by way of opposition and persecution. All this, behold, will require unwavering determination
And never be arrogant with people, and walk not haughtily on the earth. Behold, Allah does not love any bragging boaster. (1)
Hence, be modest in your pace and in your bearing, and lower your voice, for, behold the harshest voice is the braying of a donkey
(This was some of the wisdom Luqman was endowed with.) Do you not realize that Allah has made of service to you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth? And He has lavished upon you His Blessings, tangible and intangible. And yet, among people are those who argue about Allah without exploring the realm of knowledge, without taking the right approach, or a Book giving Light
And when such people are told to follow what Allah has revealed, they say, "Nay, we follow that which we have found our fathers doing." What! Even though Satan had invited them to the doom of Flames
Now whoever submits his whole being to Allah and is a doer of good to others, has indeed grasped the Strongest Bond (2:256). And Allah's Laws determine the outcome of all things and actions. (WAJH = Face = Whole being)
And let not the disbelief of the rejecters grieve you. To Us is their return, and then We shall explain to them all they truly accomplished. Verily, Allah is Knower of what is in the hearts
We will let them enjoy themselves for a little while - but ultimately We shall drive them to a heavy doom
And thus it is: If you ask them, "Who is it that has created the heavens and the earth?" They will answer, "Allah". Say, "All Praise is due to God - for, most of them do not know (that His Laws, too, are praiseworthy and worth implementing in your lives)
Unto Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. (His Law is operative in the entire Universe). Verily, Allah! He is Independent, Owner of all Praise (and the Universe is a living witness to that)
And if all the trees on earth were pens, and the sea were ink, with seven more seas yet added, the Words of Allah would not be exhausted (18:109). Verily, Allah is Almighty, Wise
Your creation and your raising again are only as that of a single life cell. Verily, Allah is the Hearer, the Knower
Do you not see that it is Allah Who makes the night grow longer by shortening the day, and makes the day longer by shortening the night? And that He has subjected the sun and the moon to His Laws, each running along its course for an appointed term? (13:2). Isn't He Aware of all you do
Thus it is - since Allah, He is the True, and what they call upon instead of Him is the False. He is the Exalted, the Great
Have you not seen how the ships speed through the sea carrying Allah's blessed provisions - so that He might show you some of His Signs? Herein, behold, are Messages for every person who would patiently observe the Nature and be grateful for learning
And so, when violent waves surround them like shadows of gloom, they call unto Allah, sincere in their faith in Him (and work according to Divine Laws). But as soon as We save them ashore, some of them compromise (with falsehood). Yet none could knowingly reject Our Messages unless he is a betrayer to his own "Self", ungrateful for such blessing
O Mankind! Be mindful of your Lord, and stand in awe of the Day when no parent will be of avail to his child, nor a child will in the least avail his parent. Verily, Allah's Promise is True. Let not (the instant gratifications of) the life of this world deceive you. And let not yourselves be distracted from Allah by anyone who deceives you (contrary to what Allah has told you about Himself in this Revelation)
Verily, with Allah alone rests the knowledge of the Hour; He it is Who sends down rain; and He Alone knows what is in the wombs. No one knows what he will reap tomorrow, and no one knows in what land he will die. Verily, Allah alone is Knower, Aware. (Hour = The Great Revolution + Resurrection ; Rain = Resurgence of humanity ; What is in the wombs = Of what character the offspring will turn out to be ; Reap tomorrow = What will happen to him tomorrow ; Land = Circumstance)
L.M. Allah Aleem the Knower, Hakeem the Wise, narrates that
This Book is, beyond any doubt, a Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds
And yet they assert, "He has invented it." Nay, it is but the Truth from your Lord, for you to warn a folk to whom no Warner has come before you, and so that they might get the Right Guidance. (Prophet Ishmael was the ancestor of, and not a Prophet to, the Arabs who became a community long after he passed on. See note (2:125), (28:46), (36:6). And the Message is to fan out from Arabia to all mankind (2:185), (3:3), (3:137), (6:19), (6:91), (10:2), (14:1), (25:1), (30:58), (39)
Allah it is Who has created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six stages, and is established on the Throne of His Almightiness of Supreme Control (7:54). You have no patron and no intercessor beside Him. Will you not, then, bear this in mind
He governs all that exists, from the celestial Highs to the Lows. And all things evolve higher to what they are meant to be in such stages where a single Day before Him equals a thousand years according to your count. (22:47, 35:10. And some of these stages span fifty thousand years each, of your count)
Such is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Mighty, the Merciful
Who created everything in perfect balance. Thus He initiated the creation of man (kind) from hydrated inorganic matter
Then He made him to be reproduced out of the essence of a humble fluid. (The inorganic matter was hydrated and from its extract life was initiated. Eventually, the evolution reached a point when procreation with male and female gametes was established)
(Then Emergent Evolution took place that distinguished humans from the Animal Kingdom.) He shapes him in accordance with what he is meant to be, and breathes into him (something) of His Energy. (This something is a special gift to the humans in the form of free will). And thus (O Mankind) He gives you the faculties of hearing, and sight, and feelings as well as minds. Yet, how seldom are you grateful by making the best use of your perceptual and conceptual faculties
For, they say, "What! After we have been lost in the earth, shall we indeed be created anew?" Nay, but they deny the Truth that they are destined to meet their Sustainer
Say, "The angel of death who is assigned for you, will collect you, and then you will be returned to your Lord." (The body dies but the "Self" lives on according to the Law of death)
If only you could see the guilty when they bend low their heads before their Lord, "Our Lord! We have now seen and heard. Return us, then, that we may do good works, for, now we are sure
Had We so Willed, We could indeed have imposed Our Guidance upon every human being (like other creatures without free will). But the Word from Me will come true - I will fill Hell with people, rural and urban all together. (A great many people will succumb to their desires (15:39-40)
It will be said, "Taste you then, for you remained oblivious of this Day of yours, and so, now We forget you - taste the lasting doom for what you used to do
Only they truly believe in Our Messages who, when they are reminded of them, fall into complete submission adoring, and strive hard to manifest their Sustainer's Praise. (They establish the Divine System that is the living evidence of how benevolent His Guidance is). And they are never given to false pride
They forsake their 'comfort zone' in calling people to their Lord, fearing that they have not done enough and hoping to do better. And they keep open for the needy the provision that We have given them. ('Madhaje' = Beds = Present circumstances = Comfort zone)
And no human being can imagine what blissful delights are kept hidden for them as a reward for what they used to do
Is then, he who was a believer like the one who drifted away from the Divine Values? Nay, these two are not alike
As for those who attain belief and develop their personalities by fulfilling the needs of others - are Gardens of Resort, as a welcome, for what they did
But as for those who drifted away from the Truth, their Retreat will be the Fire. As often as they try to come out of it, they will be brought back into it. It will be said to them, "Taste the torment of the Fire that you used to deny
And verily, We make (the violators of the Divine Law) taste the punishment closer at hand before the Greater punishment, so that they might return to righteousness
And who does a greater wrong than he who is reminded of his Lord's Messages, then turns away from them? Verily, We shall requite all those who violate human rights by stealing the fruit of others' labor. ('Mujrim' = One who steals the fruit of the toil of others)
And, indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture. So be not in doubt of his receiving it, and We appointed it a Guidance for the Children of Israel. (Therein is a lesson about the outcome of the deniers of Divine Revelation)
We appointed among them leaders who led them by Our Command since they were steadfast in their commitment and had conviction in Our Revelations
(But later, the Children of Israel divided among themselves and lost their glory.) Verily, your Lord will decide between them on the Resurrection Day, regarding everything they disputed
Is it not a guidance for them to realize how many generations We annihilated before them - in whose dwelling places they now go to and fro? Verily, in this, behold, are Signs. Will they not, then, listen
Have they not seen how We lead water onto barren land, and thereby bring forth crops providing food for their cattle and for themselves (20:54)? Have they not the vision
But they keep saying, "When will that decision be, if you are truthful?" (When will this Message bear fruit)
Say, "On the Day of Decision (when the rejecters of the Truth will be overwhelmed), pronouncement of belief shall be of no avail to the rejecters then, nor will they be given further respite
So withdraw from them and wait (for the Truth to unfold). Behold, they too are waiting
O Prophet! Be mindful of Allah and heed not the deniers of the Truth and the hypocrites. Verily, Allah is Knower, Wise
And follow that which is revealed to you from your Lord. Allah is Aware of all you people do
And put your trust in Allah, for, Allah is Sufficient as Guardian
Allah did not give any man two hearts in his chest. (You cannot be a believer and a disbeliever at the same time). And He never regards your wives as your mothers because of your senseless utterances, such as your declaring them as your mothers. (2:226), (58:2-4). Nor does He regard your adopted sons as your biological sons. These are mere words that you utter with your mouths, but Allah declares the Truth and shows the Way
Name your adopted children after their fathers; that is more just in the Sight of Allah. And if you do not know who their fathers were, then they are your brothers, sisters and friends in Faith. (You shall treat them as family members). There is no blame on you for an unintentional mistake. What counts is the intention of your hearts, for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves and their own people. (Seeing that he is as a father to them), his wives are their mothers. In accordance with Allah's decree the relatives have a higher claim (in matters of inheritance) than other believers and the immigrants. Nevertheless, you are to deal with your friends in kindness. All this is recorded in this well-written and well-scored Book. (2:180,) (4:11), (9:111), (3)
And, behold, We did take a pledge from all the Prophets - from you (O Prophet) as well as from Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus son of Mary - We took a very solemn pledge from all of them
That he might assign responsibility only to the truthful. And to warn that He has readied grievous suffering for the rejecters
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Remember Allah's blessing on you, when there came down on you armies (enemy troops from different clans laid siege around Madinah). But We sent against them a violent wind, and forces that you saw not (courage, steadfastness and discipline). And Allah is ever Seer of what you do, how you act
Behold, they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when eyes were terrified, and hearts throbbed, and you began to entertain doubts about Allah
There and then were the believers tried, and shaken with a mighty shock
And recall when the hypocrites and those who had doubt in their hearts, said to one another, "Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion
A group among them said, "O You people of Yathrib! There is no stand possible for you, so, go back." And some of them even sought permission of the Prophet, saying, "Behold, our homes are exposed (to the enemy)." (With the believers firmly entrenched around the town) their homes were not really exposed. They wanted nothing but to flee. (Yathrib = Madinah)
Now if the enemy had invaded the town from all sides and these hypocrites were asked to inflict harm on the believers, they would have done so without delay
Although before that they had pledged to Allah that they would not turn their backs (to Faith and against invasion). A pledge to Allah must be answered for
Say, "Flight will not avail you if you flee from death or being killed. You are not to enjoy life but for a little while
Say, "Who is there that could keep you away from Allah if He intends harm for you, or Grace for you?" They will not find that they have any patron or helper other than Allah
Allah already knows those of you who hinder, and those who say to their groups, "Come you here unto us!" And rarely do they mobilize for defense
They are miserly in dealing with you (believers). But when danger threatens, you can see them looking to you (for help, O Prophet), their eyes rolling in terror like one who is overshadowed by death. Yet once the fear has departed, they assail you believers with sharp tongues in their greed for wealth (from the spoil of war). These have never known belief, and, therefore, Allah makes all their deeds fruitless. That is easy for Allah (a spontaneous action of Allah's Law of Requital)
They think that the enemy clans have not withdrawn. And if the confederate clans come back, these (hypocrites) would prefer to be in the desert with the Bedouins, asking for news about you, from far away. And if they were among you, they would only pretend to fight
(You saw the Messenger standing as a rock in the most adverse circumstances.) Verily, in the Messenger of Allah you have an excellent example, for everyone who looks unto Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah much
And when the believers saw the clans, they said, "This is what Allah and His Messenger promised us. Truly spoke Allah and His Messenger!" And it only added to their faith and their zeal in submission
Of the believers are men who have been true in what they pledged with Allah. Some of them have fulfilled their vow by laying their lives, and some of them stand ready, unwavering
That Allah may reward the truthful for having been true to their word, and cause the hypocrites to suffer - or accept their repentance according to His Laws. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
And Allah repulsed the disbelievers in their fury; they gained no advantage. Allah sufficed the believers against the attack. For, Allah is Strong
Those People of the Scripture who allied with the clans (despite having a treaty with you), have been taken out from their forts and strongholds, and panic has struck their hearts. Some of them were killed in the battle and others were taken prisoners of war. (The Jewish tribe, Bani Quraizah had violated the treaty, although another Jewish tribe, Bani Nadir of Khyber had also been among the confederates)
And He made you inherit their lands, their houses, and their wealth and land you have not trodden. Allah has Supreme Control over all things, and all events take place according to His Laws
(Now in a state of affluence) O Prophet! Tell your wives, "If you desire the life of this world and its glitter - well, then, I shall provide you to your contentment and let you go in a becoming manner." (The Prophet had chosen not to keep a standard of living higher than the poorest of Madinah, and the mothers of believers were seeing other women living in relative affluence)
But if you desire Allah and His Messenger, and the Home of the Hereafter, then, verily, Allah has prepared for the benevolent among you an immense reward
O Wives of the Prophet! (You will be seen as role models for other women, therefore), if any of you displays unseemly conduct, double would be her suffering, for indeed, that is easy for Allah
And whoever of you is devout in the service of Allah and His Messenger, and helps augment the society, We shall give her reward twice-over, for, We have readied for her a most excellent sustenance
O Wives of the Prophet! You are not like other women. If you live upright, then, be not over-soft in speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire (to you). But speak in customary kindness
And abide in your homes in quiet dignity, and do not make a dazzling display like that of the former Times of Ignorance. Help establish the Divine System and the Just Economic Order, and obey Allah and His Messenger. And Allah wishes to keep away all vices from you, O Members of the Household, and to purify you to utmost purity (of character)
And bear in mind all that is recited in your homes of Allah's Messages and Wisdom, for, Allah is Sublime, Aware
Verily, for: Muslim men and Muslim women. Believing men and believing women. Committed men and committed women (committed to Allah's Cause). Truthful men and truthful women. Steadfast men and steadfast women. Humble men and humble women. Charitable men and charitable women. Abstaining men and abstaining women (abstaining from all vices). Chaste men and chaste women. Men who remember Allah much and women who remember (Him much). (For them) Allah has readied the protection of forgiveness and an Immense Reward. (3)
It is not fitting for a believing man or a believing woman, when a matter has been decided by Allah and His Messenger, to claim freedom of choice concerning themselves. And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he has indeed, gone astray in error manifest
Behold, (O Prophet) you did tell the one to whom Allah had shown Favor and to whom you had shown favor, "Hold on to your wife and be mindful of Allah. You seek to conceal in your heart what Allah intends to reveal. You are afraid of people whereas it is more appropriate to fear Allah." But when Zayd had observed all the rules and divorced her, We gave her to you in marriage. So that henceforth there may be no blame on the believers in respect of spouses of their adopted children when they have come to the dissolution of their union. And the Commandment of Allah must be fulfilled. (Contrary to many erroneous translations, the entire quote in this verse is addressed to Zayd since Messengers fear none but Allah (33:39). Also the admonition of the Prophet to Zayd clearly indicates that he, and not his wife, was at fault
There can be no difficulty to the Prophet in what Allah has assigned unto him as a duty. That was Allah's Law for those who passed on before (the previous prophets). And the Command of Allah is a well-determined Decree
Those who convey Allah's Revelations and fear Him alone, shall never fear anyone but Allah. And Allah is Sufficient to take account
Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is Allah's Messenger and the Closing Seal of all Prophets. And Allah, indeed, is Knower of all things
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Remember Allah with much remembrance. (Keep Allah's Message before you a great deal. Now it will be up to you to carry His Message to mankind (3)
And strive to establish His Glory on earth morning and night
He it is Who bestows His blessings upon you, and supports you, and His angels, that He may bring you forth from darkness into the Light. And Merciful is He, indeed, to those who attain belief. (2:155-157), (9:103) (14:1), (1)
Their salutation on the Day they meet Him is, "Peace". And He has readied for them a Generous Reward
O Prophet! Behold, We have sent you as a witness and a herald of good news and a Warner. (The Divine System that you establish will be a watcher over humanity to ensure international justice and peace. Give them the good news of what the System can accomplish, and warn them of the harm without it)
And to invite to Allah by His leave, and as a Lamp radiant with light
Give good news to the believers that they shall have a Great Bounty from Allah
And heed not the rejecters and the hypocrites. Disregard their insults, and put your trust in Allah. Allah is Sufficient as Guardian
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When you wed believing women, and divorce them before you have touched them, then there is no waiting period for them (to marry another man). Make decent provision for them and let them go in a becoming manner. (2:228-241), (4:3), (4:19), (4:35), (4:128), (33:49), (
O Prophet! Behold, We have made lawful to you your wives to whom you have given the marital gift, and those women who have sought asylum with you and signed the marital contract (6:10). Also lawful for you in marriage were daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts who had migrated with you. And lawful for you is a believing woman who offers herself freely to the Prophet and whom the Prophet might be willing to wed. This latter is but a privilege for you, and not for other believers. We have already made known what We have decreed regarding their wives and women who have sought asylum in their homes. This arrangement is designed to ease any social difficulties on you (O Prophet, as the Head of the State). Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful
You may let any of your wives leave amicably if they so wish, and likewise you may keep close those who accept the extra responsibilities as the mothers of believers (33:6), (33:28). If you reconcile with anyone you had estranged, you commit no error. This will gladden their eyes, their grief will disappear and all of them will be content with whatever you give them. Allah alone knows what is in your hearts, and Allah is Knower, Clement
Henceforth, no other women shall be lawful to you (O Prophet), nor can you substitute anyone with other wives even though you admire their beauty and qualities. None beyond those you already have. Verily, Allah is Watchful over all things
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not enter the Prophet's homes unless you are given permission. When invited to dine, arrive not too early waiting for preparation of the meal. When you are invited, come at the appointed time, and when you have finished eating, disperse. Linger not in the quest of HADITH (vain talk). Behold, this might hurt the Prophet, and he would be shy to say so. But Allah is not shy of telling you what is Right. And if you ask something you need from the ladies (the household of the Prophet), ask them from behind the curtain. This is good for your hearts and for their hearts. (Respect of privacy is an essential component of mutual respect). It is not for you to hurt the Messenger, nor that you should ever marry his wives after him. Verily, this would be a great offense in the Sight of Allah. (They are their mothers)
Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, verily, Allah is Knower of all things
There is no blame on women to relax their privacy with their fathers, their sons, their brothers, sons of their brothers, sons of their sisters, their womenfolk or their servants. But, O Women! Be mindful of Allah - for, behold, Allah is Witness to everything
Verily, Allah and His angels bless the Messenger and support his Mission (33:43). O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Bless him and give yourself up to him and his Mission in total submission. (
Verily, those who malign Allah and His Messenger, Allah will deprive them of His Grace in this world and in the Hereafter. He has readied for them a humiliating punishment
And those who malign the believing men and the believing women undeservedly, they bear the guilt of slander and manifestly drag down their own humanity
O Prophet! Tell your wives, your daughters, and women of the believers that they should draw their outer garments over their person (when in public (24:31)). This is easy and proper, so that they may be recognized and not bothered. Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful
Thus it is. If the hypocrites and they in whose hearts is a disease, and the alarmists in the City do not cease, We indeed give you the authoritative mastery over them. Then they will be your neighbors no more than a short while
Accursed, they will be seized wherever found and slain one and all. (That is the penalty for men who keep annoying innocent women on the street, assault them or rape them)
That was the Way of Allah among those who lived before. And never will you find any change in Allah's Way. (The Divine Laws in the Universe never change, and the Law of Requital never fails to requite)
People ask you about the Hour. Say, "The knowledge of the Hour is with Allah alone. Yet for your purposes, the Hour may be near
Verily, Allah rejects those who reject the Truth, and has readied for them a blazing Fire
Therein to abide forever, they will find then no patron nor helper
On the Day when their faces shall be tossed about in the Fire, they will say, "Oh, We wish we had obeyed Allah, and obeyed the Messenger
And they will say, "Our Lord! Behold, we obeyed our clergy and the leaders and it is they who led us astray from the Path
Our Lord! Give them double punishment and banish them from your Grace." (14:28), (16:2)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Never be like those who hurt Moses, and Allah caused him to be proven right. He was of great honor in Allah's Sight
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be mindful of Allah and speak words straight to the point
He will adjust your works for you, and protect you from trailing behind in humanity. Verily, one who obeys Allah and His Messenger has gained a signal victory. (4:31), (4)
Verily, We did offer the trust of compliance to the heavens, and the earth, and the mountains and they, being fearful, breach not what is entrusted upon them. Yet man, with his free will, is the only one who breaches this trust of compliance. For, verily, he wrongs himself without knowing it. (Haml = Accept or bear and = Betray the trust - Like Haram = Forbiddingly bad and = Sacred)
And so it is. (After making the Laws clear, and giving them the free will, Allah holds mankind accountable for their actions). Allah imposes suffering on the hypocrite men and hypocrite women, and the idolaters and idolatresses. And so it is too that Allah pardons believing men and believing women, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
All Praise is due to Allah to Whom belong all things in the heavens and all things in the earth. The entire Universe manifests His Praise in its design, action, discipline and splendor. And for Him is the Praise in the Hereafter, and He is the Wise, the Aware
He knows all that enters the earth, and all that comes out of it, and that which descends from the high atmosphere and that which ascends to it. And He is Merciful, Forgiving. (He nourishes the entire Cosmos and absolves imperfections)
And yet the disbelievers say, "Never will the Hour come upon us." Say, "Nay, by my Lord, it is coming to you. By the Knower of the Unseen, it will most certainly come upon you. (The Great Revolution in this world and the Hour of Resurrection are bound to come). Not an atom's weight in the heavens and the earth, escapes His Knowledge, nor is hidden anything smaller or larger, but it is recorded in a Clear Record
That He may reward those who attain belief and serve others with wealth and person, and thus grow their own personality. For them is the protection of forgiveness and honorable provision of mind and body
Whereas those who strive against Our Revelations trying to defeat their purpose, theirs will be a suffering of painful anxiety
Those who make use of the perceptual and conceptual knowledge that they have been given, see that the Revelation to you (O Prophet) from your Lord, is the Truth. And that it leads to the Path of the Almighty, the Owner of Praise
But those who are bent upon denying, say, "May we show you a man who says that after you are dispersed in dust completely - lo and behold! - You will be created anew
Has he invented a lie against Allah or is he a madman?" Nay, but those who disbelieve in the life to come are wandering in the wilderness of thought and in a profound error
Have they not observed the heaven and the earth however little lies open before them, and however much is hidden from them? If We so Willed, We could have caused the earth to swallow them, or caused masses from the sky fall down upon them. Therein, behold, is a Sign for every servant who turns to his Lord
We bestowed upon David bounties from Us, and commanded thus, "O Tribes of the Mountains! Join him in establishing My Glory on earth." And so were commanded the fierce riders of the Taer Tribe. And We made the iron soft for him. (David mastered iron technology (21:79)
(And We said to him), "Set up means for making coats of armor, and design a strong defense (with infantry and cavalry) linked in command. And (O People of David) you all shall use this power to serve humanity. Verily, whatever you do, I am Seer thereof
And unto Solomon, We committed the wind at his disposal. (He mastered the science of sailing and his ships sailed much faster than the others). They sailed one month going and one month coming back. And We gave him abundance in mining of copper and minerals and subdued for him the Wild Tribes who worked for him by his Lord's leave. (Solomon established the Divine System such that) whoever turned aside from Our Command, We made him taste a severe punishment (2)
They worked for him as he desired, making forts, sculptures and images, pools, and boilers well-dug into the ground. We said, "Labor O Children of David, in gratitude for what you have been given. Few of My servants are truly grateful in practice
When We decreed death for him (Solomon), nothing showed his death to the Wild Tribes until a creature of the earth ate away the strength he had mustered. When the power base fell, the Wild Tribes rebelled regretting that they should have done it sooner only if they knew the new unjust King. (The 'creature of the earth' was the highly incompetent son Rehoboam, and successor of Solomon 38:34. Historically, ten of the Israelite Tribes also broke away from the Kingdom at that point)
The People of Sheba had a homeland that was a marvel indeed, with gardens everywhere on the right and the left (Yemen-Somalia-Abyssinia). "Enjoy what your Sustainer has provided for you, and render thanks to Him - a goodly land and a Sustainer Absolver of imperfections
But they turned away from Divine Values and We sent on them the Flood of the 'Arim' released from water dams. And We turned their Gardens into 'gardens' producing wild bitter fruit, and a thorny Lote-tree here and a tree there
This was Our Requital for their ingratitude. Do We ever punish anyone but the ungrateful? (Ingratitude = Refusing to share Allah's bounties in equity. It appears that in the Kingdom of Sheba people were divided into two classes, the very rich and the very poor)
And We had set, between them and the towns We had blessed (Syria-Palestine), many oases with townships within sight of one another, and thus We had made traveling easy, "Travel safely in this land by night or by day
But now, their ungrateful attitude was saying, "Our Lord! Make our journey-stages longer." (Make the trade route insecure, unprofitable and deserted). They wronged people and thus harmed themselves. Consequently, We made them history, and We scattered them utterly. Herein, behold, are Signs indeed for individuals and nations who would patiently draw lessons from history and learn to be practically grateful
And indeed, Iblis found them meeting his expectations. All of them followed their selfish desire - barring a few who had remained believers in the Divine Values. (
And yet he (Iblis) had no power at all over them (15:38-41). But We thus distinguish between those who believe in the life to come from those who keep doubting it. And your Lord is Watcher over all things. (Those who deny the Law of Requital easily succumb to their desires)
Say, "Call upon those whom you imagine beside Allah! They have not an atom's weight of power either in the heavens or in the earth, nor have they any share in either, nor does He need any of them as a helper
No intercession is of any avail with Him except that one stands up as a witness of Law in His Court. When their hearts are calmed down, they will ask, "What did your Lord decide?" The witnesses will say, "The decisive Truth." He is the Most High, Most Great
Say, "Who grants you provision from the heavens and the earth?" Say, "Allah" and see for yourself who is rightly guided and who is in error, we or you?" (You wish to keep the God-given resources unto yourselves and we insist on an equitable distribution)
Say, "You will not be asked of our wrongs, nor shall we be called to account for what you are doing
Say, "Our Lord will bring us all together, then He will lay open the Truth between us. Verily, He is the Exponent of truth, All-Knowing
Say, "Point out to me those whom you associate with Him as partners. Nay - nay, but He alone is God, the Almighty, the Wise
Now (O Messenger) We have sent you as a bringer of glad news and a Warner to mankind at large, but most people are (at this time) unaware of this fact
They keep saying, "When will the promise be fulfilled, if you believers are men of truth
Say, "The promise of the Day that you can neither postpone nor hasten by an hour, is yours
And the rejecters say, "We will not believe in this Qur'an, nor in the previous Scriptures." If you could only see these transgressors when they are made to stand before their Lord, how they blame one another. The followers will tell their proud leaders, "If it were not for you, we would have been believers
The leaders will say to the weak commoners, "Why - did we drive you away from the Guidance when it had come to you? Nay, it is you who were guilty (of blind following)
The commoners will say to their leaders, "Nay, you were the ones who schemed night and day to set up systems that we were forced to follow, instead of Allah. It is you who set up (yourselves as) rivals against Him." Both parties will then be ashamed when they see the Requital. We will put shackles around the necks of all those who rejected the Truth. Is their retribution anything but what they earned with their own actions
Whenever We sent a Warner to any community its rich elite declared, "Behold, we reject the message you are sent with
And they further said, "We are more than you in wealth and children and party and we cannot be made to suffer
Say, "Behold, my Lord enlarges and narrows the provision to people according to His Laws (and hence, you see the change in fortunes). But most people are not aware (that the Divine System ensures prosperity for all)
And it is not your wealth nor your children and party that will bring you closer to Us, but he who truly believes and helps others. Such people will have a twofold reward for their deeds. It is they who will dwell in secure mansions
Whereas those who strive against Our Revelations trying to make them ineffective, will be given over to retribution
Say, "Behold, my Lord enlarges or narrows provision for His servants according to His Laws. (20:124). Whatever you spend on others, He replaces it. (2:261). For, He is the Best of providers
The Day He gathers all people He will ask the angels, "Did they worship you?" (Did they think that the forces of Nature randomly ran the Universe)
They will answer, "Glory is Yours! You are our Master, not them. Nay, they used to worship the invisible guises of their selfish desire. Most of them were believers therein." (Jinns = Hidden from sight. Generally this term in the Qur'an applies to nomads rarely appearing in townships. It is also used to describe rebellious desire, emotions and fiery temperament like Satan (6:101), (18:50), (37)
That Day you will have no power to help or harm one another and We will tell the transgressors, "Taste the doom of Fire which you used to deny
When Our Verses are conveyed to them in all clarity, they say, "This is only a man who wants to divert you from what your ancestors used to worship." And they say, "This is nothing but an invented lie." Those who disbelieve say of the Truth when it reaches them, "This is nothing but an obvious magic
But We never gave them any Scriptures that they study, nor did We send unto them before you any Warner
Thus too, nations before them had rejected the Message. These people have not received a tenth of the power and wealth that We had bestowed upon them. Yet, when they denied My Messengers, (see) how awesome was My rejection
Say, "I ask you to do just one thing: For Allah's sake! Stand up in pairs and singly - and then think! There is no madness in your companion. He is only a Warner unto you in the face of a terrible doom
Say, "Whatever reward do I ask you, it is yours. My reward rests with none but Allah, and He is Witness unto everything
Say, "Verily, my Lord makes the Truth prevail - He Who is the Profound Knower of the Unseen." (Of all True and False that may not be evident to you)
Say, "The Truth has now come to light and falsehood will hide its face, nor shall (the Days of Ignorance) come back
Say, "When I was searching for the Truth, I was searching for the Truth for myself. And now I am rightly guided because of that which my Lord has revealed unto me (93:7). He is the Hearer, Ever-Near
If you could but see, when they will be terrified with no escape and seized at a place nearby
And will cry, "We now attain faith
They adamantly rejected the Truth before and they kept shooting the arrows of conjecture from faraway
As a result, a barrier will be set between them and what they desired, as will be done for people of their kind of older times. For, behold, they too were lost in doubt, suspicion
All Praise is due to Allah, the Originator of all Highs and their Lows, Who appoints His angels as message-bearers having wings two, three and four. (Many of the angels, the physical laws in the Universe, have more than one function). He increases in creation what He Will. For, Allah is the Appointer of due measure of all things, and He is Able to do all things
Whatever Grace Allah opens for mankind, none can withhold it. And whatever He withholds, none can release, for He is the Almighty, the Wise. (He uses His Might in Mercy and Wisdom)
O Mankind! Think of the blessings of Allah upon you. Is there any creator other than Allah who provides for you from the heaven and earth? There is no god but He. How could you wander in the wilderness of thought
(O Messenger) if they deny you, Messengers before you were also denied. But all affairs ultimately end up in His Court
O Mankind! Indeed Allah's Promise is true. (The Law of Requital is an inevitable reality). So let not the present life deceive you, nor let the Deceiver deceive you about Allah. (Deceiver = Satan = Selfish desire. Also misguided people and their propaganda)
Behold, Satan is a foe unto you; so treat him as a foe. He only calls his party to become companions of the Blazing Fire
For those who are bent on rejecting the Truth, is a severe retribution. And for those who accept the Truth and work for the welfare of others, is the protection of forgiveness and a great reward
Can you think of he whose persistence in evil blunts his sensitivity - so that his deeds seem fair to him? Verily, Allah lets go astray any who wants to go astray, just as He guides any who wants to be guided. Therefore, waste not yourself in sorrowing over them. Verily, Allah is Aware of all that they contrive
And Allah it is Who sends the winds and they raise a cloud; then We lead it unto a dead land and revive the earth after it had been lifeless. Thus is the Resurrection (and revival of individuals and nations with Divine Guidance)
Whoever desires dignity should know that to Allah belongs all Dignity. Unto Him ascend all good words, and He exalts the works that help others. (That is how individuals and nations can ascend in honor). But those who plot imbalance in the lives of others, for them is severe punishment and their plotting, in the end, will come to naught
(Recall your common humble origin.) Allah created you from dust, then from male and female gametes, and then He makes you pairs. And no female becomes pregnant, nor gives birth without His Knowledge (according to His Appointed Science, without exceptions). No one lives long, and no one lives short, but by His Law (3:144). Behold, all this is easy to Allah. ('Nutfah' = Gamete, male or female)
(Observe the diversity in Nature.) Thus the two seas (and subsoil waters) are not alike. One is fresh, good to drink, the other undrinkable, salty (25:53). Yet, from either of them you eat tender meat and extract ornament that you may wear. And you see ships sailing through the waves seeking His Bounty, so that you may have cause to be grateful
He makes the night grow longer by shortening the day, and makes the day grow longer by shortening the night. And He has committed the sun and the moon to service, each running to an appointed term. Such is Allah, your Lord - unto Him belongs all Dominion. And those whom you call upon instead of Him, do not own so much as the husk of a date-stone. (
When you call them (the dead 'saints'), they don't even hear your call, and even if they were to hear they won't be able to respond to you. On the Day of Resurrection they will disown your 'partnership'. And none can inform you like the One Who is Aware
O Mankind! It is you who stand in need of Allah. And Allah! He is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise
If He Will, He can do away with you and bring some new creation
This is not at all difficult for Allah
And no person, being already burdened with his own doings, will be made to carry the burden of another. And if a laden one calls for help with his load, none may carry part of it even if he is a close relative. Hence, you can warn only those who understand their Lord's Law of Requital knowing that even their actions done in secrecy have consequences. So, such people follow the Divine Commands closely. Whoever grows in virtue does so for the good of his "Self". And the destination of all is to Allah
The blind of reason and the seeing are not equal
Nor are the Darkness and the Light
Nor the cooling shade and the scorching heat
Nor are the living equal with the dead. Behold, Allah makes him hear who wants to hear. You cannot make hear the dead of heart like those who are in the graves
You are but a Warner
Verily, We have sent you with the Truth, as a bearer of glad news, and a Warner. And there is not a nation but a Warner has passed among them
(O Prophet) if they deny you, those before them also denied. Their Messengers came to them with all evidence of the Truth, and with Books of Divine Wisdom, and the Scripture giving light
Then My Law of Requital seized the rejecters of the Truth, and how intense was My rejection
Have you not seen that Allah causes water to fall from the height. And from the same water We produce fruit and flower of different color, just as in the mountains are streaks of varying colors - white, red, and varying shades of black
And of human beings, and other creatures, and the cattle have diverse colors. This is how it is: of all His servants only the ULAMA get some idea of the Glory of Allah (by examining the wonders in Nature. ULAMA = men and women of scientific knowledge. They understand that) Allah is Almighty, the Absolver of imperfections
Verily those who read the Scripture of Allah (in Nature) and follow Allah's Commands, and spend on others the provision We have given them secretly and openly, are conducting business that will never perish
He will pay their wages and give them yet more of His Bounty. He is Absolver of imperfections, Responsive to gratitude
And (O Prophet) all that We have revealed in this Book to you is the very Truth, confirming the Divine Origin of the previous Scriptures. For, behold, of the needs of His servants Allah is fully Aware, all-Seeing
And so, We have bestowed this Book (on you) as a heritage from Our servants whom We chose. And among people are those who (ignore it and thus) hurt themselves. Others will have a lukewarm attitude toward it, and some who, by Allah's leave, will be foremost in attaining all the good in it. That! Indeed that is, the Great Bounty
Hence, the Gardens of Eden of eternal bliss will they enter, therein to be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and therein to be dressed in garments of silk. (And right here in this world they will establish a society in which life will be pleasant and honorable)
And they will say, "All praise to Allah Who has put away grief from us. Verily, Our Lord is Absolver of imperfections, Responsive to gratitude
Who, out of His Bounty, has settled us in the mansion of Eternity. Neither do we experience toil herein, nor any sense of weariness
But for those who reject the Truth, is fire of Hell. Therein they neither end up dying nor is the torment lightened for them. Thus We requite all those who remain ungrateful (for the Guidance)
And in that suffering they will cry, "Our Lord! Get us out of here. We will do right, not that we used to do." Did We not give you a life-long opportunity replete with reminders for whoever would bethink? And a Warner had come to you. Taste then the fruit of your transgressions, for there is no helper for the transgressors of Divine Laws
Verily, Allah is the Knower of the Hidden realities of the heavens. Behold, He is Knower of what is in the hearts
He it is Who has given you supremacy in the earth (2:30). So whoever denies this blessing, his denial is upon him. Their denial increases their deprivation according to the Laws of their Lord, and their denial only increases their own loss (causing them to be content with a subhuman existence)
Say, "Have you seen your 'partners' whom you call upon besides Allah? Show me what they created of the earth! Or have they any share in the heavens? Or have We given them a Scripture as evidence to prove their fallacies?" Nay, those who exploit the weak, support one another with delusions
Verily, it is Allah Who upholds the celestial bodies and the earth, so they deviate not from their course. And if they were to deviate, there is none, no one whatsoever that can uphold them after He ceases to uphold them. Verily, He is Clement, Absolver of imperfections
Thus it is, yet - they used to swear by Allah with their most solemn oaths that if a Warner came to them, they would follow his guidance better than any nation ever could. But now that a Warner has come unto them, it arouses in them nothing but aversion
Their arrogance in the land and their evil schemes! Yet an evil scheme engulfs its designers. Are they waiting for anything but the way the ancients were dealt with? Yes! No change you will ever find in the Laws of Allah, and no deviation you will ever find in the Laws of Allah
Have they not traveled in the land and seen what happened to those before them? And they were greater in might than these are. Allah is not such that anything in the heavens and the earth could foil His Authority, for He is Knower, Supreme Controller
Now if Allah took mankind to task by that which they earn by their deeds, He would not leave a creature on its surface. However, He grants them Respite unto an appointed term. And when their term comes to an end, then, verily, they come to know that Allah is ever Seer of His servants. ('Not leave a creature' - Life on the planet earth exists for and manifests itself in the highest form as the humans (2)
S. YASIN! O Human being, to whom this Divine Writ is revealed
The Wise Qur'an is a witness in itself that
Verily, you are one of the Messengers
On a Straight Path
It is a Revelation of the Almighty, the Merciful
That you may warn a people whose ancestors were not warned, and who are, therefore, unaware of what is right and what is wrong
The Word is bound to come True that since most of them will deny the Message they will suffer the consequences
Behold, around their necks We (Our Laws) have put shackles, reaching their chins. Their heads are forced up in arrogance (like the agitated camel who keeps his head high refusing to drink the life-giving water)
And We have set a bar before them and a bar behind them, and thus have covered them that they cannot see. (They neither look to the future nor derive any lesson from history)
Whether you warn them or you warn them not, it is the same for them. Their attitude bars them from attaining faith
You can only warn him who reflects, and fears (violating the Universal Laws of) the Beneficent even in privacy. Unto such give the good news of forgiveness and a most honorable reward
Verily, We give life to the dead, and We record all they send before them and their footprints. And all things and events are recorded in a Clear Record. (What the humans do, the imprints of their actions on their "Self" and what they leave for posterity)
Make them understand in Symbolic Form: The People of the Town when Messengers came to them
When We sent to them two Messengers, they denied them. We then strengthened them with a third and they said, "Verily, We have been sent unto you
But the people said, "You are nothing but human beings like us. The Beneficent has never revealed anything. You are but lying." (
Said the Messengers, "Our Lord knows that we have been indeed sent to you
And our duty is only to convey the Message clearly
The people said, "We consider you bad omens. Indeed, if you desist not, we will surely stone you, and grievous punishment will befall you at our hands
The Messengers replied, "Your destiny rests with yourselves, now that you have been reminded. (There is no such thing as a bad omen (17:13)). Nay, but you are a people who are wasting away your potentials
At that, a man came running from the farthest end of the Town and said, "O My people! Follow these Messengers
Follow those who ask you no reward, and who are rightly guided
He continued, "Why should I not serve Him Who has originated me, and unto Whom you all will be returned
Should I take gods instead of Him? But then, if the Laws of the Beneficent harm me, their intercession cannot help me at all, nor can they save me
Then, behold, I would have been lost in error manifest
Verily, I have come to believe in your Lord. Listen, then, to me
And this man was told, "You shall enter Paradise." He exclaimed, "I wish my people only knew
That my Lord has absolved my imperfections, and has made me among the honored ones
And after that, We did not send down any army from the sky against his people (of the Town), nor do We ever send
Nothing but a single Blast (of Requital), and behold! They were ashes, still and silent
Ah, the anguish for the servants, they have to bear! Never has a Messenger come to them, but they did mock him
Have they not reflected how many a generation We (Our Law of Requital) annihilated before them. They turned not to their Messengers and, hence, returned not to their lost glory
All of them, all together, will be presented before Us
And yet, there is a Sign for them in the lifeless earth which We revive and We bring forth from it grain so that they eat thereof. (Divine Revelation can, likewise, revive dead nations and make them fruitful for humanity)
And We produce therein gardens of date palm and grapevines, and We cause springs to gush forth therein
That they may enjoy the fruit thereof - And! Their hands made this not. Will they not then be grateful in word and action
Glory to Him Who has created pairs of everything that the earth grows, and of themselves, and of things they have no knowledge yet
And a Sign for them is the night. We withdraw from it the day, and behold, they are in darkness
And the sun: it runs its appointed course. That is the measure of the Almighty, the Knower. (The sun along with its system is moving to the Solar Apex, Constellation of Hercules, at a speed 150 miles per second, according to the current science)
And the moon: We have measured for it phases until it becomes (a crescent) like an old curved date-stalk
It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor can the night outrun the day. All of them swim along in their orbits. (The sun cannot cause the moon to gravitate towards itself and the night and the day cannot lengthen or shorten other than the appointed measure (21:33), (22:61), (25:62), (31:29), (4)
Another Sign for them is that We carry the Children of Adam on the loaded ship
And We have created for them similar things to ride on. (And will create things of which you have no knowledge yet)
We could down them, drown them according to Our Laws, with none to respond to their cry of help - and then they cannot be saved
But as a Mercy from Us, We let them enjoy life for a while
And yet, when it is said to them, "Walk aright learning from every yesterday, so that you may build a future worthy of Grace
No Message of their Lord's Messages reaches them without them turning away from it
And when it is said to them, "Spend on others of the provision Allah has given to you", the rejecters say to the believers, "Shall we feed anyone whom Allah could have fed if He so willed? You people are obviously lost in error." (6:149), (1)
And they (change the subject asking), "When will this warning be fulfilled, if you are men of truth?" (That our system of life, if it is wrong, will crumble)
Well, nothing awaits them but a single Blast of Requital that will overtake them while they keep contending
And they shall not even have time to utter their last wish, nor will they be able to get together with their families
And when the Trumpet is blown, behold, out of their disintegrated states unto their Lord they will run. ('Qabr' = grave = disintegrated state)
They will exclaim, "Oh, woe unto us! Who has awakened us from our beds of sleep? This is what the Beneficent promised, and the Messengers spoke the truth." (The concept of punishment in the grave is non-Qur'anic and, hence, wrong)
Nothing but a single Blast, no more, and behold, before Us all of them will be presented
This Day no person will face the least injustice, nor will you be rewarded other than what you had been doing
Behold, those who merit Paradise, this Day are enjoying the new life
They and their spouses in pleasant shades, on thrones of honor reclining
Theirs the fruits of their good deeds, and theirs all that they will ask
Greetings from a Lord Merciful, "Peace
But stand aside Today, you violators of human rights who thrived on others' toil
Did I not warn you O Children of Adam! That you shall not worship Satan, your desire - since verily, it is an open enemy to you
And that you serve Me alone? This is the Straight Path
Yet he led astray a great many of you. Did you not, then, have any sense
This is the Hell you were warned about again and again
Burn in it now for you adamantly rejected the Truth
This Day We seal their mouths, but their hands speak unto Us, and their feet bear witness to what they earned
Had We so Willed, We could have made them devoid of Vision that would make them unaccountable for whichever way they went. (Without free will like the Animal Kingdom)
And had We so Willed, We could have degraded them driven by instincts, powerless to advance or retreat in their potentials
Such as, he whom We grant long life, We cause him to revert to weakness. Will they not then use their intellect? (That they must use their full potentials)
(Know about the Prophet that) We have not taught him poetry, nor is it meet for his dignity. This is no less than a Divine Reminder and an Articulate Qur'an clear in itself and clearly showing the Way
That it may warn everyone who is alive of heart and that the Word may prove True concerning the rejecters. (That violation of the Divine Laws brings Requital in both lives)
Have they never envisioned how We must have created for them of Our Handiwork, the domestic animals of which they are now masters
And that We have made them submissive to humans so that some of them they use for riding and others they consume
And may derive yet other benefits from them and milk to drink. Will they not, then, be grateful
But, nay, they have chosen gods other than Allah hoping that they might be helped
It is beyond their power to help them, and in effect such people end up guarding their false gods like committed hosts
So let not their utterances grieve you. Behold, We know what they conceal and what they declare
Does not man realize that We created him from male and female gametes? Yet, behold, he stands forth as an open contender of Truth! ('Nutfah' = Gamete, male or female)
And he makes comparisons for Us and forgets the fact of his creation, saying, "Who will revive these bones when they have crumbled to dust?" (
Say, "He will revive them Who brought them into being in the first instance. Yes, for He is the Knower of all acts of creation
(The same Creator) Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, so that, behold, you kindle from it
Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth Able to create the like of them? Yes indeed - for He is the Creator, Knower of all acts of creation
When He intends a thing, His only Command to it is "Be" and it is
Glorified is He in Whose Hand rests the Mighty Dominion over all things, and unto Him you will be brought back. (And every step of yours heads to His Law of Requital (3)
Those vanguards who set up ranks (in order to defend the Divine System)
And those officers of the state who help maintain law and order
And those believers who convey the Reminder
(Are the living witnesses that) - Verily, most surely, your God is One
He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything that is between them (the intergalactic material) - And the Lord of the sunrises (and of the Light-giving Revelation)
Behold, We have beautified the lowest heaven nearest to the earth with ornaments, the stars and planets
And made them secure against every satanic force (The Revelation brings an end to the false claims of the fortune-telling astrologers)
Repelled faraway from the Truth, the 'occult sciences' despite their boisterous claims, can get not a hint of what Divine Revelation is
Outcast--and theirs is a lasting torment
Even if a thing of their conjecture comes to pass, they are pursued by a Flame of Brightness. (The Divine Revelation exposes the claimants to the 'occult sciences' (18:22), (26:210-212), (52:38), (67:)
And ask them to enlighten you, "What is more difficult and stronger - their creation or the rest of Our creation in the multiform Universe? Them (the humans) We have only created out of a sticky clay
Nay, but whereas you (O Prophet) marvel at the Universe, they mock - and again you marvel at their mocking
They take not to heart the wonders of Nature when reminded
And they turn to mockery every Wonder that they see
And of the Revelation they say, "This is nothing but magical eloquence
What! When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then be raised again
And even our forefathers
Say, "Yes, indeed. And you will be brought low
There will be a single Rebuke, and then, behold, they will begin to see
And they will say, "Oh, woe unto us! This is the Day of Judgment
Yes - This is the Day of Decision you used to deny
Bring you up", it will be said, "The transgressors and their companions and the leaders whom they obeyed
Instead of Allah, and lead them onto the path to the Blazing Fire. ('Azwaj' in 37:22 = Companions)
Halt them! For, they must be questioned
What is the matter with you that you help not each other
Nay, but this Day they make full submission
And they will turn to one another asking, demanding
Some will say, "You used to approach us in power
The leaders will reply, "Nay, it were you yourself who were devoid of Faith
And we had no power at all over you. Nay, you were a people of unrestrained conduct
But now the Word of our Lord has come to pass about all of us. Verily, we are bound to taste the fruit of our deeds
So then, if we misled you, behold, we ourselves were astray
And on that Day, verily, they will be partners in a common doom. (14:21), (33:67), (3)
Behold, this is how We deal with the guilty
For when it was said to them, "There is no god but Allah", they showed arrogance
And used to say, "Shall we give up our gods for a mad poet
Nay, but he brought the Truth, and he confirmed the previous Messengers
Behold, you will indeed taste the grievous suffering
And you are requited only for what you have done
But the sincere servants of Allah
Theirs shall be a sustenance known to them
As the fruits of their labor, and they shall be honored
In the Gardens of Delight
Facing one another upon thrones of happiness
A cup from a gushing spring of Bliss brought around for them
Crystal clear, delicious to those who drink
No headache or hangover in it, nor will they get drunk
And in their company will be mates of modest gaze, endowed with vision
Faultless like the hidden ostrich eggs (of unblemished character)
And they will all turn to one another asking (socializing)
One of them speaks thus, "Behold, I had a close companion
He used to ask me, "What! Are you of those who affirm
That after we have died and become mere dust and bones, we will be called to account
A voice will be heard, "Will you people like to look at him
And then he looks and finds his companion in the midst of the blazing fire
He says to the companion in the fire, "By God! You had almost ruined me too
Had I not earned the blessing of my Lord, I would surely be of those given over to punishment
Are we then never to die (O My Companions of Paradise)
After our former death, and that we will never be among the suffering
Verily, this - this indeed, is the Supreme Triumph
For such an end should work all workers
Is this better as a welcome or the inedible cactus (the bitter tree of harming others (17:60), (44: 43)
Verily, We have appointed it a torment for the oppressors
For, behold, it is a tree that springs in the heart of the blazing Fire. (Harming others, oppression and violation of human rights build one's own Hellfire. Likewise, humans earn Paradise with their own hands (7:42), (16:32), (17:9), (29:55), (4)
Its growth like cobra heads. ('Shaitan' and 'Jaann' = Serpent, Cobra. (38:41-44), Harming others harms one's own 'Self
Verily, from it they must eat, and fill their bellies with it
And, behold, above all this they have a drink of burning despair
And once again, verily, the blazing Fire is their destination
For, verily, they had found their fathers on the wrong path
But they made haste to follow their footprints
This is how, indeed, most of the people of the old had gone astray before them
And verily, We had sent Warners among them
Behold, then, what happened to those who had been warned
Except for the sincere servants of Allah
And it was so when Noah cried to Us. Behold, how excellent are We as Responder
For, We saved him, his family and his followers from the great distress. ('Ahl' or the Household of a Prophet includes his followers)
And made his progeny and followers survive
And We left his remembrance for later generations
Peace and salutation to Noah in the Worlds
Verily, this is how We reward the benefactors of humanity
Behold, he was one of Our truly believing servants
And We caused the others to drown
And verily, to his group (of believers, later) belonged Abraham
When he came to his Lord with a noble heart
And thus spoke to his father and his people, "What is that you worship
It is a falsehood. Do you desire gods besides Allah
What do you think of the Lord of the Worlds
And he glanced at the stars
And said, "Behold, I am sick (of you worshiping false deities)
At that they turned their backs and went away from him
Then Abraham gently turned to their idols and said, "What! You do not eat
What ails you that you speak not
Then he turned upon them, striking them with the right hand (struck them hard)
The people came running to him
He said, "Do you worship that which you carve with your own hands
When Allah has created you and your handicraft
They said, "Build a structure for him and fling him into the blazing fire
But as they schemed against him, We brought them low
And he said, "Behold, I am going to my Lord Who will guide me (to refuge)
(Abraham emigrated to Syria and prayed), "My Lord! Grant me the company of the righteous, and children who will be righteous
So We gave him the good news of a clement son (Ishmael)
And when he was old enough to strive along with him, Abraham said, "O My dear son! I have a vision that I must give you to a life of test and tribulation for a Noble cause (37:107). So look, what do you think?" He said, "O My father! Do what you are commanded. God willing, you will find me of the steadfast." ('Zibh' & 'Zabh' = Sacrifice = Disregard comfort for a Noble cause. Just as 'Qatl' = Killing, fighting, humiliating, to bring low)
As both of them had surrendered themselves (to Allah), he made Ishmael prostrate on his forehead in gratitude. (Contrary to popular tradition Abraham never envisioned or intended to slaughter his son)
We called unto him, "O Abraham
You have already affirmed the vision. We - This is so - We must reward the doers of good
This was indeed a Trial, clear in itself. (Leaving the prestigious office of Chief Priesthood in Babylon and now the comfort of Syria for the wilderness of Makkah)
We exchanged his life for a Momentous Sacrifice. (Please notice here the absence of the Biblical and the traditional myth of a 'ram' sent from the heavens. Also, note that slaughtering of a sheep or goat, by no means, can be considered a Momentous Sacrifice. (14)
And We left for him remembrance among the later generations
Peace and salutation to Abraham
Thus do We reward the benefactors of humanity
He was one of Our truly believing servants
Then We gave him the good news of Isaac - a Prophet, among men of quality
And We gave lasting felicity to him and Isaac. But among their generations are the doers of good, and those who, by doing wrong to others, clearly wrong their own "Self
Yes indeed, We bestowed excellence upon Moses and Aaron
And We saved them and their people from the awesome distress (of bondage)
And helped them so that they became the victors
And We gave both of them the Scripture that helped to distinguish the right from wrong. ('Kitabal Mustabeen' = the Book that helped to distinguish = The Torah. 'Kitabil Mubin' = The Book that distinguishes = The Qur'an)
And showed both of them the Straight Path
And We left for them remembrance among the later generations
Peace and salutation to Moses and Aaron
Verily! This is how We reward the benefactors of humanity
Indeed, both of them were Our truly believing servants
And, behold, Elias (Elijah) was one of Our Messengers
When he said to his people, "Will you not walk aright
You call upon Ba'l, and disregard the Best of creators
Allah! Your Lord, and Lord of your forefathers
But they denied him. And they will certainly be called to account
But the sincere servants of Allah
And we left for him remembrance among the later generations
Peace and salutation to Elias
Verily, this is how we reward the benefactors of humanity
Indeed, He was among our truly believing servants
And, behold, Lot was indeed among the Messengers
When We saved him and his household, everyone
Except an old woman who was among those who stayed behind in belief
And then We destroyed the rest
And verily, you pass by their sites by day
And by night. Will you not, then, use your sense to draw lessons
And, behold, Jonah was indeed among the Messengers
When he fled like a runaway slave onto a laden ship. ('Abaqa' = Fled like a runaway slave. He migrated before Allah's Command)
He had cast an arrow and missed the mark. (Untimely action)
Then the Fish grabbed him while he was blaming himself. (Again, usually a whale is mentioned here. But the whale is a mammal and not a fish, and the Qur'an which is never inaccurate, speaks of)
And had he not been a valiant swimmer
(The fish would have eaten him up and) he would have remained in her belly disintegrated there and further until the Day of Rising
(He freed himself and swam to safety.) Then We cast him on the shore, while he was exhausted
We caused him to rest under a well-grown fruitful tree
And We sent him back to his people, a hundred thousand, even more
And this time they believed in him and so We let them enjoy this life
Now (O Prophet) ask them if your Lord has daughters whereas they have sons! (Do they wish to live with superstitions, such as that Jonah lived in the belly of a fish for forty days and then he got free only by reciting a verse, or that your Lord has offspring)
Or is it that We have created angels female and they witnessed it
Attention! It is out of their own invention that they say
That Allah has begotten." And, verily, they tell a lie too
When they say, "He has chosen daughters over sons
What is amiss with you? How do you judge
Will you not then reflect
Or have you a clear authoritative evidence
Then bring your Divine Authority if you are truthful
And they imagine relationship between the unseen forces and their Lord. But the unseen forces know their assignments and constantly remain in His servitude
Glorified is Allah from what they attribute to Him
But the sincere servants of Allah
Verily, neither you nor what you worship
Can tempt the sincere servants against Him
Only the one who rushes to the Blazing Fire
The sincere servants say, "Each one of us has an assignment
And, behold, we are soldiers in ranks
And, verily, we, yes we are they who strive to establish His Glory on earth. ('Sabh' = Swim with long and strong laps and strides. It is not the rolling of the rosary-beads or to hymn some words)
And indeed the disbelievers used to say
If only we had a reminder from the old generations, or a Scripture as they had
We would certainly be sincere servants of Allah alone
And yet, now they are denying the Truth. In time, they will come to know what they denied
Our Word has already gone forth to Our servants, the Messengers
That verily, they - indeed they - would be helped
And that Our soldiers - they indeed - would be the victors
So (O Prophet) withdraw from the disbelievers for a while
And see them for what they do, and soon they will see what they now don't
Do they really wish to hasten Our retribution
But when it comes upon their front-yards, it will be a dreadful awakening for those who have been sufficiently warned
Hence, turn aside from them for a while
And see them for what they do, and soon they will see what they now don't
Glory to your Lord, the Lord of Majesty, Exalted above their contriving
And Peace and salutation to all the Message-bearers
And all Praise is due to Allah, the Sustainer of the Worlds! (And to that end strive the Soldiers in Ranks)
SAAD. As-Sadiq - Full of Truth, this Qur'an is a Profound Reminder. Embracing all that is worth taking to your hearts, it can give you eminence
But nay, the deniers are lost in false pride and opposition for the sake of opposition. Hence, they split their own personalities forcing themselves into maintaining double standards in life. ('Shiqaq' = Opposition, schism, splitting, split-personality. Double standards; since denial of a reality does not make it disappear)
How many a generation have We (Our Law of Requital) wiped out before them, and they cried out when it was too late to escape
Now these people wonder that a Warner has come to them from their own midst! And the disbelievers say, "This is a wizard, a liar
Does he blend all the gods into One God? Behold, this is a thing mind-boggling
Their leaders go about saying, "Walk away and hold on to your gods! This, behold, is the only thing to do. And this (mind-boggling thing) seems to be designed with ulterior motives
We have never heard of this in the latest religion. This (concept of One God) is nothing but a made-up tale! (Even the Christians subscribe to a Triune God)
What! Has the Reminder come down only to him among us?" Nay, in fact, it is My Own Reminder that they distrust (and not you O Prophet). Nay, they have not yet tasted My Requital
Or with them are the treasures of your Lord's Grace? - The Almighty, the Grantor of Gifts
Or is it that theirs is the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them? If so, let them ascend to Supremacy by all means
But here it is! Defeated confederates are these, however closely they might band together
And before them denied the Truth, the people of Noah, Aad and Pharaoh of the firm stakes. ('Zil-awtad' could indicate 'the lord of the Pyramids)
And Thamud, and the people of Lot, and the dwellers of the Wood-dales (of Midyan). And they were clans strongly banded
All of them accused the Messengers of lying. Hence, My Law justly grasped them
Now these people only wait a single Blast from which they recover not
And they mock, "Our Lord! Bring for us our sentence before the Day of Account
Bear with patience whatever they may say, and remember Our servant David, the man of strength and resources. He always turned unto Us
Behold, We subdued for him the strong Mountain Tribes that strove along with him night and day
And the nomad riders of the Ta'er Tribe were all obedient to him. (21:79), (2)
We strengthened his Kingdom and gave him wisdom and good judgment. And We endowed him with the ability to make just decisions, and speak eloquently. (1)
Have you heard of the story of the two disputing men when they climbed the wall into his private chamber
When they breached his privacy, he was startled. They said, "Be not startled!" We both are disputing with each other as to who has done wrong to the other. Therefore, judge fairly between us, deviate not from equity and guide us to the even path
One of them said, "Behold, this my brother has ninety nine farms, whereas I have only one. And yet he says, 'Give it over to me', and he dominates me in eloquence." ('Na'jah' = Ewe = Female sheep or deer = Agricultural farm)
David said, "He has certainly wronged you in demanding your farm in addition to his farms. Thus, behold, many close associates and business-partners treat each other unfairly - except those who believe in the Divine Values and care for the needs of others - but how few are they!" Afterwards, David wondered that We had tried him. (The feudal and economic system in his kingdom needed reform, as the poor were getting poorer). He implored his Lord to absolve his imperfections, and he immediately bowed himself and turned unto Him for guidance
So We absolved his imperfections, and, behold - He remained ever close to Our Laws and his efforts reached a happy destination
(We said to him), "O David! We have made you a ruler in the earth, therefore, establish the System of justice and equity for people. Never let your judgment be swayed by personal whims causing you to deviate from the Path of Allah. For those who wander from the Path of Allah, is a strict retribution for having forgotten the Day of Account
(No action goes uncompensated since) We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain - without meaning and purpose. Such is the assumption of those who disbelieve. (10:4), (11:7), (45:22), (53:31). Woe from the Fire to those who deny the Truth
Shall We treat those who believe and augment the society as We treat those who spread corruption in the land? Or shall We treat the guardians of the Law as the Law-breakers
This is a Scripture that We have revealed unto you (O Prophet), full of lasting Bliss that they may ponder its Messages and that people of understanding may take them to heart
And unto David We granted Solomon, how excellent a servant! Behold, in every situation He would turn to Divine Laws
In the evenings he used to examine his cavalry of nobly-bred, swift-footed horses
He would say, "Verily, I love my fondness of all that is good because it reminds me of my Lord", as the horses raced away until hidden by the veil of distance
Bring them back unto me!" - and would lovingly stroke their legs and their necks
(That was Solomon and) We indeed tried him, and set upon his throne a mere body, and thereupon he turned to Us. (His son, the crown prince Rehoboam was just a hopeless presence (34:14). Until that point in history, the Kingdom of Israel was inherited among the generations of Prophet Jacob
Solomon prayed, "O My Lord! Absolve my imperfections and bestow upon me the gift of a kingdom that may not suit anyone after me. Verily, You are the Giver of Gifts." (He did not wish to leave his great kingdom in incompetent hands and in all probability was thinking of merit in preference over lineage)
So We gave him the science of making the wind serve him and it carried his ships wherever he intended
And made subservient to him the wild unruly men - every kind of builder and diver. (2)
And others linked together in chains of discipline
We told him, "All this is Our Gift for you. Give freely or withhold, in matters of the State, according to your best judgment. It is given to you beyond count
And, behold - He remained ever close to Our Laws and his efforts always reached a happy destination
And remember Our servant Job, when he called upon his Lord, "Behold, the serpent has bitten me and I am in distress and suffering." ('Satan has touched me', as a metonym = Serpent has bitten me. He was left alone from his caravan and family, ran out of the essential supplies, and now this happened (4:163), (6:8)
(We told him), "Strike the ground with your foot (move a little bit). And here is cool water to wash with and a refreshing drink
And We gave him back his family and followers and, in time, doubled their numbers as a Grace from Us. And herein is a reminder for people of understanding (on the virtue of patience)
(And finally We told him,) "Now gather your strength and travel the land and break not your pledge." Behold, We found him steadfast. How excellent a servant! In every situation he turned to Our Commands
And also remember Our servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of strength and vision
Verily, We endowed them with sincerity of purpose and with exceptional foresight. Hence, in all their efforts they never lost sight of the desired destination
Behold, according to Our Standards, they were of the elect, excellent, fulfilling the mental, moral and physical needs of humanity
Also mention Ishmael
Let this be a Reminder - for, verily, there is a most beautiful destination for those who journey through life honorably
Gardens of Eden, the perpetual Bliss, with gates wide-open for them
Relaxing therein, they will be hosted with all kinds of food and drink
And with them are well-matched companions of modest gaze
This is what you are promised for the Day of Account
This, verily, is Our Giving with no end to it
Yes, this is so. But, for those who kept trespassing the Moral Values, is a destination with no good in it
Hell that is! Wherein they burn - the worst bed to lie on
This, then, - so let them taste it - the drink of burning distress and ice-cold wind. (Distress they caused others and insensitivity they showed toward oppression and injustice)
And other penalties in pairs (heat-cold, glare-darkness, noise-isolation, anxiety-depression, desire-hopelessness, etc)
It will be said to the ringleaders, "Here is your group going with you headlong. There is no welcome for them, for only the Fire is here to embrace them
The followers will say to the leaders, "Nay, but you! There is no welcome for you either! It is you who sent this forth for us! What a station of plight!" (14:21), (33:67), (34:32), (3)
Then the followers will say, "Our Lord! Whoever has sent this forth for us, oh, double for him the suffering in Fire
Then they will exclaim to one another, "What is amiss with us? We do not see people whom we counted among evil
Whom we used to ridicule. (Are they not here) or is it that our eyes are missing them
Such, behold, will in truth be the argumentation of people of the Fire
Say, "I am only a Warner, and there is no god but Allah, the One, the Irresistible
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them - Exalted in Might, Ever-Forgiving
Say, "That is a Tremendous News
From which you turn away
Say! "I had no knowledge of the top leaders of the past, and of their disputations
It is revealed unto me only that I am a plain Warner." (To give warning plainly and publicly)
(The disputations began ever since mankind came into being.) When your Lord said to the angels, "Behold, I am about to create a human being out of clay. (Angels = Laws in the Universe)
And when I have designed him, and breathed into him from My Energy (from the Attribute of Free Will) then be submissive to him
Thereupon the angels agreed to be submissive before him, all of them together. ('Sajdah' = Literally, prostration, is due to Allah alone, hence, the allegorical meaning here)
Except Iblis - he acted arrogantly and denied the Command. (Iblis = Satan = selfish desire of the humans)
Said He, "O Iblis! What has kept you from being submissive to that which I have created with My Hands? Are you too proud or are you of the rebellious
Iblis replied, "I am better than he. You created me of fire while you created him of clay." (Emotions are fiery in relation to the cool 'clay' of higher controls)
Said He, "Go forth from here, for, behold, you are condemned
And My rejection is on you until the Day of Judgment
Iblis said, "Then, My Lord! Give me respite till the Day when they are raised
Answered He, "Verily so, you shall be among those who are given respite
Until the Day of Appointed Time
Iblis said, "I swear by Your Honor, I will certainly lead them all astray
But such of them as are Your sincere servants
Said He, "The Truth is this - and this Truth do I state
That certainly I will fill Hell with you and with such of them as follow you, together
(O Messenger) say to them, "I ask of you no reward for this Message, nor am I a pretender
This (Qur'an), behold, is no less than a Reminder to the Worlds
And you will most certainly know the Truth of it all after a lapse of time
The Revelation of this Book issues from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise
Behold, it is We Who have revealed this Book to you (O Prophet) setting forth the Truth. Therefore, serve Allah sincere in your Faith in Him alone
Know and make it known that the Pristine Religion is for Allah and from Him alone. And yet, they who take patrons besides Him say, "We worship them for no other reason than they bring us nearer to Allah." (5:35), (10:18), (17:57). Behold, Allah judges them (right in this Revelation) concerning that wherein they differ. Verily, Allah does not intervene to guide anyone who is a liar unto himself, thankless to his own detriment
And if Allah had willed to take unto Himself a son, He could have chosen anyone that He wanted out of what He has created. Infinite is He in His Glory! He is Allah, the One, the Overpowering. (Utterly remote from all imperfection, Allah is in no need or desire of having an offspring)
He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth to fulfill a definite Purpose. He rolls the night over the day, and rolls the day over the night. And He has subjected the sun and the moon, each running along its course for a term appointed. Is not He the Almighty, the Ever-Absolver of Imperfections
He has created you all out of one living entity (from a single life cell) - and fashioned similarly its mate, male and female. (6:99). And He has bestowed upon you cattle of eight kinds in pairs. (Sheep, goat, camel, cow - male and female, the common permissible livestock (6:144-146).) He creates you in the bellies of your mothers, creation after creation, in threefold depths of darkness (the abdominal wall, the uterine wall and the embryonic sac). Such is Allah, your Lord! Unto Him belongs the Kingdom. There is no god but He. How, then, can you sway like errant winds
If you are ungrateful, behold, Allah is in no need of you. He does not approve of ingratitude in His servants. And if you are grateful, He approves it for you. And no laden one will bear the burden of another. Ultimately, unto your Lord is your return. And, then He will make you understand everything you were doing in life. Verily, He is Knower of what is in the hearts
Now, when affliction befalls man, he calls upon his Lord turning unto Him. But as soon as He bestows upon him Bliss, he forgets Him Whom he called before, and he claims that there are other powers that can rival Allah - thus misleading others from His Path. (Such as he was saved by so and so of the saints, or magic, amulet etc.) Say, "Enjoy your disbelief for a little while. Behold, you are among the companions of the Fire
Is it not better to be one of those who are humble, adoring Him - even in the hours of the night, and standing, keeping in mind the life to come and hoping for his Lord's grace? Say, "Are those who know (that that the 'Self' can evolve) equal to those who know not?" But only those who build their insight will take this to heart
Convey to them on My behalf, "O You servants of Mine who have attained belief! Be mindful of your Lord. Good is the reward for those who do good in this world, and spacious is Allah's earth. Verily, the steadfast will be given their reward in full, beyond account
Say, "Behold, I am commanded to serve Allah sincerely for the establishment of His System
And I have been commanded to be the foremost among those who surrender to Him
Say, "Behold, if I disobey my Lord, I fear the doom of a Tremendous Day
Say, "I serve Allah sincerely to establish His System
You may worship whatever you wish besides Him." Say, "The real losers are those who lose their "Selves" and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Ah, that is without doubt the obvious loss." ('Mubin' = Obvious without any doubt)
They will have fire and ashes above them, and beneath them a dais of hot ashes. In this way does Allah alert His servants: O My servants! Be mindful of My Laws
As for those who shun the non-divine 'authorities' refraining from idol-worship in all forms, and turn to Allah alone, there are glad tidings. Give, then, this good news to My true servants
Who listen to what is said and follow what is best. And they truly listen to the Word and see what is best applicable in a given situation. Such are those whom Allah guides, and they are the ones who grow in understanding
On the other hand, he who has inevitably deserved suffering (for his persistence in following the non-divine 'authorities') - can you save someone who is already consumed in the Fire
But those who are mindful of their Lord, for them are lofty and honorable mansions built for them with rivers flowing beneath. This is Allah's Promise. Never does Allah fail His Promise
Have you not realized that it is Allah Who sends down water from the Height, and then leads it through the earth to form wells and come forth as springs? And then He brings forth a variety of colorful vegetation. Then you see the crops ripen turning golden yellow, and in the end He makes them crumble away (with grain aside). Verily, therein is a reminder to those who wish to develop their insight
If Allah renders one's chest open to Islam he will be following a Light from his Sustainer. Hence, those whose hearts are hardened against Allah's Reminder (in the Book of Nature) only harm themselves. They are most obviously lost in error
Allah has now revealed the best HADITH, a Book fully consistent within itself. It marks out both ways (to success and failure) repeating its Messages in diverse forms. Herewith shiver the skins of those who have some idea of the Glory of their Lord, and then, their skins and their hearts soften at Allah's Reminder. This is the Guidance of Allah, and with it He guides him who seeks guidance. Whereas he who follows a path that Allah has declared to be wrong, goes astray and he cannot find a guide. (
Oh, he who defends himself against the suffering on the Resurrection Day only with his face! And it will be said to the violators of Divine Values, "Taste now what you had sown
Those who lived before their times, also denied the Truth. So the punishment befell them from directions they could have not imagined
Thus Allah made them lose dignity and honor in the world. Yet, much greater will be the suffering in the life to come. They could have understood, had they made good use of what they knew
And, indeed, We have explained this Qur'an to mankind with all kinds of requisite examples so that they might reflect and understand
This Qur'an in Arabic is a Monograph in plain language free of all deviousness so that they might walk aright. (7:158), (12:3), (13:37), (14:4), (25:1), (39:28),
Allah gives you another example: There is a man who deals with several disputing supervisors, compared to a man who deals with only one consistent supervisor. Are these two equal as regards their condition? All Praise is due to Allah (the One Master of all mankind!) Nay, but most of them know not (the Bliss of strict Monotheism)
Behold (O Prophet) you will die, and verily, they will die. (What counts is how people journey through life)
And, then, behold, on the Resurrection Day all of you shall present your disputes before your Lord for settlement
(Here is the forewarning.) Who does a greater wrong than the one who tells a lie against Allah and the one who denies the Truth when it reaches him? Is not Hell the proper home of those who adamantly deny the Truth and choose to live in darkness? ('Kufr' = Denying the Truth, choosing to live in the darkness of ignorance, journey through life without Divine Guidance, being ungrateful for the Light)
And, the one who brings the Truth and the one who affirms it - they, indeed they, are the upright. (Note that the statements in this verse and the preceding one allude to the Messenger and the recipients of the Message)
With their Lord, they have all that they could ever desire. Such is the reward of the doers of good to others
Allah will blot out the imprints of their faults and give them a reward par excellence, more than befitting for the best of their deeds
Is not Allah Sufficient for His servant? And yet, they try to intimidate you with others besides Him. He whom violation of Allah's Law of guidance sends astray, for him there is no guide. (He who follows a path that Allah has declared to be wrong, goes astray and he cannot find a guide)
And he who attains guidance according to Allah's Law of guidance, for him there can be no misleader. Is not Allah All Mighty, the Lord of Requital
And thus it is - If you ask them, "Who is it that has created the heavens and the earth?" - They will answer, "Allah". (29:61). Say, "Have you, then, ever reflected on what you worship besides him? Can they remove harm from me against the Laws of Allah? Can they withhold His Grace if He wills Grace for me?" Say, "Allah is Sufficient for me! On Him rely the reliant
Say, "O My people! Do all that may be in your power. For, behold, I am a laborer (in the Cause of Allah). In time you will come to know what you now don't
As to who it is whom covers the torment of humiliation in this world and the Doom ever-Lasting." (6:136), (11: 93-121), (20)
Behold, (O Prophet) We have revealed unto you this Book expounding the Truth for all mankind. Then whoever chooses to see the roadway is guided for his own good. And whoever chooses to be lost, he strays only to his own detriment. Neither are you a custodian over them, nor do you have power to determine their fate. (Wakeel = Advocate, guardian, warder, warden, defender, watcher, responsible, accountable)
(Only the living of the mind and heart can make choices in this world.) It is Allah Who takes their 'Conscious' upon death, and of the living during their sleep. He withholds it for those upon whom He has passed the decree of death, and restores the others until an appointed time. Herein, behold, are Signs for people who think
What! Do they contrive mediators side by side with Allah? Say, "Why - even though they have power over nothing and have no intelligence
Say, "All intercession belongs to Allah alone! Unto Him belongs the Kingdom of the Highs and their Lows, and unto Him you shall be returned." (Only He can mediate on your behalf - between His Law of Requital and your faults. It is His Law that He shall blot out the imprints of your faults and absolve your imperfections by way of your good deeds that make you worthy of His Grace (3:195), (2)
And yet, when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe not in the life to come, shrink with aversion. But, when others (such as their 'holy men') are mentioned besides Him, behold, they rejoice. (Belief in the Hereafter essentially involves belief in the unwavering Law of Recompense where all actions have their repercussions)
Say, "O Allah! Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the Invisible and the Visible! It is You Who will judge between Your servants wherein they differed
If the violators of human rights owned everything on the earth, and twice as much, they would readily offer it as ransom from the awful retribution of the Resurrection Day. And there will appear unto them, from Allah' Law of Requital what they had never imagined. (They will realize that Paradise and Hellfire are but natural consequences of how the human beings use their capabilities)
Here comes a hint - the very deeds they committed to cause imbalance in the lives of others, will appear before them. And the very things that they used to ridicule will come back to haunt and surround them
But now this is so - when adversity touches the human, he calls upon Us. But as soon as We grant him Bliss from Us, he says, "I have been given this by way of skillful knowledge." Nay, this affords them a test of their character. But most of them know not that they do not know enough. ('La Ya'lamun' pertaining to knowledge, in my opinion, carries a double connotation here as rendered. And, however intelligent and skillful an individual may be, Divine Laws and the society work in concert toward his success)
The same was said by those who passed before them, but their earnings failed to make them truly rich
They destabilized the lives of others, and their very deeds fell back upon themselves. And the same will happen to the oppressors always - their deeds falling back upon themselves, and they will never be able to evade the Law of Requital
Do they not know that Allah increases and decreases provision according to His Laws? Herein are Messages for nations who believe in the Divine Laws
(O Prophet) convey on My behalf, "O You servants of Mine who have so far wasted their personal capabilities! Despair not the rejuvenating Attribute of Allah - His Grace! Behold, Allah absolves your imperfections and protects you from the detriment of all that caused you to trail behind in humanity. Verily, He, indeed He, is the Forgiving, the Merciful
Hence, turn to your Lord and surrender to Him before the period of respite is over and the doom befalls you. Then you will not be helped
And follow the best teaching (the Qur'an) that has been revealed for you by your Lord before the doom comes upon you suddenly without your perceiving of the why, how and whence of it. (39:18). (I have rendered: revealed 'for' you instead of 'to' you since the addressee in the verse is plural)
Lest any person should say, "Ah! My grief that I was unmindful of Allah, and indeed was I among the mockers
Or lest he should say, "Had Allah guided me, I too would have been of those who walked aright
Or lest he should say, when he sees the Requital, "I wish I had a second chance so that I could be among those who do good to others
Nay! My Messages did come to you, but you denied them in false pride and so were you of the rejecters of the Truth
Saddened in gloom you will see, on the Resurrection Day, the faces of those who lied concerning Allah. Is not Hell the proper home for those given to false pride
But Allah will safeguard those who walked aright, for their successful journey through life. No harm will touch them, nor will they grieve
Allah is the Supreme Creator of all things, and He alone determines through His Laws the destiny of all things
His are the keys of the heavens and the earth. (He has appointed Laws through which the heavens and the earth can be explored). Those who shun His Signs in the Universe - it is they, they, who are the real losers
Say, "Is it something other than Allah that you want me to serve, worship and obey, O You the ignorant ones
It has already been revealed for you as well as for those before you, "If you fell for idolatry in any form, all your works will be nullified, and indeed you will be among the losers
Nay, but you shall serve Allah alone and be among those who show gratitude for His Guidance and Bounties by sharing them with others. ('Shukr' = Gratitude = Keeping Allah's bounties open for the benefit of others thus obtaining best possible and collective results. It does not end with just verbal 'Thank God)
And they (mankind) do not esteem Allah as He has the right to be esteemed. When mankind stand at their feet, His Law will be held Supreme in the human society as it is in the Universe. (As an allegory) on the Resurrection Day the entire earth will be as a mere handful to Him, and the heavens will be rolled up in His Right Hand. Glorious is He, Sublimely Exalted Above all that they associate with Him. (6:92), (21:20-23), (2)
When the Trumpet will be sounded the high leaders and the masses will be stunned except those who are already walking the Divine Path. And then it will sound again, and behold, they will stand in awe seeing the Truth. (
And the earth will shine bright with the Light of its Lord. And all matters will be seen in the Light of the Book that clearly expounds all things. And the roadmap that the Messengers had come to point out, and the believers kept witnessing to their Truth, will help Justice prevail. And no one shall be wronged
For, every human being will be repaid in full for whatever he has been doing. (The Justice that is so well expounded in the Qur'an.) And He is the best Knower of whatever they do
The rejecters of the Truth will be led to hell as communities till they reach it and its gates are opened. The keepers of hell will ask them, "Did not come to you Messengers from among yourselves conveying to you the Messages of your Lord and warning you of the meeting of this your Day?" They will say, "Yes, indeed!" But at that time the sentence of punishment would have already been announced against the deniers of the Truth
It will be said to them, "Enter you the gates of hell to abide therein." The time is now to realize how miserable is the destination of those given to false pride
And those who are mindful of their Lord will be escorted into the Garden as communities till they reach it and its gates are opened. The keepers of the Garden will say to them, "Peace be upon you! You have done well! Enter, then, herein to abide
And they will say, "All Praise is due to Allah Who has fulfilled His Promise unto us, and made us inherit the land. We can live in beautiful dwellings of our choice in this Garden." So Bounteous is the reward of the sincere workers! (2)
And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne of the Almighty's Supreme Control extolling their Lord's Glory and Praise. And all will be judged aright. And they will say in concert, "All Praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds." (Allah's physical Laws in the Universe will help the guided mankind establish the Divine Rule on earth, as it is in the Cosmos. And the Divine System in the lives of mankind will make them truly see that all Praise indeed belongs to the Giver of such Benevolent Guidance)
M. Hameed Owner of all praise, Majeed Exalted in Glory, states that
The Revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the Knower
Absolver of actions that cause you to trail behind in humanity, Acceptor of repentance, Stern in grasping, Infinite in Authority - there is no god but He. Unto Him is the destination of all journeying
None but those who are determined to deny the Truth will dispute the Messages of Allah. Let not their thump and thud in the towns impress you
Before their times, the people of Noah and generations after them too banded together in denying the Message. And every nation endeavored to seize its Messenger, and disputed with him with falsehood in order to refute the Truth. But it was I Who seized them, and, behold, how awesome was My grasping
Thus was fulfilled the Word of your Lord concerning the rejecters, and so they are companions of the Fire
Those who understand the Supremacy of their Lord, and even those who come close to it, extol His Glory and praise, and strive to manifest it in the human lives. They have conviction in Him and work to absolve mutual imperfections of one another of the believers in the System, saying, "Our Lord! You embrace all things within your Knowledge and Grace - Absolve then, the imperfections of those who turn to and walk on Your Way, and guard them against the blazing Fire
And O Our Lord! Admit them into the Gardens of Eden that you have promised them, along with their parents and their spouses and their descendants as walk aright. Verily, You, only You, are the Almighty, the Wise
And guard them against the imprints of their faults, for, anyone whom You guard from the imprints of their faults on that Day, him You have verily taken into Grace. And that, that is the Supreme Triumph
But, behold, as for those who adamantly deny the Truth, they will be so addressed, "Indeed, greater than your disapproval of yourselves this Day was Allah's disapproval when you were invited to the Faith but you went on denying and screened yourselves off from the Light." (Kufr = Denying the Truth = Ingratitude for guidance = Choosing to live in darkness)
They will say, "Our Lord, twice You have made us die, just as twice You have made us live. But now we confess that we did trail behind in making progress. Is there any way out of this (second death)
It will be said to them, "This is your plight because when Allah alone was invoked you denied the Message, and when others (such as your 'holy' men) were included besides Him, you believed. But the Command belongs only to Allah, the Sublime, the Majestic
He it is Who shows you His Signs in the Universe and sends down sustenance for you from the sky. Yet none learns a lesson except those who turn to seek the Truth
Call you, then, upon Allah, sincere in your Faith in Him alone, however hateful this may be to those who deny the Truth (by invoking their 'holy' men besides Him)
Exalted is He in His Attributes, and the Exalter of ranks He is, the Lord of the Throne, Master of the Supreme Control. By His Command has He sent the Revelation to whomever He chose from among His servants, in order that He may warn mankind of the Day of Meeting. (The Day when all of them meet together and meet their Lord)
On the Day when they shall come forth, with nothing of them hidden from Allah. Well, to Whom belongs the Kingdom (as dawned upon you) this Day? To Allah, the One, the Irresistibly Dominating
Today will every 'Self' be rewarded for whatever it has earned - no wrong Today! Verily, Swift is Allah in settling accounts
Hence, warn them of the Day which draws near - when the hearts will throb muffling the voices in the sound boxes. No bosom friend will be there for the violators of human rights, nor shall any mediator be granted audience
He knows the treachery of the eyes, and all that the hearts would conceal. (Treachery of the eyes = See but not observe. Reporting hearsay as eyewitness. Failing to lower the gaze. Not using senses to full potential. Failing to learn from daily observation. Not using vision to develop the Vision)
Allah alone secures all things as the hinges secure the controlled freedom of a swinging door. Whereas those whom they call instead of Him, can secure nothing, for, behold, Allah! He alone is the Hearer, the Seer. (The common rendering here, that Allah judges while others cannot, is linguistically deficient and fails to stand up to reason)
Have they, then, never traveled in the land and seen the outcome of those who lived before their times? They were mightier than these, and in the impact they left on earth as evident from their ruins. But Allah took them to task for their trailing behind in humanity. And then they had no defender against the Laws of Allah
This - because their Messengers had come to them with all evidence of the Truth, and yet they rejected it. So Allah seized them. Behold, verily, He is Strong, Strict in grasping
Thus indeed, We sent Moses with Our Messages and a clear authority
To Pharaoh, Haman and Qarun (Korah), (the archetypes of tyranny, priesthood, and wealth respectively), but they said, "A spellbinder is he, a liar." (
Now when he brought them the Truth from Our Presence, they said, "Kill the sons of those who have come to believe with him and spare their women!" But the scheme of the rejecters came to naught. (
Pharaoh said, "Leave it up to me to kill Moses and let him call upon his Lord. Behold, I am afraid he will change your religion and your life-style and cause uprising in the land
Moses replied, "Behold, I have found refuge with my Lord and the Lord of you all from every arrogant one who believes not in a Day of Account (and, hence, in the Law of Requital)
Now a believing man among Pharaoh's folk who had thus far concealed his Faith, exclaimed, "Would you kill a man because he says, 'My Lord is Allah', and brought you all evidence of the Truth from your Lord? If he is a liar, then his lie will fall back upon him (he will soon be exposed). But if he is a man of truth, then some of the punishment he warns you against, will certainly befall you. Verily, Allah does not guide to success any who wastes his 'Self' being a persistent liar
O My people! Yours is the kingdom today, and most eminent are you in the earth. But who will help us against Allah's strike, once it hits us?" Pharaoh said, "I want you to see what I see. And I would never show you but the right way
Thereupon the believer said, "O My people! Behold, I fear for you the day of disaster that befell prior peoples who banded together (against the Truth)
The condition of Noah's people, and Aad and Thamud, and those who came after them. Allah never intends injustice for His servants
O My people! Behold, I fear for you a Day when you will cry unto one another in distress
A Day when you will turn to flee, having no defender against Allah's Law. And whoever forsakes Allah's Law of guidance, for him there is no guide
And it was to you that Joseph had come with all evidence of the Truth. But, you incessantly cast suspicion on what he had brought. And when he died, you said, 'Never will Allah send a Messenger after him (among you, the Israelites). Thus Allah's Law lets go astray a waster of 'Self' - doubter, given to suspicion
Such who keep opposing Allah's Messages without any authority that ever came unto them (40:56). Strongly disapproved is this attitude in the Court of Allah and in the sight of the believers. Thus Allah's Law sets a seal on every arrogant megalomaniac heart
(Thus spoke the believer among Pharaoh's folk.) And Pharaoh remarked, "O Haman! Build for me a lofty tower that I may have enough means
The means of access to the Heavens, and look upon the God of Moses. Behold, though, I think him a liar." Thus, goodly seemed to Pharaoh the evil of his own deeds, and so was he barred from the Path. In the end all plotting of Pharaoh led him to nothing but ruin
Still, the man who had believed, went on, "O My people! Follow me. I will show you the right way
My people! The life of this world is but a brief enjoyment. Whereas, behold, the Hereafter, that is the Lasting Home
There whoever has destabilized another person's life, will be repaid the like of it. And whoever has helped others, whether male or female, while believing in the Divine Values, such will enter the Garden wherein they will be blessed with sustenance without measure
O My people! What is my personal benefit that I call you to freedom from grief whereas you invite me to the Fire
You call me to disbelieve in Allah and accept authorities besides Him, a concept that holds no ground before what I know. On the other hand, I invite you to the Almighty, the Consistent Absolver of human faults and imperfections
No doubt you invite me to that calling upon which is an exercise in futility in this world and in the Hereafter. In fact unto Allah is our return and they who waste their human potential shall be companions of the Fire
Sometime in the future you will remember what I am saying to you now. I commit my affair to Allah, for, verily, Allah is Seer of His servants
And Allah protected him from their evil scheming while suffering was to surround Pharaoh's people
The Fire which they had been warned, day-in and day-out and then faced it (as long as they lived in this world.) And on the Day when the Hour dawns, it will be said, "Cast Pharaoh's folk into the toughest penalty." (7)
And behold! They will dispute with each other in the Fire. The commoners will say to the leaders, "Behold, we were following you. Can you, then, take away some of the Fire from us?" (14:21), (33:67), (34:32), (37:2)
The leaders will respond, "Behold, we are all in it together. Verily, Allah has judged between His servants
And those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, "Ask your Lord that He lighten for us one day of this torment
But (the keepers) will say, "Is it not that your Messengers came to you with all evidence of the Truth?" They will answer, "Yes, indeed." And the keepers will respond, "Pray, then! But the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but futile wandering
Behold, We verily do help Our Messengers and those who truly attain belief, in this world and also on the Day when the witnesses shall stand up. (On the Resurrection Day the humans will have a newly awakened consciousness within themselves witnessing the Truth)
The Day their excuses will not avail the oppressors, and theirs will be a removal from Divine Grace, and for them is but the home of misery
And indeed such was the history of Moses whom We gave the Guidance and thus made the Children of Israel inherit the Scripture
As a guide and a reminder for people of understanding
Hence, (O Prophet) remain patient in adversity - for, verily, Allah's Promise always comes True. And dispel and guard yourself against the slander and schemes of the alarmists, intended to cause dissension. And extol the Glory and Praise of your Lord night and day, working hard to set up the Divine Order for everyone to behold that He is Praiseworthy. (47:19), (48:2) - 'Zanb' also means sticking a blame or slander behind one's back for character assassination
They contest the Messages of Allah without possible authoritative evidence, since they have nothing but false pride in their hearts. By self-glorification none shall attain dignity. (7:146), (40:35). Dispel their designs by seeking refuge in Allah's Laws. Behold, He, only He, is the Hearer, the Seer
Greater indeed than the creation of the humans is the creation of the heavens and the earth. But most people never know what it implies (That the entire Universe submits to the Divine Laws, hence, should the mankind)
But then, the blind of reason and the seer at heart are not equal. And neither are those who attain faith, and help others, equal to those who create imbalance in people's lives. How seldom do you use your mind
Verily, the Hour is surely coming, of this there is no doubt. Yet most people do not believe. (That the Divine Revolution will come on this earth and then in the Cosmos)
Your Lord has said, "Call unto Me and I shall respond to you. (Whenever you need guidance, turn to My Laws in the Qur'an and you will find an answer). Verily, those who are too proud to serve Me, will enter Hell, disgraced
Allah it is Who has made the night for you, so that you might rest therein, and the day to make you see. Behold, Allah is the Lord of Bounty for mankind, but most people are ungrateful (not making proper use of His Bounties and keeping them confined to themselves)
Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things. There is no god but He. How can you, then, wander in the wilderness of thought
Thus it is - Wandering indeed are those who contend with the Messages of Allah
Allah it is Who rendered the earth a dwelling place for you and the atmosphere a canopy (to protect you against extremes of heat and cold and against meteorites (21:32)), and formed you - and formed you so well - and provided you with decent things of life. Such is Allah, your Lord. Most Exalted, then, is Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
He is the Ever-Living. There is no god but He. Call, then, unto Him alone, sincere for the Faith. (Be sincere in establishing His System of Life letting everyone behold that) all Praise indeed belongs to Allah, Lord of the Worlds
Say, "I am forbidden to obey whom you call upon instead of Allah, since all evidence of the Truth has come to me from my Lord and I am commanded to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds
He it is Who created you from dust, then from the gametes, then from an embryo, and then He brings you forth as an infant. And then you attain full strength and afterward you grow old - though some of you die earlier. All this He ordains so that you reach a term appointed, and along the way, develop your insight
He it is Who grants life and causes death. The moment He decrees a thing, He says to it only "Be!" and it is
Have you, then, seen those who contend against Allah's Revelations, and, hence, sway like errant winds
Those who deny the Book and thus the Message with which We sent all Our Messengers. But, in time they will come to know (what it was that they had denied)
When they shall have shackles of their own making around their necks, and are dragged in chains of their restricted thinking
Into the hot fluid (since they were floating from desire to desire), and, then, they become sparks of the Fire of their own making
And now, they will be asked, "Where are those whom you made partners
Besides Allah?" They will groan, "They have left us groping in the dark. Nay, rather, we were calling upon what existed not." This is how Allah lets go astray those who choose to live in darkness by denying the Truth and thus remaining ungrateful to Guidance. ('Kafirin' = Deniers of the Truth = Those who choose to remain in darkness = Those who are ungrateful for the Divine Guidance = Those who conceal the Truth)
This is because in your life on the earth you used to take delight in what was not True, and roamed about haughtily with your false doctrines
Enter you the gates of Hell to abide therein. What a miserable abode for the arrogant
Then, (O Prophet) remain patient, for, verily, Allah's Promise always comes True. Whether We let you witness some of what We promise them, or whether We cause you to die, still unto Us they will be brought back. (10:46), (2)
Yes indeed, We sent Messengers before you. Some of them We have mentioned to you, and some of them We have not mentioned to you. And none of the Messengers was given the authority to bring a Message or a Sign but by Allah's leave. But when (the period of respite was over and) the Command of Allah came, the matter was decided in truth and justice. And there and then perished the upholders of falsehood
(Those who ask for miracles, must know that Allah has placed Signs in the Universe, for example) Allah it is Who has made for you the quadrupeds, that you may ride some of them and from some you derive food
And you find yet other benefits from them. And that through them you may fulfill your heart-felt needs (of travel, food and milk, labor and battle) - and that you may be carried on them (on the land) as upon the ship (in the sea)
And thus He shows you His Wonders! Then which of the Wonders of Allah will you deny
Have they not, then, journeyed about the earth and seen what happened in the end to those who lived before them? They were more numerous than these, and greater in power than these are, and stronger in the impact they left upon earth. But all that they ever achieved availed them not, and it failed to make them truly rich
For when their Messengers came to them with all evidence of the Truth, they took delight in the knowledge they possessed. And the very thing they used to mock came on to pay a visit to them. (They took pride in their knowledge and skill and ridiculed the warnings of the Messengers that wrong Systems crash down however smartly they might be run)
And then, as they saw Our Strike, they cried, "We believe in Allah, the One God only and reject all that we used to associate with Him." (We will dismiss false 'authorities' and submit to the Divine System of Life)
But their proclamation of Faith could not help them, once they saw Our Blow. This is the Law of Allah that has always applied to His servants. And so, there and then, lost were the rejecters of the changeless Divine Laws
M. HA-MIM. Hameed: Owner of all Praise, Majeed: Sublimely Exalted states that
This is a Revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful
A Book whose verses and Messages are clearly explained, a Monograph in Arabic, the eloquent language, for all people who would make use of what they learn. ((7:158), (12:3), (13:37), (14:4), (25:1), (39:28),
A herald of glad news as well as a warning. Yet, most of them turn away so that they hear not
And so they say, "Our hearts are veiled from what you invite us to, and (consider) there is deafness in our ears, and that between us and you is a barrier. So, do as you will (mind your business), and, behold, we shall do as we have been doing
(O Prophet) say to them, "I am only a human being like you. It has been revealed to me that your God is One God. Therefore, march along the Straight Road to Him and seek the protection of His forgiveness. And (know that) there is nothing in store but loss for them who associate 'partners' with Him." ('Wayl' = Woe = Ultimate loss)
Those who (because of submitting to man-made systems) fail to set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat and thus practically deny (the accountability in) the life to come. (And the long-term prosperity and viability of their societies)
But, verily, those who accept the Divine Revelation and contribute toward enhancement of the society, shall have a reward unending
Say, "What! Do you indeed deny Him Who has created the earth in two stages? (Firstly when it shot away like a fiery ball from the Cosmic matter and secondly, when it cooled off sufficiently to become habitable). And would you still ascribe rivals unto Him? He it is, the Sustainer of the Worlds." (3)
And He it is Who placed therein firm mountains towering above it, and bestowed enduring Bliss upon it. And He measured therein its sustenance in Four Seasons, alike for all who (invariably) need it. (39:6)
Likewise, He it is Who designed well the Sky when it was Smoke (Nebulae of gas). And He said to it and the earth, "Come both of you willingly or unwillingly." They said, "We do come, obedient." ('Thumm' = Afterward, then, so, likewise, similarly, in the like manner. The Cosmic bodies coming into their orbits willingly or unwillingly indicates their having been made subservient to the Divine Laws, without free will (3)
And He it is Who ordained that they become seven Heavens in two stages and assigned to each heaven its function. And We decorated the sky of the world with shining lamps, and made them secure (that they clash not in their orbits (41:9)). That is the Design of the Almighty, the Knower
But if they turn away, then tell them, "I warn you of a thunder (of Requital) like the thunder of Aad and Thamud
Behold, the Messengers came unto them in their former and latter generations, saying, "Serve none but Allah!" They replied, "If our Lord had willed, He would have sent down angels. This is it, behold, we are disbelievers in what you (claim) are sent with
Now as for Aad, they behaved proudly in the land doing things contrary to the Truth. And they used to say, "Who is mightier than us in power?" How - could they not realize that Allah, Who created them, is Mightier than they in power? But they went on denying Our Messages, knowingly. ('Ja'hd' = Rejecting the Truth knowingly)
And so We sent upon them a raging windstorm for days of misfortune, that We let them taste a punishment of humiliation in the life of this world. But the punishment of the Hereafter is far more humiliating and they will have none to help them
And as for Thamud, We showed them the Way, but they preferred blindness over the light of Guidance. So the thunder of a degrading punishment seized them for what they used to earn
And We preserved those who had believed and walked aright. (The believers heeded the forewarning of their Messenger and had followed him to safety)
Hence, the Day! When the enemies of Allah will be gathered to the Fire, led in ranks
Till, when they reach it, their hearing and their sight and their skins will bear witness against them, about all they had been doing
And they will ask their skins, "Why did you testify against us?" They will say, "Allah has given us the power to speak as He has given speech to all things. For, He created you for the first time and unto Him you are brought back. (1)
And you did not hide yourselves that your hearing, or your sight or your skins would bear witness against you. Nay, but you thought that Allah never knew a great deal of what you were doing
And that very assumption that you thought about your Lord has brought you to ruin, and so now you find yourselves among the losers
And even if they bear with patience, the Fire will be their home. And if they ask to be allowed to make amends, their request will not be granted
(In the life of the world) We assigned them comrades who made pleasing to them their present and past actions. (The Divine Law so applied to them (43:36). "Birds of the same feather flock together.") - And so, the Word has come to pass for them as it did concerning the communities that lived before them, among the rural and the urban. Verily, they all are losers
Now those who adamantly deny the Truth, say, "Listen not to this Qur'an, but drown it in uproar so that you might dominate
But We shall certainly make these deniers taste an awful suffering, and verily, We shall requite them for the worst of their deeds
That is the reward of Allah's enemies - the Fire. Therein will be their eternal home. A befitting reward, for they knowingly opposed Our Messages
And the deniers will say, "Our Lord! Show us those, among the rural and the urban, who misled us. We will trample them underfoot so that they become the lowliest
But, behold, as for those who say, "Our Lord is Allah," and then remain steadfastly upright - upon them descend angels, saying, "Fear not, and grieve not, but hear good news of the Paradise that you are promised. ('Angels descending and saying' = Allah's Laws supporting the steadfastly upright who submit to Allah alone. (3:124-125), (8:10-12), (33)
We are close to you in the life of the world and in the Hereafter. In it (in your paradise on the earth and in the Hereafter) you shall have all that you may desire and in it you shall have all that you ever prayed for
A gift of welcome from Him Who is all-Forgiving, most-Merciful
And who is better in speech than him who invites people to Allah, tries to grow himself in goodness, fulfills the needs of others and declares, "Surely, I am one of those who surrender unto Him
Since good conduct and bad conduct cannot be alike, repel evil words and deeds in a way that is decent. And, behold, he, between whom and you there was enmity, may become as though he was your bosom friend
Yet, none is granted this quality but those who exercise patience and restraint. And none is granted it except those who become worthy of great happiness and good fortune. This quality can make you outstandingly successful, winning. ('Zu-hazzin azim' = Extremely fortunate, includes the two meanings rendered here)
(This quality is difficult to attain because Satan, your impulsive emotions and rogue people, will try to instigate you.) Hence, if a prompting from Satan stirs you up into anger, seek refuge with Allah (recalling this admonition immediately). Behold, He is all Hearing, all Knowing
(Divine Laws help you journey through life in great balance as you see in the Nature). Now among His Signs are the night and the day as well as the sun and the moon. Adore neither the sun nor the moon, but adore Allah Who created them, if it is Him you wish to serve
But if they are too proud, those who are with your Lord, practically extol His Glory night and day, and tire not. (All things in the Universe are working toward the fulfillment of the Divine Plan)
And among His Signs is this: That you see the earth humble (to Command). And behold! When We send down water thereon, it thrills and vibrates with life! Behold, He Who revives it, verily is the Reviver of the dead. For, behold, He has Power over all things. (His Laws can revive the dead of heart and the lowly nations as well)
Behold, those who distort Our Messages are not hidden from Us. Hence, is he who is cast into the Fire better, or he who comes secure on the Resurrection Day? Do what you will; He is ever Seer of all that you do
Think of those who fail to see the power in this Reminder when it comes to them! For, verily, it is a Tremendous Scripture
No falsehood can ever approach it openly or in stealth - a Revelation from all Wise, Owner of Praise
Nothing is being said to you (O Messenger) but what was said to all Messengers before you. Behold, your Lord is Owner of the protecting forgiveness, and Owner of awesome grasp. ('Ghafarah' = Helmet of armor = Protecting from hurt = Absolving imperfections)
Now if We had made it a Qur'an in a non-Arabic tongue they would surely have said, "Why is it that its verses have not been made clear? Why - a foreign tongue and an Arab?" Say, "For those who accept it, this is a Guidance and medicine for a wholesome life. But as for those who will not believe (Arabs or non-Arabs), in their ears is deafness, and so it remains obscure to them. They are like people who are called to from afar
Yes, indeed, We had given Moses the Scripture too (in their language), and it was also disputed. And but for a Word from your Lord that has already gone forth, all disputes between them would have been judged. And, behold, they keep lingering in doubt amounting to suspicion concerning this Revelation as well! (The Word gone forth = The Law of free will (2:256),
(The Revelation that shows mankind how to grow their 'Self'.) Whoever does good to others does good to his own 'Self', and whoever causes imbalance in the lives of others, hurts his own 'Self'. And your Lord is never unjust to His servants
In Him alone is vested the knowledge of the Hour. (Actions reach their logical consequence in stages). And no fruit emerges from its sheath, and no female ever conceives, nor gives birth, but according to His Laws of Science. And so, on the Day He will call them, "Where are now those 'partners' of Mine?" They will say, "We confess to You, none of us sees them around here." ('Ilm = Knowledge = Skill = Science)
And thus, those whom they used to call upon before, will leave them groping in the dark. And they will realize there is no asylum for them
Man tires not of looking for wealth and happiness, and if harm touches him, soon he is disheartened, despondent. (100)
And when We let him taste Grace from Us after some hurt that has touched him, he says, "This is from, and for, me. I think not that the Time will ever rise (to go against me). And if I am indeed brought back before my Lord, then, behold, with Him is even better return for me." (I shall be favored there as I am favored here). But We certainly will tell the ungrateful all that they did. And certainly We will make them taste heavy punishment. ('Ma Li' = For me, from me. 'As-Sa'ah' = The Hour = Resurrection = Revolution = Turn of fortunes = Time)
Also, when We bestow Bliss on man, he turns away, and withdraws aside, but when a hurt touches him, then he is full of prayers
Say, "Have you ever considered: If this Revelation is truly from Allah and you deny it, then who can be more astray than he who is in a deep split of his personality or the one who opposes it?" (This Book from your Creator is all about you)
In time We will show them Our Signs in the utmost Horizons and within themselves, so that it will become clear to them that this Qur'an is indeed the Truth. Is it not enough for them to know that your Lord is Witness to all things (including this proclamation)
Oh, verily, they are still in doubt about the meeting with their Lord! How! Does He not encompass everything
M. Ha-Mim. Hameed the Owner of Praise, Majeed The Glorious
S.Q. 'Ain-Sein-Qaaf. Aleem the Knower, Samee' the Hearer, Qadir the Almighty, proclaims that
Thus it is: Revealing to you (O Prophet) as He did to those before you, is Allah, the Almighty, the Wise
Unto Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And the Most Exalted, the Tremendous is He
The heavens above them would shatter (if the Universe were to run like the humans run their lives (19:88-91). But angels (the Divine Laws) practically extol their Lord's Glory by protecting the Order in the Universe. Oh, verily, Allah! He alone is the Absolver of imperfections, the Merciful. ('Malaekah = Angels = Divine Laws in the Universe. 'Yastaghfirun' = They help protect like a helmet protects the head. 'Sabh' = Swim in strides = Doing one's best)
Now as for those who instead of Him take patrons, Allah is Watcher over them, and you are not a pleader on their behalf
And thus: We have revealed to you a Monograph in Arabic so that you may warn the Foremost of all towns and those who dwell around it, and may warn of the Day of Gathering, which is beyond all doubt. One group will be in the Garden, and one group will be in the Flames. (Such will happen in this world and in the life to come)
Now had Allah willed, He could have made all of them one single community. But Allah brings into His Grace him who so wills (making himself worthy). Whereas for the violators of human rights shall be no patron and no helper
Or have they chosen patrons besides Him? But Allah, He alone is the Patron, since it is He alone Who revives the dead. (And His Laws can revive the dead of heart). He is the Appointer of due measure for all things
And in whatever you humans may differ, the Decision rests with Allah. (Say), "Such is Allah, my Lord. In Him I trust and unto Him I always turn." ((42:8). Turning to Allah = Turning to His Laws in the Qur'an
Originator of the heavens and the earth! He has made for you pairs from among yourselves, and pairs among the quadrupeds, whereby He multiplies you. There is nothing whatsoever like unto Him. And He is the Hearer, the Seer
His are the Keys of the heavens and the earth. He grants abundant provision, or gives it in scant measure according to His Laws (of Economics given in the Qur'an. Mankind can open His Treasures only with His Keys (7:96), (28:77), (41:10)). Behold, He is the Knower of all things
He has ordained for you all, the same System of Life that He enjoined upon Noah - And We have revealed to you (O Prophet) the same Message as We enjoined upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: "Establish the Divine System of Life and make no sects in it." (O Prophet) Hard it is upon the idolaters (those who worship false 'authorities') the unity you call to. Allah draws unto Himself everyone who is willing, and guides unto Himself everyone who turns unto Him." (Sects vs. Unity: (3:32), (3:104), (6:160), (30:31), (42:13)
And they became sects for no reason but through rivalry among themselves, after the Knowledge had come to them. Had it not been for a Word that has already gone forth from your Lord for an appointed term, all matters would have been decided among them. (The Word = The Law of free will, in this context). Behold, the later generations who inherited the Scripture of the old still keep harboring doubts about it
Because of this (dilemma), then, (O Messenger) summon all mankind. And stand firm as you are commanded, and follow not their wishes. But announce, "I believe in the Book that Allah has revealed, and I am commanded to be just among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. We are responsible for our deeds and you are responsible for your deeds - No argument between us and you! (109:6). Allah will bring us together and unto Him is our journeying
And as for those who argue about Allah after He has been accepted (and the Divine System has been established as a living witness to the Truth), futile is their argument at their Lord. And upon them is condemnation and theirs will be a severe retribution
Allah it is Who has revealed the Book setting forth the Truth, and the Balance (for people to weigh right and wrong.) And what will make you realize that the Hour (the consequence of your actions) might be close
Only those who deny it seek to hasten it. But the believers remain conscious of the Law of Requital knowing that it is the Truth. Oh, verily, those who call the Hour in question have indeed gone far astray. ('As you sow so shall you reap' is all that free will and the Law of requital are about)
Allah is Sublime, Aware of the minutest needs of His servants. He provides for them (even if they deny Him) according to His Laws. And He is the Strong, the Almighty
Whoever desires the harvest of the life to come, We increase his harvest. And whoever desires only the harvest of this world, We give him something thereof, but he will have no share in the life to come. (Individuals and nations attain prosperity in both lives only by submitting to the Divine Values)
What! Do they have 'partners' who have set up for them some religion without Allah's leave? And but for a Decisive Word (the period of Respite), all matters would have been decided between them immediately. Verily, there is an awful doom for those who relegate the Truth
You will see the transgressors worrying about what they had been doing, and their earning is bound to fall back upon them. And those who accept the Message and enhance the society will be in flowery rows of the Gardens. For them is whatever they desire from their Lord. This, this indeed is the Great Bounty
This is the good news from Allah to His servants who believe and lead a righteous life. Say, "No reward do I ask you for this other than that you show loving kindness to the ones near (in the human bond, and thus seek the Way to your Lord (25:57))." For, anyone who benefits people, We shall grant him additional good. And, verily, Allah is ever Absolver of imperfections, Responsive to gratitude
Do they say, "He has invented a lie about Allah?" But then, had Allah so willed, He could have made your heart insensitive (10:16). And Allah will wipe out the falsehood and will prove the Truth by His Words. Verily, He is the Knower of all that is in the hearts
And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants, and pardons their ill-deeds and He knows all you do. ('Taubah' = Repentance = Coming to the right course and taking corrective action. Pardon = Blotting out the unfavorable imprints on the human "Self)
And accepts all those who attain belief and help others, and He gives them a far exceeding reward from His bounty. But for those who adamantly deny the Truth and choose to stay in darkness, is a severe retribution
And if Allah made His provision unlimited for His servants, they would have created more disorder in the earth (by increasing in pride and greed (96:6)). But as it is, He bestows His provision in due measure according to His Laws. For, behold, He is Aware, Seer of His servants (their needs and their psyche)
And He it is Who sends down rain after they have despaired and He spreads out His Grace widely. And He is the Protecting Friend, the Owner of all Praise
And among His Signs is the creative design of the Heavens and the Earth, and the living creatures which He has dispersed throughout them. And He is Able to gather them together when He will. (Herein is an allusion to the existence of life in other celestial bodies, and to man meeting with the 'aliens' some day)
Now whatever calamity befalls you, is a consequence of your own actions and He pardons a great deal. (If mankind harmonize themselves with Divine Laws, their Systems would run as orderly as the rest of the Universe does)
And you cannot evade the Law of Requital anywhere in the earth, and you have no patron and no helper besides Allah
And among His Signs are the ships that sail like bannered mountains through the seas
And if He so wills He calms the winds so that they come to a halt on its surface. Herein, behold, are signs for everyone who is patient (in reading the Book of Nature) and grateful (for what he learns)
Or that He may cause them to perish as a consequence of their deeds, but He forgives a great deal. (The human 'Self' may progress like ships that sail freely through the sea, suffer stagnancy, or perish to a subhuman existence)
And those who dispute about Our Signs, let them know that they have no shelter outside Our Laws
Now whatever you are given is but a fleeting enjoyment of the life of this world. And that which is with Allah is far better and more lasting - for all those who believe in Divine Laws and trust in their Lord
And desist from actions that most of all drag down the individual and collective human potential, and from stinginess and obscene behavior, and when annoyed, readily forgive people. ((4:31), (53:32). 'Fawahish' = Indecencies, miserliness amounting to shame
And who respond to their Lord, and establish the Divine System and who conduct their affairs by mutual consultation. And they spend on others of what We have given them
And who, whenever frank injustice afflicts them, stand up for their rights. (They establish the System wherein the oppressed is helped and the oppressor is requited)
But requiting evil may become an evil in itself! Hence, whoever pardons and makes peace, his reward rests with Allah. Verily, He loves not the violators of human rights
And whoever stands up for his rights and defends himself, when he has been wronged, for such, there is no blame against them
The blame is against those who oppress people, and cause disorder in the earth resorting to aggression unprovoked. They are the ones for whom there is an awful doom
And, verily, whoever is patient and forgives, behold, that indeed is from strength of character
And he whom Allah lets go astray has, then on, no protector. And you will see the oppressors when they face the punishment how they say, "Is there any way of return!" (Allah lets go astray = People only go astray by defying the Divine Law of Guidance)
And you will see them facing it, humiliated, looking and yet not looking. And those who believe will say, "Verily, lost on this Day of Resurrection are those who had wasted their own 'Self' and their families." Oh, verily, the wrongdoers will fall into lasting suffering
And they will have no patrons to help them instead of Allah. One who goes astray by violating the Laws of Guidance, for him there is no road
Hence, respond to your Lord before there comes to you from Allah a Day which is not to be averted. There will be no shelter for you on that Day nor will you have any rebuttal to what you did
But if they turn away, We have not sent you as a guardian over them. Your job is to convey the Message. And behold, when We cause man to taste of Grace form Us, he rejoices in it. And if a calamity befalls them as a consequence of their own doings, then, behold, man is contentious against Divine Laws. (They say that God had so willed)
To Allah belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth. He creates and designs all things according to His Laws. He bestows the gift of daughters according to His Laws and the gift of sons according to His Laws
Or He bestows both males and females, and He leaves infertile some according to His Laws. For, verily, He is the all Knowing Appointer of designs
And it is not for any human being that Allah will speak to him other than through direct Revelation (on the heart of His Messengers) or from behind a barrier (such as at Mount Sinai to Moses) or by sending a Messenger to convey His Words with His Permission (as all Messengers did). Verily, He is the Most High, the Wise
And thus We have revealed to you (O Prophet) a life-giving Message, by Our Command. You knew not what Revelation is, nor what Faith implies. (That the Power of Faith could revolutionize humanity). But now We have made it a Light, whereby We show the Way to Our servants according to Our Law of Guidance. And, verily, (O Prophet) you shall certainly show them the Straight Path
The Path that leads to Allah, to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Oh, verily, with Allah is the beginning and with Him is the end of all affairs. (All things go back to Him as their Source, and all things pursue their course according to His Laws)
M. Ha-Mim. Hameed Owner of all Praise, Majeed Owner of Glory, states that
Witness to itself is this Scripture that is clear in itself and shows the Truth clearly
Behold, We have made it a Monograph in clear Arabic language that you may fully understand. (7:158), (12:3), (13:37), (14:4), (25:1), (39:28),
And, verily, in the Source of Decrees with Us, it is indeed sublime, decisive
Should We withdraw the Reminder from you just because you are a people bent upon wasting yourselves
And how many a Prophet did We send to the previous generations
But never came unto them a Prophet, but they mocked him
And so, We annihilated them. They were mightier in prowess than these are. They were made history and this fact should serve as an example for these people. ('Madha mathal' = An image of the past, lost and gone)
If you ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth?" They will answer, "The Almighty, the Knower created them
He it is Who has made the earth a cradle for you and has made roads therein and ways of subsistence, so that you may find ways to your destination. ('Subula' = Ways and means)
And He it is Who sends down water from the sky in due measure. And We revive with it a dead land, thus will you be brought forth
And He it is Who has created all the pairs and He it is Who has given you all those ships and quadrupeds on which you ride
So that you might have control of the means of transport, and that upon gaining control of them you might remember your Lord's Blessings, and say, "Glorified is He Who has made all this of service to us. (Against His Laws) we would not have been able to attain this control. ('Alayehi': The singular form here refers to 'transport' including the ships, the quadrupeds, and all else)
Hence, verily, it is unto Him that we must always turn
And yet they have 'made' some of His servants to be a part of Him! Verily, most obviously ungrateful is man
What! Has He taken daughters out of what He Himself created and grants you sons of your choice
Yet if any of them is given the glad tiding of what he likens to the Beneficent, his face saddens and he is filled with hidden anger
(He says), "What! That which has to be raised in ornaments?" And then he finds himself in an inner conflict (whether to let the daughter live or bury her in the dust)
And they 'make' the angels who are servants of the Beneficent, females. Did they witness their creation? Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be called to account (for their false claims)
Yet they say, "If it had been the Will of the Beneficent, we should not have worshiped them." But, of that, they have no knowledge. (That there is no room for fatalism in Divine Laws. Humans have been endowed with free will (6:149), (36:47). They only wander in the valley of conjecture
What! Have We given them a scripture before this to which they are holding fast
Nay, but they say, "Behold, we found our fathers following a certain religion, and we find our way in their footprints
Thus it is. Whenever We sent, before you, a Warner to a community, its luxurious ones said, "Behold, We found our fathers following a certain religion, and we are following their footprints
(Whereupon the Prophet would say), "Why! Even though I bring you better guidance than that you found your ancestors following?" They replied, "Behold, We deny what you are sent with
And so We requited them. Then see what the outcome of the deniers was
And when Abraham declared to his father and his people, "Verily, I do indeed free myself of what you worship
None (shall I serve) but He Who brought me into being, and, behold, He it is Who will guide me
And He left an enduring lesson for subsequent generations that they may seek inspiration from it. (Taking a firm stand against blind following)
As it is, I have let these people, and their fathers get along with their lives, until the Truth has come to them and a Messenger making things clear (and afford them a chance to achieve true success)
But now that the Truth has come to them, they say, "It is a magical lie and, behold, we are disbelievers therein
And they say, "Why was not this Qur'an sent down to some great man of the two towns (Makkah and Taif)
But are they the ones who distribute your Lord's Grace (of Revelation)? Nay, it is We Who distribute among them even their material needs in the life of the world. And We grade them in work so that they might help one another (with different skills). And the Grace of your Lord (the revealed Guidance) is better than all the wealth they amass. (1)
If mankind were intended to become One Community (through wealth and not through Ideology), We might have made all those who disbelieve in the Beneficent super rich, giving them roofs of silver for their houses and stairs of silver to climb
And for their houses doors of silver and couches of silver to recline on
And gold! Yet all this would have been but a fleeting delight of the life of the world. But the Eternity with your Lord belongs to those who walk aright
Whoever closes his eyes to the remembrance of the Beneficent, to him We assign a Satan as an intimate companion. (His desires overtake him)
And, behold, they surely hinder them from the Way, but (rationalizing their actions) they think that they are guided aright
But in the end when he comes to Us, he will say (to his split self), "Ah, I wish I was far apart from you as the East is from the West! Ah, what a miserable companion
It will not console you on that Day that after doing wrong together, you are now partners in punishment
But, can you make the deaf of heart hear or show the way to the blind of heart? Such is the case of him who obviously wishes to wander off road
(O Prophet) Even if We take you away, verily, Our Requital is inevitable for them
Or, We may show you what We promise them. (If they accept the Message they will be blessed with Our bounties, instead of suffering). Behold, We have full power over them. (10:46), (13:40), (2)
So hold fast unto what is revealed to you. For, verily, you are on a Straight Path
And, behold, this Reminder will give eminence to you and your people. But in time, all of you will be called to account for what you have done with it. (21:10), (2)
Check the Messengers (their Message) We sent before you. Did We ever appoint gods to be worshiped other than the Beneficent
Thus indeed, We sent Moses with Our Messages to Pharaoh and his chiefs, and he said, "Behold, I am a Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds
But when he presented them Our Messages, behold, they laughed at them
We showed them Sign after Sign each greater than the previous like of it, and We took them to task with suffering so that they might turn (to make amends)
But they kept saying, "O Wizard! Pray for us to your Lord according to His covenant with you. For, verily, we shall now walk the right way
But as soon as we relieved their affliction, behold, they broke their word
(As Moses was becoming popular), Pharaoh kept announcing to his people, "O My people! Is not mine the Kingdom of Egypt, and these streams flowing beneath me? What! See you not then
Am I not better than this despicable fellow man who can hardly make his point? (Pharaoh held the Divine Message in low esteem and not the speech of Moses as suggested in some traditions)
And then, why have no golden armlets been bestowed on him? Or why have no angels come along escorting him?" ('Aswirah' = Armlets of gold, which were considered a sign of honor, stature and royalty in many civilizations)
Thus did he stupefy his people and they obeyed him. Verily, they were a nation who readily drifted away from the Truth
So when they continued to challenge Us, We requited them and drowned them all
And so We made them history and an example for later generations
When the son of Mary is mentioned as an example (O Prophet), behold, your people raise an outcry about it
And they say, "Which is better, our gods or he?" They raise this objection as a vain argument. Nay! But they are a contentious folk
He was nothing but a servant whom We had graced (with Revelation) and whom We made an example for the Children of Israel
And had We so willed We could have made you humans into angels succeeding one another on earth
And, behold, this (Qur'an) indeed gives knowledge of the oncoming Revolution. Hence, bear no doubt about it and follow Me. This alone is the Straight Path
And let not Satan (your whims and deceivers) bar you from it. Behold, he is your open enemy
Now when Jesus came with the evident Truth, he said, "Now I have come unto you with wisdom and to make clear to you some of the issues on which you differ. So, be mindful of Allah and heed me
Behold, Allah, He is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him alone. This is a Straight Way
(This was the true Monotheism he had brought) but factions among them began to hold different views. Then anguish of an awful Day awaits those who wrongfully deviated
Herein was the response to the idolaters' objections about their idols and Jesus (43:58).) Do they only wait for the Revolution that will (seem to) come upon them all of a sudden while they perceive not
Friends on that Day will be foes to one another except those who walk aright. (The Divine Ideology will keep them close)
O My servants! No fear for you this Day nor are you to grieve
You who believed in Our Messages and surrendered to Us
Enter the Garden, you and your spouses, rejoicing
Therein they will be served around in trays and goblets of gold. And therein is all that a person might desire and the eyes might delight in. And you are immortal therein
Such is the Paradise that you shall have inherited by virtue of your deeds
Fruits of those deeds shall you have in abundance to partake thereof
But, behold, those who stole the fruit of others' labor shall abide in the suffering of Hell
It will not be relaxed for them, and therein they will be in despair
And it is not We Who wrong them, but it is they who used to hurt their own "Self" by doing wrong to others
And they will cry, "O Keeper (of Hell)! Let your Lord finish us!" He will answer, "Verily, you must live on
Indeed We have conveyed to you the Truth, but most of you resent the Truth
What! Have they devised a plan? Behold, it is We Who determine the outcome
Or do they think that We do not hear their secret plans and private meetings? Yes indeed, We do, and Our envoys are with them, recording
Say (O Prophet), "If the Beneficent ever had a son, I would be the first to worship him
Glorified is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of Supreme Control, from what they ascribe to Him
So let them chatter and play until they meet their Day which they have been promised
He it is Who is God in the heaven and God in the earth. And He is the Wise, the Knower
And Blessed is He to Whom belongs the Kingdom of the Highs and the Lows and all that is between them. And with Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and unto Him you shall be returned. (And, He knows when mankind will rally around the Divine Ideology, and every step of yours is getting closer to it)
And those whom they call instead of Him possess no power of intercession, except such who stand up to witness in truth and they know
Now if you ask them who created them, they will surely answer, "Allah." So how come are they lost in the wilderness of thought
By his (the Prophet's) silent cry, "O My Lord! Behold, these are a folk who believe not!" (His call will be heard. ()
Then bear with them, and say, "Peace!" In time, they will come to know what they now don't
M. Ha-Mim. Hameed Owner of all Praise, Majeed Owner of all Glory, states that
By this Divine Writ that is clear in itself and makes things clear
Behold, We have revealed it on a Blessed Night, for, verily We have always been warning. (Revealed on the Prophet's heart in a Blessed Night in the month of Ramadhan, 610 C.E., and then conveyed to mankind in stages over a period of 23 years. (2)
Herein is distinctly presented every Matter of Wisdom
A Command from Our Presence, behold, We have always been sending
A Mercy from your Lord. Behold! He is the Hearer, the Knower
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you could ever attain conviction
There is no god but He. He it is Who gives life and gives death; your Lord and the Lord of your earliest ancestors
Nay, but they are toying with their doubts
Wait, then, for the Day when the sky will bring forth a pall of visible smoke
Enveloping all mankind, heralding an outcry, "Grievous is this suffering
O Our Lord! Relieve us of this suffering. Behold, now we are believers (in Your Laws)
How can there be another Reminder for them seeing that a Messenger had already come to them, clearly expounding the Truth? (And this Qur'an is the Eternal Reminder)
Whereupon they had turned away from him, and said, "Taught and tutored is he, a man possessed
Still, behold, We shall postpone this suffering for a while although you will revert to your old ways
On the Day when We shall seize with mighty grasp, verily, We shall indeed dispense Our Requital
And indeed We put to test before them Pharaoh's nation, for there came unto them an honorable Messenger
(He said), "Pay attention to me O Servants of Allah! Verily, I am a Messenger to you worthy of trust. ('Add' = Pay dues, to give in, to listen, to return the trust)
Exalt not yourselves against Allah, for, verily, I have come to you with a Clear Authority (Divine Revelation)
And, behold, it is with my Lord and your Lord that I seek refuge against that you debar me. ('Rajm' = Debar, stone, revile, expel, insult, dismiss, humiliate, curse, deride, mock, ridicule, belittle)
And if you do not believe in me, then simply leave me alone." (Allow me to take my people with me. Thereupon Pharaoh and his chiefs denied him)
So he cried unto his Lord, "This is an exploitive people." ('Mujrim' = One who thrives on the fruit of others' toil = Exploitive)
(And his Lord Commanded), "Take away My servants by night. Behold, you will be followed
And leave the ebbed, becalmed sea behind, for, verily, they are an army destined to be drowned
How many gardens did they leave behind, and water-springs
And fields of grain, and grand palaces
And blessings that they enjoyed
Thus it was! And We made another people heirs
And neither the sky nor the earth wept over them, nor were they reprieved again
And, indeed, We delivered the Children of Israel from the humiliating suffering (of bondage)
From Pharaoh, for he glorified himself to the extent of wasting his own "Self
And, indeed, We chose them among the contemporary nations because of the Knowledge (of Revelation)
And We gave them Signs in which there was a manifest trial
Behold, now, these people say
There is nothing but our first death, and we shall not be raised again
So then, bring back our forefathers if you are men of truth
Are they, then, by any means better than the nation of Tubba and those before them? (Yet) We annihilated them for their violation of human rights
For, We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, merely as idle sport
None of this have We created without Purpose. But most of them are not aware of this fact. (They fail to realize that the human 'Self' lives on after death and must be recompensed in the Hereafter)
Verily, the Day of Decision is appointed for them all
The Day, when no friend shall be of avail to his friend, and none shall be helped
Except those who made themselves worthy of Allah's Mercy. For, verily, He, He alone is the Mighty, the Merciful
Verily, the tree of bitter deeds
Will be the food of him who plunged down his and other's capacities. (17:6)
Like molten brass will it boil in the belly
As the boiling, burning despair
Take him and drag him into the midst of hell. (That is what the unending greed does)
Then pour upon his head the boiling anguish
Taste! Behold, you considered yourself so mighty, so noble. (But the Law of Requital is absolutely just)
Behold, this is the very thing you doubted (and hence, trampled Divine Values)
Verily, those who walked aright, will find themselves in a secure state
Amid gardens and water springs
Dressed in fine silk and in rich brocade, in a company affectionate they will be
Thus shall it be. And We shall pair them with virtuous companions of beautiful vision
In that Paradise they shall claim all the delicious fruits of their deeds in blissful contentment
True immortality! They taste not death again after the first death. Thus will He save them from getting stuck at the Insurmountable Barrier. (
A Bounty from your Lord! That is the Supreme Triumph
Thus, then, (O Prophet) We have made this Qur'an easy to understand, in your own human language, so that people might take it to their minds and hearts
So wait you and watch. Behold, they too have to wait
M. Ha-Mim. Hameed Owner of all Praise, Majeed Owner of all Glory states that
The Revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
Behold, in the heavens and the earth are Signs for all who are willing to attain conviction
And in your own creative design, and in all the animals which He has spread widely, there are Signs for those who explore and attain certainty
And in the alternation of the night and the day, and in the means of sustenance which Allah sends down from the Height, reviving the earth which had been lifeless, and in the change of winds and seasons - in all this are Signs for people who use their reason
These are the Messages of Allah We convey to you with Truth. Then, in what HADITH, if not in Allah and His Verses, will they believe
Woe unto every fabricating impostor
(The impostor) who hears Allah's Verses conveyed to him, yet he is haughtily obstinate, as though he never heard them. Hence, announce unto him grievous punishment
For when he learns anything of Our Verses, he belittles them. Theirs is a shameful suffering in store
Ahead of them is Hell, and what they have earned will not avail them, nor will the AWLIA (saints, sufis, imams) whom they had chosen besides Allah. Theirs will be an awesome suffering. (29:24), (7)
Guidance is this Qur'an. And those who deny the Revelations of their Lord, for them is a weakening chastisement
Allah it is Who has made the sea of service to you that the ships may run thereon by His Command, and that you may seek of His Bounty, and that you may be grateful
And He has made subservient to you, from Himself, all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Therein, behold, are Signs for people and nations who reflect
Tell all believers that they should forgive and try to save those who do not believe in the oncoming Days of Allah. It is for Him alone to recompense each nation for their good or ill deeds that they have earned. (Days of Allah = When mankind establishes the Divine System on earth. ((14:5). 'Yaghfir' = Forgive = Protect from the harmful effects of misdeeds
Whoever helps others helps himself. And whoever hurts others hurts his own 'Self'. And in the end all of you will be brought back unto your Lord. ('Amale Saleh' = Fulfilling others' needs = Enhance human potential = Take corrective action = Help the individual or society = Doing collective good = Grow in goodness. 'Amale Su' = Destabilize someone = Hurting others = Causing imbalance = Promoting injustice and inequity)
And, indeed, We gave to the Children of Israel the Scripture, the Rule and a succession of Prophets, and provided them with good things and bestowed upon them bounties more than other nations of the time.
And gave them clear Commandments. Yet, they fell for differences through rivalry among themselves after Knowledge had come to them. Behold, your Lord will judge between them on the Resurrection Day concerning all they differed about
And now We have appointed you (O Messenger) on the Right Way. So follow it, and yield not to the whims of the ignorant
Behold, they cannot avail you the least against Allah. And, verily, the wrongdoers are friends unto one another, while Allah is the Friend of those who walk aright
The Messages right before you are a means of vision and insight for mankind, and a Guidance and a Grace for people who wish to live by conviction rather than uncertainty
What! Do those who disrupt others' lives think that We will treat them, in life and death, like believers and helpers of humanity? Off balance, indeed, is their judgment
For, Allah has created the heavens and the earth with Purpose, and that every person shall be repaid what he or she has earned. And none shall be wronged
Have you ever noted him who makes his desire his god? Consequently Allah lets him go astray despite his knowledge. The Divine Law seals his hearing and heart, and places a veil on his sight. Then who will lead him after he has left Allah? Will you not then take this admonition to heart
And yet they say, "There is nothing beyond our life of this world. We die as we come to life (per chance) and nothing destroys us but Time." But of that they have no knowledge. They do nothing but make a wild guess
And when Our Revelations are conveyed to them in all clarity, their only argument is this, "Bring back our forefathers if you are truthful
Say, "It is Allah who gives you life, and then causes you to die. And He will gather all of you together on the Resurrection Day, the advent of which is beyond doubt." But most people know not (that the human 'Self' survives the physical death)
For, unto Allah belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth. And on the Day when the Hour stands - on that Day will be lost all those who run after the mirage of Falsehood
And you will see every nation kneeling down, each nation called to its record. (And it will be said), "This Day you shall be paid for all that you ever did
This Our Record tells the truth about you. Behold, We arranged for all your doings to be meticulously recorded
Now as for those who accepted the Message and helped the society, their Lord will admit them into His Grace. That! That is the Obvious Triumph
And as for those who rejected the Truth (they will be told), "Were not My Messages conveyed to you? But you took an arrogant stance since you were an exploitive folk
And when it was said, "Behold, Allah's Promise always comes true and there is no doubt about the Hour - you would reply, "We do not know what the Hour is. We think it could be conjecture, however, we are not certain
And their disruptive actions will become obvious to them and the very thing they used to mock will surround them
And it will be said, "This Day We forget you, just as you forgot the meeting of this your Day. And your abode is the Fire, and there is none to help you
This, because you ridiculed Allah's Messages, having allowed the life of the world to deceive you." This Day, therefore, they will not be taken out, nor can they make amends
(Time is now to realize) Then, all Praise is due to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, the Lord of the Worlds
And His alone is all Majesty in the Universe, and He alone is Almighty, Most Wise
M. Ha-Mim. Hameed Owner of all Praise, Majeed Owner of all Glory, states that
The Revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without Purpose, and for a term appointed. And yet, those who are determined to deny the Truth turn away from what they are warned against
Say, "Have you ever given thought to what it is that you call upon instead of Allah? Show me what they have created of the earth. Or do they have a share in the heavens? Bring me a Scripture before this one, or even some remains of knowledge if you are true in your claim
And who could be further astray than one who invokes, instead of Allah, such as respond not to him even until the Day of Resurrection, and, in fact, are totally unaware of their call
And when mankind is gathered, the false deities will become enemies to those who worshiped them, and will utterly reject their worship
But when Our Clear Messages are conveyed to them, the rejecters say of the Truth as soon as it reaches them, "This is obviously a magical lie." ('Sihr' = Magic = Lie = Delusion = Spellbinding eloquence = Amazing = Incredible = Surprising)
Or do they say, "He has invented all this?" Say, "If I have invented it, still you have no power to support me against Allah. He is fully Aware of your reckless flight of imagination. He suffices as a Witness between me and you. And He is the Forgiving, the Merciful." (You shall come to know what you now don't. And the Forgiving, the Merciful Allah has ordained the Law of Respite for you (37:)
Say, "I am not the first of the Messengers, and I cannot predict what will encounter me and encounter you. I do but follow what is revealed unto me, and I am but a plain Warner
Say, "What if it is from Allah and you rejected it! A witness from the Children of Israel has already borne witness to the advent of one like himself. And he has believed while you are showing arrogance. Verily, Allah does not guide people who relegate the Truth
And the deniers speak thus of the believers, "If this Message were any good, these people would not have accepted it before us." But since they choose not to be guided by it, they say, "This has been a fabrication since ancient times
And yet, before this was the Scripture of Moses, an example and a grace. And this (Qur'an) is a Book confirming the Truth (in Torah), in the Arabic Tongue, to warn the wrongdoers, and a herald of glad tiding for the doers of good
Behold, those who say, "Our Lord is Allah," and thereafter stand firm and walk aright, no fear will come upon them nor shall they grieve
Such are the rightful dwellers of the Garden, immortal therein, as a reward for all they have done
Now, We have enjoined upon man goodness toward his parents. In pain did his mother bear him, and in pain did she give him birth. The carrying of the child and his total dependence on her took thirty months. And so, when he attains maturity and reaches forty years, he says, "My Lord! Enable me to be grateful for the blessings You have given me and to my parents, and that I may do works that meet Your Approval. And cause my generations to be righteous as well. Verily, unto You I turn, and truly do I submit to You." (2:233), (7)
Such are those from whom We accept the best of their deeds and We shall absolve their imperfections. They are among the dwellers of Paradise. This is the True Promise that is made to them. ('Best of their deeds' indicates Allah's Reward surpassing the best of the best)
And whoever says to his parents, "Shameful it is for both of you! Do you threaten me that I shall be brought forth again although so many generations have passed away before me?" And they both pray for Allah's help and say, "Alas for you! Believe! Behold, Allah's promise always comes true. But he replies, "All this is nothing but fables of the ancient
Such are the ones against whom the Word came to pass among the previous generations of the rural and the urban. Verily, they will be lost
And for all there will be ranks according to what they did that He may recompense their actions. And none shall be wronged
And on the Day when the deniers are exposed to the Fire, it will be said, "You squandered the good things in the life of the world and only sought immediate comfort. Now this Day you are rewarded with a humiliating doom for your unjust pride, and because you drifted away from humanity
And remember the brother of Aad when he warned his people in their Land of Sand-dunes. And, verily, Warners came and went before and after him, saying, "Serve none but Allah. Behold, I fear for you the retribution of a Tremendous Day
They answered, "Have you come to turn us away from our gods?" Bring, then, upon us that with which you threaten us if you are a man of truth
He said, "That knowledge is with Allah alone. I announce to you the Mission on which I have been sent. But I see that you are a people who prefer to live in the darkness of ignorance
And so, when they saw a dense cloud approaching their valleys, they said, "Here is a dense cloud bringing us the needed rain." Nay, this is the very thing you challenged to hasten - a wind wherein is painful torment
Bound to destroy everything by its Lord's Command. And morning found them so that nothing could be seen but their empty dwellings. Thus do We reward the exploitive people
And verily, We had established them in the land better than We ever established you, and We had given them keen faculties of hearing, sight and intellect. But of no avail to them were there hearing and sight and intellect when they went on knowingly rejecting Allah's Messages. And so, the very thing they used to mock at surrounded them. ('Fuad', plural 'Afidah', includes the faculties of intellect, reasoning, insight and feelings)
Thus indeed have We annihilated many townships round about you, after We had explained Our Messages from different vantage points that they might return. (Townships and communities: Aad, Thamud, Sheba, Midyan, Sodom, Gomorrah, Ninevah, Tubba)
Why did then no help come to them from those whom they idolized besides Allah, as a means of nearness (to Him)? Nay, their idols abandoned them, for that was their falsehood and fabrication
(O Messenger) Behold, We turned toward you a company of the nomads so that they might listen to the Qur'an. And as soon as they were in its presence, they said, "Listen in silence!" And when it was over, they hurried to their people as Warners
They said, "O Our people! Behold, We have heard a Scripture that has been revealed after Moses, confirming the Divine Origin of what came before it. It guides to the Truth and to a Straight Road
O Our people! Respond to the one who invites to Allah and believe in Him. He will absolve your fault of trailing behind and guard you against an awful suffering
And whoever fails to respond to Allah's caller, cannot evade Him on earth, nor can he find patrons other than Him. Such people are obviously lost in error
Do they not realize that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth, and wearied not with their creation, is Able to revive the dead? Yes, indeed, He has power over all things
And on the Day when the rejecters will be exposed to the Fire (they will be asked), "Is it not for real?" They will answer, "Yes indeed, by our Lord!" He will say, "Taste, then, this punishment as a consequence of your denial of the Truth
And so, hold on to patience, as did the Messengers of firm resolve. And hasten not about which way they choose. On the Day when they shall see what they are promised, it will seem to them as if they had not lived in the world more than an hour of the day. A Clear Message! Shall anyone perish except those who drift away from the right path? ('What they are promised' enfolds the glad tiding if they choose to walk aright and, in that instance, they will feel that a new blissful chapter of life dawns upon them. On the other hand, 'What they are promised' enfolds grievous suffering if they persist in their denial of the Truth)
(Know that) those who deny the Truth and bar others from the Way of Allah, He causes their actions to be lost. (Even their good deeds will carry no weight against this mountain load of infringement)
Whereas those who attain faith and help enhance the society, and believe in what has been revealed to Muhammad - for he is the Truth from their Lord - He will absolve their imperfections, erase the imprints of their faults, and direct their hearts and minds unto rightful contentment
This, because those who deny the Truth (have no choice but to) follow Falsehood, and those who believe follow the Truth from their Lord. This is how Allah exemplifies concepts to people from within their own composition. ('Amthalahum' = Their own examples = Illustrations from within themselves = Their own demonstrations = Typify from their own)
Now if you meet the disbelievers in battle, strike at their command centers. When you have subdued them, bind in a firm bond, and thereafter an act of kindness or ransom till the battle lays down its weapons. (Free the captives as an act of kindness or ransom, such as in exchange for your men in their captivity. There is no third option). And if Allah willed, He could indeed punish them Himself, but that He may let you humans test one by means of another (as to which nation remains vigilant). And, as for those who are slain in the Cause of Allah, He will never let their actions be lost
He will instantly guide them (straight to Paradise (47:6)), and direct their hearts and minds unto rightful contentment
And bring them into the Garden which He has made known to them
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! If you help Allah, He will help you and will strengthen your foothold
And trip and fall on their face all those who journey through life in the darkness of Ignorance. And the Divine Law causes their actions to be lost. ('Ta'as' = Trip and fall on the face)
This, because they detest what Allah has revealed, and so He renders all their actions fruitless.(13:17). ('Habet' = Undigested food that fails to provide nourishment)
Have they not, then, traveled in the land and seen what eventually happened to those who lived before them? Allah wiped them out, and for the deniers of Truth shall be the like thereof
This, because Allah is the Patron of those who accept His Commands, whereas there is no patron for those who deny the Truth
Verily, Allah will admit all those who accept His Message and fulfill the needs of others into Gardens beneath which rivers flow. But those who deny the Truth, may partake of life and eat like the cattle (live and) eat, and the Fire will be their abode. (Living without a Noble Ideology reduces human beings to a subhuman existence)
And how many a township mightier in power than this your township which has evicted you (O Prophet), have We annihilated! And (then) they had no helper
Is, then, he who lives by an evident Truth from his Lord like the one to whom his disruptive behavior seems pleasing - while such people are but following their own desires
In allegorical terms the Paradise that the righteous are promised is this: Therein are rivers of ever fresh water, and rivers of ever fresh milk, and rivers of delicious wine, and rivers of clear-run honey. Therein are all kinds of fruit (of their good deeds), with a life secure from deterioration bestowed upon them from their Lord. Are they like the ones who abide in the Fire and are given drinks of burning despair that tears their insides? ('Maghfirah' here denotes protection from deterioration)
(O Messenger) Among them are some who pretend to listen to you, and then, as soon as they leave your presence, they ask others who have received knowledge, "What was it that he just said?" Such are the ones whose hearts Allah has sealed, for their minds are always contemplating ways to fulfill their desires. (4:155), (10:74), (16:106), (17:45), (4)
While as for those who wish to walk in the Light, He shows them the way all along, and secures for them their journey through life. ('Huda' = Brightness, light, guidance, beacon, showing the way, lead the lost)
Are they, then, waiting for the Hour that may come upon them suddenly? And the signs of confrontation have already appeared. And when it comes to them, how shall their understanding (of the Truth) will help them
So (O Prophet) remain consciously and incessantly aware that there is no 'power' but Allah, and protect yourself against the rumors and slander that the enemy sticks after you, and the believing men, and the believing women. Devise means to counter whatever may cause your community to lag behind in their Mission. For, Allah knows (the meticulous ways) how you move about in your daily lives and what your blessed destination is. ('Wastaghfir' = Protect. Zanb = Tail = Rumors and slander that are stuck behind one's back = Lagging behind like the tail lags behind an animal's body)
Now those who have believed, say, "Why is not an injunction revealed (permitting us to fight in self-defense?)" But now when a decisive injunction has been revealed about fighting, you find the hypocrites looking at you as if they were fainting to death. And yet, the foremost good for them would be
Obedience and a righteous word. For, once a matter has been determined, it would be best for them if they were true to Allah
Would you then, rather turn back (to the old ways of Ignorance) and work corruption in the land, and break the common bond of humanity and your ties of mutual relationships
Such are they whom Allah deprives of His Grace, and whom He makes deaf, and blinds their sight
Will they not then reflect on the Qur'an, or is it that they have locks on their hearts (which bar them from reason)
Behold, those who slide back after the Guidance has been made clear to them, do so because Satan has charmed them into utopia
This, because they say to those who resent the Qur'an, "We will be with you in part of your plans." And Allah fully knows their secret consultations
Then how will it be when the angels gather them in death, smiting their faces and backs? (They leave the world in emotional agony for not having readied themselves for the life to come)
This, because they followed that which brings Allah's disapproval, and detested the actions that win His Approval. And so, He renders all their actions fruitless
Or do the hypocrites think that Allah will not reveal their malice
Had We so willed, We could have pointed them out to you and you would have identified them by their faces. But you will surely recognize them by the tone of their speech. And Allah knows all that you humans do
And verily We shall try you all in order to distinguish the valiant among you and the steadfast. And We shall put your reputation to test
Behold, those who deny the Truth and hinder the Path of Allah, and oppose the Messenger after guidance has been clearly conveyed to them, cannot harm Allah in the least. And He will make all their deeds fruitless
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and render not your actions vain
Verily, those who deny the Message and hinder the Path of Allah, and then die as disbelievers, Allah will not grant them the protection of forgiveness
And so, be not weary and keep calling unto the abode of Peace and Security, for, you shall surely attain high ranks. And Allah is with you, and He will never put you in loss for your efforts
The life of this world is but a sport and amusement. But if you believe and walk aright, He will give you your rewards, and will not ask you to give up your wealth
If He were to demand and compel you for it, you would cling to in stinginess, and He would (thus) reveal your shortcomings
Behold, you are those who are called upon to spend in the Cause of Allah. Yet, among you there are such who turn niggardly. Anyone who is miser is miser against his own 'Self'. And Allah is the Rich, and you are the poor. And if you turn away, He will replace you with another nation, and they will not be like you
Verily, (O Prophet) We have opened for you the gates of a Victory that everyone shall behold
In this way Allah has guarded you against whatever could have caused you to lag behind in the past and in the future. And so, He perfects His Bliss upon you and takes you along a Straight Path. (24:55), (4)
And thus Allah supports you with a Mighty Support
He it is Who sends down peace of reassurance into the hearts of the believers to increase their faith unto the state of conviction. Unto Allah belong all the Forces of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Knower, Wise. (9:26), (4)
Thus He will admit the believing men and the believing women into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they shall abide. And He will absolve their faults and imperfections. And that is, with Allah, the Supreme Triumph
And He will punish the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women and the idolater men and idolater women who hold evil assumptions and plans against Allah. Around them is a circle of their disruptive deeds, and Allah's Disapproval is upon them and He deprives them of His Grace. For them He has readied Hell, and how miserable is that as a destination
Unto Allah belong all Forces in the Highs and the Lows, and Allah is Almighty, Wise
Verily (O Prophet), We have sent you as a witness (to the Truth and to these people) and a herald of glad news and a Warner
So that you mankind may believe in Allah and His Messenger. Therefore, support the Messenger and honor him and do your best to establish the Glory of Allah from morning to evening
Behold, all who pledge allegiance to you (O Prophet), in fact pledge allegiance to Allah. The Hand of Allah is above their hands. Hence, whoever shatters his pledge, shatters his own 'Self'. And whoever keeps his pledge with Allah, to him He will grant a Supreme Reward
The Bedouins, who were left behind, will tell you, "Our properties and families kept us occupied, so ask forgiveness for us!" They will utter with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, "Who can avert from you Allah's Law of Requital, whether it is harm or benefit to you?" Nay, but Allah is Aware of all that you do
Nay, you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never come back to their folk and families. And it was made pleasing in your hearts that you did think evil, for, you are a people devoid of virtue
As for him who denies Allah and His Messenger - behold, We have prepared a Flame for rejecters of the Truth
To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives and punishes according to His Law of Requital. And Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Compassionate
Those who had stayed behind will say - if you go forth to a battle that holds promise of a booty, "Allow us to follow you." They seek to change the Word of Allah. Say, "You shall by no means go with us. This is what Allah has decreed already." Then they will say, "You are envious of us." Nay, but very little it is that they understand (of selfless service). (The battle is no longer to be seen as a means of winning booty, it is allowed only for liberty and self-defense. That is the Word of Allah (8:1), (2:167), (2:)
Say to these desert Arabs who had stayed behind, "Soon you will be called against a people mighty in warfare, to fight them until they surrender. And if you obey, Allah will give you a beautiful reward. But if you turn away, as you did turn away before, He will punish you with a painful suffering
There is no blame for the blind, nor is there blame for the disabled, nor is there blame for the sick. And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him in the Gardens underneath which rivers flow. And whoever turns away, him will He punish with an awful doom
Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance unto you (O Messenger) under that shady tree. For, He knew what was in their hearts, and so He sent down upon them inner peace, and rewarded them by opening the gates to a quick Victory
And many gains will they achieve in addition, for, Allah is Almighty, Most Wise
Allah promises you a great many gains that you shall acquire, and has given you these ones just to begin with. And He has restrained the aggressive hands of people from you, that it may be a Sign for the believers (of all times) and so that He may light up for you a Straight Path. ('Huda' and derivatives = Lead, guide, show the way, enlighten, light up the way, walk ahead, be a beacon)
And there are yet other gains which are beyond your power at this time, but Allah has already encompassed them for you. For, Allah has Power over all things
Now, if the non-believers fight you, they will certainly turn their backs in flight, and then they will find no protecting friend nor helper
This is the Law of Allah which has been in force since older times. And never will you find any change in Allah's Law. ('Sunnatillah' = Allah's Law in practice. 'Kalimatillah' = Allah's Word = Allah's Law in theory (3:139), (17:77), (33:38), (33:62), (35:43), (40)
And He it is Who has withheld their hands against you, and your hands against them in the Valley of Makkah after He has given you victory over them. And Allah was indeed Watcher over all your actions
These are the very people who denied the Message, and debarred you from the Sacred Masjid, and prevented your offerings from reaching their destination. Therein were believing men and believing women whom you did not know, and you could have harmed them. And on their account you could have carried guilt without knowing it. Thus Allah admits into His Grace whoever seeks it. Now if the rejecters persist in aggression, We shall indeed clearly separate them (from the believers) and punish them with an awful doom
Just when the unbelievers had their hearts filled with zeal, the *zeal of the Age of Ignorance, right then Allah sent down His blessing of inner contentment upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and empowered them to ward off this kind of zealotry. For, they truly deserved this virtue and it was befitting for them to own it. And Allah is Knower of all things. (*Zeal for revenge)
Indeed, Allah has vindicated His Messenger's vision of Solidarity. You shall indeed enter the Sacred Masjid, Allah willing, perfectly secure, having unburdened your heads of all fear. And He knows what you know not, and He has granted you a quick Victory
He it is Who has sent His Messenger with the Enlightenment and the Religion of Truth that He may cause it to prevail over all other systems of life. And Allah is Sufficient as Witness (to this Pronouncement (9:31-33), (14:48), (18:48), (4)
Muhammad is Allah's Messenger. And those who are with him are stern towards the rejecters, but full of compassion towards one another. You see them bowing, adoring, as they seek Allah's Bounty and Acceptance. Their signs (of belief) are on their faces, the effects of adoration. Such is their likeness in the Torah and their likeness in the Gospel. Like a seed that brings forth its shoot, and then strengthens it, so that it grows thick, and then stands firm on its own stem, delighting those who have sown it. Consequently, it fills the rejecters with rage at them. But unto those who may yet attain belief and do works that help others, Allah promises forgiveness and Immense Reward
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His Messenger, and be mindful of Allah. Verily, Allah is Hearer, Knower. (Desist from holding your opinions above that which Allah has revealed to His Messenger)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor shall you speak loudly to him, as you would speak loudly to one another, lest your works be rendered vain while you perceive not. (In my opinion, this verse applies today as well. We must be respectful whenever we speak of or even think of him)
Behold, they who lower their voices in the presence of the Messenger of Allah, - it is they whose hearts Allah has primed to become righteous. Theirs will be the protection of forgiveness and a Supreme Reward
Verily, as for those who call out to you from outside the private apartments, most of them lack understanding
For, if they only had patience until you came forth unto them, it would certainly be better for them. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! If a person, who is known to drift away from Moral Values, comes to you with any news, verify it, lest you hurt some folk in ignorance and then regret what you have done
And be constantly aware that in your midst is Allah's Messenger. If he were to obey you in much of the governance, you will certainly be in chaos. But as it is, Allah has made belief dear to you and has beautified it in your hearts. And He has made disbelief, immoral conduct and disobedience detestable unto you. Such indeed are they who are rightly guided
A Bounty and Bliss from Allah, and Allah is Knower, Wise
And if two groups of believers fall into a fight, then make peace between them. But then, if one of the two wrongs the other, fight the one that wrongs until it reverts to Allah's Command (the decision that was made by the Central Authority). Once they revert, make peace between them with justice, and act equitably. Verily, Allah loves the equitable
The believers are but a single Brotherhood. (They are members of one family, brothers and sisters unto one another). Hence, make peace between your brothers and be mindful of Allah so that you may attain Mercy
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! No folk shall make mockery of other folk, for they may be better than they are. Nor shall any women ridicule other women, for they may be better than they are. And neither shall you defame one another, nor insult one another by nicknames. Bad is the immoral name after attaining faith. And whoever turns not, such are the wrongdoers
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Avoid much suspicion and guesswork. For, behold, some of such suspicion and guesswork deplete your communal energy. And spy not upon one another, nor shall you backbite one another. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Nay, you would detest it! Be mindful of Allah. Verily, Allah is Relenting, Merciful
O Mankind! Behold, We have created you male and female, and have made you nations and tribes so that you might (affectionately) come to know one another. Verily, the most honored among you, in the Sight of Allah, is the one who lives most upright. Behold, Allah is Knower, Aware. ('Min zakarinwwa untha' = Of a kind that is male, and of a kind that is female = Male and female = Some of you are men and some of you are women. On this note I find myself in agreement with M. Pickthall)
The Bedouins say, "We have attained belief." Say (O Prophet), "You have not yet attained belief, but rather say, 'We have submitted (to the System)', for the Faith has not yet entered your hearts. Yet, if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not diminish (the reward of) any of your works. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
The believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and then, have left behind all doubt, and who strive with their belongings and their persons in the Cause of Allah. It is they, they who confirm their word with action
Say, "Do you inform Allah of your religiousness when Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth?" And Allah is Knower of all things
Some people act as if they are doing you a favor by embracing Islam. Say, "Deem not that your Islam is a favor upon me. Nay, it is Allah Who bestows a favor upon you as He has led you to the Faith, if you be true and sincere
Verily, Allah knows the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Seer of all that you do
QAF. Qif! Stop and think! Qadir, the Omnipotent, presents this Glorious Qur'an as a witness to itself
But, nay, they marvel that a Warner from among their own has come unto them! And so these deniers are saying, "This is a weird thing
What! After we have died and become dust? Such a return is a thought far-fetched indeed
(But) We know what the earth takes of them. (It is only their physical body that becomes dust. Their "Self" lives on). And with Us is a Guarded Book (of Laws)
Nay, but they denied the Truth as soon as it came to them. And so, they are in a state of utter confusion
Do they not look at the sky above them how We have built it and beautified it, and there are no flaws therein
And the earth. We have spread it out, and scattered mountains firm on it, and caused it to bring forth plants on it of all beauteous kind. (This gives us a scenario of a huge ball with carpets spread out on it held in place with weights. And the mountains serve as great water reservoirs that help grow the vegetation (13:3), (15:19), (31:10), (39:5), (79:28)
A Vision and an enlightening Reminder for every servant who wishes to turn (to Allah)
And We send down from the high atmosphere blessed water whereby We cause to grow colorful gardens and fields of grains
And lofty palm-trees with their thickly clustered fruit
A provision for My servants. And by all this We revive a dead land. Thus it is: (your) coming forth
Before them denied the Message, the nation of Noah, the dwellers of the valley of Ar-Rass (25:38), and Thamud
And 'Ad, and Pharaoh, and the brothers of Lot
And the dwellers in the wooded dales (of Midyan), and the nation of King Tubba'. All of them denied their Messengers, so My warning came to pass
Could, We, then, be worn out by the first creation? Nay, they are still (after such diverse examples,) lost in doubt about a new creation
Now indeed, it is We Who have created man and We know the whispering that goes on within his mind (all the intricacies of his thought process), for, We are nearer to him than his Vena cava
And so it may happen that two conflicting demands in his mind, sitting in opposite directions, pull him apart. (His reason, and his emotions)
Not even a word can he utter but there is an ever-vigilant watcher with him. (The Law of Requital makes a meticulous record)
And then, the twilight of death brings with it the inevitable truth. "This is the very thing you would rather evade
(Then a long slumber) - And - the Trumpet is blown - This is the Day Promised
And every person will come with his actions and their imprints
Yes, indeed, you were oblivious to this. But now We have removed your veil and sharp is your vision this Day
And his other part (the imprints) will say, "Here is the record ready with me
It will be said, "Throw, throw into Hell every stubborn enemy of the Truth
Every withholder of charity - given to extremes - fomenter of distrust between people
Whoever had set up another god along with Allah. Hurl, hurl him in the strong retribution
Man's comrade (desire) will say, "Our Lord! I did not mislead him. He himself was far astray
Thus will respond He, "Contend not in My Presence, for I had sent forth to you warning in advance
The Word changes not with Me, and I am not at all unjust to My servants
On that Day We will ask Hell, "Are you filled?" And it will answer, "Is there yet more for me
And the Paradise will be brought close to those who walked aright, no longer distant
This is what you were promised. It is for everyone who was turning to the Message and guarded it
Everyone who feared violating the Laws of the Beneficent even in privacy and came with a heart that kept turning to Him
Enter this Paradise in Peace! This is the Day of immortality
There they have all they desire, and therein is yet more with Us
(All this is the Law of Requital.) And how many a generation We annihilated before them, of greater might than theirs! But, then they wandered on the face of the earth asking, "Is there a place of refuge
Therein, behold, is a reminder for him who has a heart, that is, listens with a presence of mind. ((50:21). 'Aw' = Or = That is = So that = As it is = And so
And (who believes that) verily, We created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, in six stages, and weariness did not even touch Us
Hence, bear with patience whatever they say, and keep doing your best from before the rising of the sun to after it sets, for establishing the Glory and Praise of your Lord
And at night too, do your best, hence, all humanity will come to adore Him. (5)
And the day is coming when a caller will call from close-by. (The enemy will approach you for war)
The day on which they will hear the real battle-cry. That is the day of coming forth (along with your companions, O Prophet)
Verily, it is We Who grant life and dispense death, and unto us is the destination
On that day, the earth will split asunder before them (they shall fail to advance). This assembling of the forces is easy for Us
We know full well whatever they say, and you are, by no means, a compeller over them. Nevertheless, remind with this Qur'an, any who would fear My warning
Consider those who scatter broadcast. (Individuals and communities that spread the Divine Word)
And those who carry a great burden of responsibility
And those who glide gently (toward success)
And those who share the Command
Behold, what you are promised will come to pass. (The Qur'an will prevail)
And verily, the Divine System will be established
Witness is the sky with starry orbits
Behold, it is you humans who deviate from your course
Wanders in the wilderness of thought he who wills to wander
Belittle themselves those who live by guesswork
They know not that they know not
They ask mockingly, "When is the Day of Judgment coming
It is the Day when they are tried at the Fire
Taste the trial that you brought upon yourselves. This is what you asked to hasten
Behold, in the midst of Gardens and springs are those who walked aright
Enjoying all that their Lord grants them, for, behold, aforetime they used to benefit others
And rarely did they fall asleep at night without reflection. ('Haju' = Fall asleep instantly like an exhausted horse)
And heartily sought to be guarded against their imperfections. ('Sahr' = Morning = Core of the heart (Lisanal Arab). 'Ghafarah' = Helmet = Guarding
And in their wealth was the Divine Right of the requester and the deprived
And in the earth are signs for those who wish to attain conviction. (And its resources must remain open for all (15:20), (41:10)
And also in yourselves, your individual psyche and soma, your folk and the unity in diversity among your human communities. Can you not then use your inner vision? ('Anfusikum' entails all the meanings rendered here)
And in the heaven is all your providence and all that you are promised. (It is the Divine Laws that bestow upon you your physical and mental needs and promise you the just reward of your actions)
And by the Lord of the heavens and the earth, all that which is being said is as Real as your speaking to one another
And (as a historical evidence) has the story of Abraham's honored guests reached you
When they visited him greeting him with "Peace!" He answered, "Peace to you strangers
Then he went quietly to his household, and brought forth a well-bred roasted calf
And placed it before them, saying, "Will you not eat
Then he felt apprehensive of them. They said, "Fear not!" And gave him the glad news of a son who would be endowed with knowledge. (Abraham was concerned, since people with aggressive designs used to refuse hospitality. But they were hurrying to Sodom (11:69-76), (15:50-55), (26)
Then his wife came forward with a loud cry and struck her face in astonishment and said, "An old barren woman
They said, "Thus it is. Your Lord has so decreed. Behold, He, He alone is all-Wise, all-Knowing
Abraham said, "And now what is your task, O Messengers
They replied, "Behold, We have been sent to a guilty folk who violate human rights
That we may herald upon them a shower of hardened stones
Marked out by your Lord for those who have wasted their own 'Self
We then brought forth safe all believers that were in town
But We found therein none but one Muslim household
And so We left therein a Sign for those who fear a painful consequence (of their actions)
And in Moses too! Behold, We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authority
But he turned away in the pride of his might and said, "A wizard or a madman
So We seized him and his troops, and flung them in the sea, and he was blameworthy
And in Aad! When We sent upon them the devastating wind
It spared nothing that it blew on and smashed it to dust
And in Thamud! Behold, they were told, "Enjoy life for a little while
But they defied their Lord's Commandment. Whereupon the thunder seized them while they looked on
And they were unable even to rise up and could not help themselves a bit
And the people of Noah aforetime! Behold, they were a folk who drifted away from the Truth
And it is We Who have built the Universe, and behold, We are steadily expanding it
And We have spread out the earth, and how excellent a Spreader We are
And all things We created in pairs and in opposites (such that one complements the other). This system has cause for you to reflect
(Say), "Hence, Rush unto Allah! Behold, I am a plain Warner unto you from Him." (To emphasize the urgency to do good in this unpredictable human life, the word 'say' in this verse is merged within 'Fafirru' = So, flee = Therefore, rush = Hence, go forth now)
And set up no god or Authority along with Allah. Behold, I am a plain Warner unto you from Him
But, thus it is. No Messenger came to those before their time, but they said, "A wizard or a madman
Have they handed down this (behavior) as a last will from one to another? Nay, but they have been folk who wished to live without moral bounds
Turn, then, away from them, and you shall not be blameworthy
Yet continue reminding, for, verily, the believers will benefit from it and gain eminence
And I have not created the nomads or the urban but to consciously and willingly live by My Laws. ('Ibadah', usually translated, as worship is better applicable in that sense to idol-worship. And since the Qur'an consistently promotes action over ritual, 'Ibadah' of Allah is better understood as serving Him by serving His creation. That is in conformity with my rendering, 'consciously and willingly live by)
No sustenance do I ever require of them, nor do I ask that they feed Me
Verily, Allah! He it is Who is the Provider, the Lord of Might, Invincible
And behold, the violators of human rights trail behind in humanity as their comrades did in the past. So they should not ask Me to hasten their full recompense
Then, anguish awaits the deniers of the Truth - anguish from that Day of theirs which they have been promised
Mount Sinai stands witness. (That this Qur'an is a Divine Writ as was the Scripture of Law bestowed upon Moses)
And a well-scored Book it is
Written on fine parchment, unrolled, open for everyone to read, widely published
And the Blessed House that is frequently visited (the Ka'bah) stands witness
By the exalted canopy (of the sky, this Book is Exalted)
And by the ocean bustling with ships and lights
Behold, the retribution of your Lord is now inevitable
There is none who can repel it
On the day when the high elite will be shaken, and shaken well. ('Sama' = Sky, heaven, height, top and elite)
And the strong leaders will be moved with a movement. ('Jibal' = Mountains, of firm standing, strong leaders, high and powerful, dominating)
Ultimately, then, is destruction on that Day for all who belie the Truth
Who peddle the play of shallow rituals
The Day when they are thrust into the fire of Hell with a mighty thrust
This is the Fire that you used to belie
Is it, and was it, then, magic - or is it that you never used your Vision
Endure the heat herein. It is the same whether you bear it patiently or impatiently. This is only the built-in Requital of what you used to do
Verily, those who lived upright, dwell in Gardens and in Bliss
Delighted in what their Lord has bestowed upon them. And their Lord has guarded them against the torment of the blazing Fire
Enjoy life, eat and drink happily for what you used to do
Relaxing on couches with beautiful interior decoration. And We will match them with neat companions, most beautiful of Vision
And they who attained belief, and whose children followed them in belief, We shall unite them with their children, and We shall not let any of their deeds go waste. Yet (as a rule) each person is held as a collateral against what he has earned. (The condition of every person will depend on his actions)
And We shall bestow on them the fruits and the delicacies of their choice
And therein they pass from hand to hand cups of delicious drinks that cause no idle talk nor a hangover. ('Ithm' = Pull down, drag down, hangover, harming personality, reducing human dignity or potential)
And their children like pearls, playful, happy around them. (13:23), (52)
They will socialize and reminisce among themselves (recalling how they lived the previous life)
They will say, "Behold, We were kind and humble amidst our families
So Allah has graced us and guarded us against the suffering of scorching winds of requital
Verily, We used to call unto Him (seeking guidance from His Word alone). Behold, He is all Kind, all Merciful
Hence, (O Messenger) keep reminding, for, by the Grace of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman
What! Do they say, "A poet? Let us wait how time handles him
Say to them, "Hope for what you hope for! Behold, I shall wait with you expecting what I expect
Do they behave like this because they would rather dream their lives through? Is this behavior really commanded by their intellect? Or is it that they are a people who wish to live without any moral bounds
Or do they say, "He himself has composed it?" Nay, they simply do not wish to believe. (The Message hits at their vested interests. Hence, so many contradictory blames)
Then let them produce a Hadith like this if they are truthful. (2:23), (10:38), (11)
Are they a product of spontaneous generation? Or were they their own creators
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay, but they have certainty about nothing
Do they possess the treasures of your Lord? Or are they in charge
Or do they have a stairway of knowledge to ascend to the Glorious Heights of Divine Revelation and listen directly to and come at par with it? Let, then, whoever has received a direct Revelation bring his proof
(Such is their ignorance, yet their claims) What! He has daughters, whereas you would rather have only sons
Or is it that you (O Prophet) ask a reward from them and thereby they are burdened with debt
Or do they know the future so that they have it written down
Or do they intend a plot? But it is the deniers who are in fact entrapped. (In their spider web of falsehood)
Or have they a god other than Allah? Glorified is Allah far above what they associate with Him
Even if they were to see a fragment from the Height falling, they would say, "A dense cloud!" (Their lack of reasoning makes them oblivious to the Law of Requital)
Hence, leave them alone until they meet that Day of theirs wherein they shall be thunderstruck
The Day when none of their scheming will avail them, nor will they be helped
And verily, for oppressors, violators of human rights and those who relegate the Truth, there is a punishment beyond that. But most of them know not. (Their wrongdoing hurts their own "Self)
And so, (O Messenger) work patiently to establish the Rule of your Lord, for, behold, you are in Our eyes. Begin your day with a firm resolve and work to manifest the Praise of your Lord
And even in the night-time do your best to manifest your Lord's Praise, and at the setting of the stars
Witness are the Stars that set along a course appointed. (They never misguide you. He Who commands them, commands the Messenger (6:98), (56:75). 'Wa' = And = Consider = Witness = For = By. 'Najm' is singular as well as plural in the form of a galaxy
Your honored companion is neither in error, nor is he misled
Nor does he utter the Word out of his desire
This (Qur'an) is but a Revelation that is being revealed to him
He has been taught by the One Mighty in Powers
The Owner of Authority and Wisdom established him (the Prophet)
At the highest horizon
Of human wisdom and knowledge as he drew near and approached (the point where the human intellect comes to a halt)
Till he was but two bow-lengths away, or even closer. (The Divine Will and the will of the Messenger merged together, like the two of you join your bows as a bond of friendship)
And thus He revealed to His servant what He revealed
And never did he find contrary to reason what he learned. ((2:285), (6:164). 'Raa' = Saw, learned, observed, took to heart
Will you, then, contend with him concerning what he learned (and you have not)
And indeed, he learned it again and yet again
At the Ultimate Mark ('Sidratil muntaha' = The last Lote-tree = The point where the human intellect is left with nothing but astonishment)
Near unto the Garden of Abode. (The Revelation tells the Messenger how to establish a paradise on earth)
Overwhelming is the spectacle at the overwhelming Ultimate Mark
Yet, his sight wavered not and wandered not
And indeed, he has seen the great Signs of his Lord. (The shackles of mental and physical bondage will be broken and humanity will come from darkness to Light (7:157), (17:1)
Have you seen and thought about Lat, and Uzza
And Manat, the third other? (All three goddesses of yours)
Why - for yourselves you would prefer only sons, whereas to Him you assign daughters
Behold, this indeed is an unfair division. (You worship female idols and resent having daughters)
They are but names that you have named, you and your fathers, for which Allah has revealed no authority. They follow nothing but conjecture and their own fancies. But now the Guidance from their Lord has come to them
Nay, should man get all that he covets and fancies
Even though unto Allah belong the later life and the former. (His are the Keys of the heavens and the earth (7:96), (28:77), (39:63), (41)
And how many forces are in the Universe whose company avails not except whom Allah permits. This is so, because such a person works by His Laws and thus obtains His Approval. (Science can only be mastered by understanding the physical laws in Nature)
Behold, it is only those who do not believe in the life to come that consider the angels as female beings
And since they do not learn the Law of Cause and Effect, they can follow nothing but guesswork. And behold, guesswork can never take the place of Truth
Therefore, avoid him who turns away from Our Reminder and cares for no more than (the dogmas prevalent in) the life at hand
Such is the sum-total of their knowledge. Behold, your Lord knows best who strays from His Way, and He best knows who goes right
And unto Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. (He has designed the Universe such that no action goes without a consequence). That He may requite those who destabilized lives, with their own deeds, and reward with goodness those who benefited humanity. (
Those who abstain from the greater transgressions that deplete the communal energy, and from shameful deeds and stinginess, even though they may sometimes waver, behold, your Lord is Immense in absolving their imperfections. He knows you best since He brings you into being from the earth, and when you were still hidden in the bellies of your mothers? Therefore, claim not piety for yourselves. He knows best as to who walks aright
Have you, then, noticed him who turns away
And gives so little of himself, yet with a heavy heart
What! Does he have the knowledge of the innermost psyche that he sees unfolded before him
Nay, did he never hear of what was in the Scrolls of Moses
And of Abraham who fulfilled his obligations
i That no laden one shall bear the load of another
ii And that every human being shall be responsible for, and compensated for, his labor
iii And that his effort (and not the outcome) will be seen
iv And then he will be given the full wage
v And that to your Lord is the final destination. (Your goal shall be the Lord's Rule on earth)
vi And that He it is Who makes laugh, and makes weep. (Nations that establish His Rule will have inner happiness, whereas the others will be in misery)
vii And that He it is Who gives death and gives life. (The rise and fall of nations follow His Laws)
viii And that He it is Who creates the two companions, the male and the female (pairs and opposites among His creation)
From gametes that unite
ix And that He has promised to bring about a second life (the ultimate accountability)
x And that He it is Who gives wealth and contentment. (Only His Laws can bestow true prosperity)
xi And that He it is Who is the Lord of the brightest star, the human intellect
xii And that He it is Who annihilated the former tribe of Aad. (They were men of intellect but refused to establish the Divine System (7:65). A wrong system, however smartly run, is bound to collapse
And the tribe of Thamud, sparing no one
And the people of Noah before them. Behold, they were even more unjust and more rebellious
And His Law of Requital annihilated the cities such that they were overthrown
So that there covered each of them what covered them. (Sodom and Gomorrah buried under the Dead Sea. Also applies to other townships covered with Doom)
Then, which facet of your Lord's Power will you doubt or deny
This Prophet is a Warner like the previous Warners
The Inevitable is now imminent. (The opponents of the Divine System will soon be subdued)
None but Allah can dispel it. (Stop attacking the System)
Do you, then, marvel at this statement
And will you laugh and not weep
Just amusing yourselves
Nay, rather prostrate yourselves before Allah and serve Him
The Hour of Revolution is fast approaching. And the moon bearing banner is torn asunder
But if they see a Sign of the oncoming Change, they turn away and say, "A persistent bewilderment
For they adamantly belie the Truth and follow their desires. Yet, everything moves to its destination in stages
And indeed, there has come unto them news sufficient to deter them from arrogance
And profound Wisdom! But all the warnings have been of no avail
Therefore, (O Messenger) Ignore them for a while. The Day is coming when the caller will call them to a thing they have not conceived. (Shackles of captivity following the battle when they come to attack the believers)
They will come forth from their places of rest like a swarm of locusts, but will be thoroughly dispersed with their eyes downcast
Running in bewilderment toward the caller, the same deniers will then exclaim, "This is an awful day
Long before them, Noah's people had belied the Message, and belied Our servant and said, "Madman", and he was rebuked
Thereupon he cried unto his Lord, "I am suppressed. Do help me, then
And so, We opened the gates of the heaven pouring down torrents of water
And caused the earth to gush forth springs so that the waters met together in due measure as decreed
And We carried him on a watercraft made of mere planks and nails
And it floated before Our eyes, a reward for him who had been denied with ingratitude
And verily, We left this event as a lesson. Then, is there any who will learn
Then see how was My Requital after My warnings
And indeed, We have made the Qur'an easy to understand. Then, is there any who will learn
The tribe of Aad had also belied the Message. Then see how was My retribution after My warnings
Behold, We sent raging winds upon them on a day of relentless misery
Tossing people around like empty, uprooted palm-trunks
Then see how was My retribution after My warnings
And indeed, We have made the Qur'an easy to understand. Then, is there any who will learn
Thamud also rejected the warnings. (Thamud and Saleh (7:73-79), (11:61-68), (26:1)
And they said, "What! A human being! Shall we follow a man among us while he has no party with him? Behold, we then, shall fall into error and loss
Why - Has the Message been given to him alone among us? Nay, but he is a flagrant liar
Ah! They will come to know on the morrow who the flagrant liar is
Behold, We are sending the she-camel as a test for them. So watch them (O Saleh) and hold yourself in patience
And let them know that the water must be shared by all. Every drinking will be witnessed. (The she-camel was a symbol of obedience for them)
But they called their (most forward) comrade and he took charge and killed her
Then see how was My retribution after My warnings
Behold, We sent upon them a single mighty Blast whereupon they crumbled to chaff
And indeed, We have made the Qur'an easy to understand. Then, is there any who will learn
Lot's folk rejected warnings
Behold, We sent a storm of fiery stones on them, except the family of Lot whom We saved at dawn
As a Bliss from Us. Thus it is, We reward the grateful
For he had truly warned them of Our Grasp, but they contended about the warning
And demanded that he give up his guests. Whereupon We sealed their vision. Taste now My punishment after the warnings
And indeed, the inevitable punishment befell them early in the morning
Now taste My retribution after My warnings
And behold, We have made the Qur'an easy to understand. Then, is there any who will learn
And warnings came indeed to Pharaoh's people
They, too, denied Our Messages, every one. Thereupon We grasped them with the grasp of the Mighty, the Powerful
Are your deniers better than those others, or do you have some amnesty in the Scriptures
Or do they say, "We are a group united bound to be victorious
Yet, all these troops will be routed and will turn back and flee
Nay, the Hour is the time promised them, and that Hour will be most grievous with a most bitter defeat
The violators of human rights are in grave error and loss
On the Day when they shall be dragged through the Fire on their faces, "Taste you the touch of Blaze!" ('Wajh' = Face = Countenance = Whole being = Total personality)
Behold, We have created all things in due measure and proportion. (And appointed Laws so that all things become what they are meant to be)
And Our Command is but a single Word, like the twinkling of an eye
And often in the past We have annihilated gangs like you. Then, is there any who will learn
And everything they did is in the Scriptures
And everything, be it small or great, is recorded
Behold, those who walk aright will be in the midst of gardens and rivers
Seated honorably in the Presence of a Mighty King
Ar-Rahman, the Beneficent, the Instant Source of all Mercy and Kindness
He it is Who has made known and taught the Qur'an
He has created the human being. (And taken care of his mental and physical needs)
He has distinguished him with the ability to clearly express his feelings and thoughts
The sun and the moon run by a mathematical design. (Such are the changeless Laws given in this Book)
The stars and the trees all adore Him (and follow His Laws)
And the sky has He raised high and has kept perfect balance in the Universe
So that you, too, never violate balance in your lives
Therefore, establish Balance in the society in absolute justice. And never belittle the Scale of Justice in the community and in all your transactions with your own 'Self' and with others
And (know that) the earth He has spread out for all His creatures. ('Anam' = All living beings)
Wherein are fruit and palms with clusters protected in sheaths
And grain, corn, leaves, stalks, colorful herbs, vegetables, spices, sweet-smelling plants and fragrant flowers. (The three Arabic terms used in this verse include all the meanings rendered)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
He created the human out of inorganic matter that sounded like an empty pot. (And it was empty of a trace of the finished form)
And the Jinns (nomads) He has created from a confused flame of fire (with a confused fiery disposition)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Lord of the two Easts and the two Wests. (The East and the West of the summer, and the East and the West of the winter)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
He has let free the two seas. They meet
Yet, there is a Barrier between them that they cannot exceed. (The great bodies of salt water and fresh water)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
From both of them come forth pearl and coral
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
And His are the bannered ships sailing through the sea lofty like mountains. (All creativity and invention of human beings issues forth from His gifts of mind and body. So all man-made things belong to Him)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
All things thereon (in the Universe) are ever changing. ('Fani' = Ever-changing = Mortal)
But forever is Changeless the 'Self' of your Lord, the Lord of Majesty and Honor. ('Baqi' = Remaining = Eternal = Survivor = Remainder = Changeless. 'Wajh' = Face = Countenance = Self = Whole being = Personality)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
All creatures in the heavens and the earth seek their needs from Him. And every day is He in a Marvelous Splendor
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Soon shall We lighten your burdens, O Burdened men and women
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
O Communities of the rural and the urban! If you can break through the 'fences' of the heavens and the earth, then break through. Never can you break through without an Authority. Can you bring an evidence
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
A blaze will be unleashed upon you - and thick smoke - and you will not be able to defend yourselves. (If you think that you can escape Divine Laws, you will never find your way in the thick smoke of conjecture)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
And when the high elite will disperse and adapt to a stunning change
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
In that Era neither the urban nor the rural will be asked why they trailed behind
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
The violators of human rights will be clearly identified, firmly seized and held accountable. ('Mujrim' = Guilty = One who steals the fruit of others' labor = Violator of human rights)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
This is Hell which the guilty deny
They wander between it and their smoldering anguish
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
And for him who stands in fear of his Lord's Presence, are two Paradises - one here one there
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Abounding in two facets, art and science. ('Afnan' = Creative works, art and science)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Wherein flow two springs, creativity and aesthetics
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Wherein is two kinds of fruit, of their own labor and of the added Reward
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Reclining on luxurious carpets lined with rich brocade, the fruit of both Gardens at hand
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Therein women have a modest gaze, never touched by human vices or evil prompting
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Like unto rubies and pearls
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Is the reward of goodness anything but goodness? (10:26), (
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
And other than these two, shall be two more Gardens. (The human 'Self' and the new Universe will keep evolving)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Both ever-fresh, lush green, pleasing
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Therein are two springs gushing forth. (Personal delight and shared joy)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Therein is fruit, and palms and pomegranate. (Fruit within the fruit of Reward)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Therein are all things most excellent, symmetrical, beautiful. ('Khair' = Good thing = Excellent. 'Hisan' = Nicely balanced = Beautifully symmetrical = Symmetrically beautiful)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Modest, intelligent companions in blessed shades
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Companions never touched by human vices or evil prompting. (5)
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Relaxing on ever-fresh meadows and splendid carpets
Then, O Men and women! Which Authority of your Lord will you deny
Ever Blissful is the Name of your Lord, the Lord of Majesty and Honor
When the Inevitable Episode unfolds
None could, then, deny its unfolding
Lowering some, raising others, the Great Equalizer
When the land is shaken with a shaking (popular uprising)
And the tyrannical powers crumble
So that they scatter like sand in a sandstorm. (20:105), (28:20), (
Then, you shall be three kinds
So, (firstly) the blessed ones. Oh, how wonderful are the blessed ones! ('Yumn' = Blessing = Bliss = Grace = Right side = Right action (19:52), (28)
And (secondly) the unblessed ones. Ah, how unfortunate are the unblessed ones! ('Mash'amah, from 'Shimal' = Unblessed = Left side = Wrong action (18:17), (56)
And (thirdly) the foremost are the foremost! (Those who led the race in doing good (55)
They are the ones near (to their Lord), in both lives
In Gardens of Delight
A good many of those who led in goodness
And some of those who trailed after them
On decorated thrones
Reclining thereon, socializing
Their children immortal, playful around them. (13:23), (52:2)
With goblets, glistening beakers, and sparkling drinks
Wherefrom they get no headache nor beclouding of mind
And fruit of their choice
The supreme delicacies of life
And lovely, intelligent spouses of vision
Like unto pearls well-guarded, far from vice
A reward for what they used to do
No vain talk will they hear therein, nor any call restraining from further development. ('Ithm' = Word or action that restrains, drags down or hurts human potential)
Nothing but the greeting and tiding of Peace! (And in the earthly paradise individuals contribute toward peace and security of the society)
And the blessed ones. Oh, how wonderful are the blessed ones
Among orchards of life without thorns
And trees laden with fruit and flower
And cool expanded shades of abundant delight
And water falls
And fruit abounding
Never interrupted, never too far
And on thrones, raised in honor
Behold, We have given these women a new being (wholly different from the Age of Ignorance)
And made them of unparalleled virtue
Eloquent, made of the same mettle, harmonious, blending well in the society. ('Urub' from 'Arabi' = Eloquent. 'Turab' = Dust = Harmonious = Of the same mettle = Well-blended (43)
They deserve the most blessed people
A good many of those who led in goodness
And a good many of those who trailed after them
Then, the unblessed ones. Ah, how unfortunate are the unblessed ones
In scorching wind, smoldering anguish
Enshrouded in smoke, opaque
Neither coolness of contentment nor honor of accomplishment
Behold, before this, they were sunk in luxury, exploiting the poor
And stubbornly persisted in their violations
And they used to say, "What! When we die and become dust and bones, shall we possibly be raised
And also our forefathers
Tell them, "Verily, those of old, and those of later generations
All will be brought together on a Day assigned at an appointed time
Then, behold, O You the straying deniers
You will eat the bitter fruit of the tree of your deeds. (37:62), (4)
And fill your bellies with it
And drink of burning anguish (that you gave to others)
And indeed drink as the camel with false thirst drinks." (Greed could never give you inner contentment (26:2)
Such will be their welcome on the Day of Judgment
It is We Who have created you. Will you not, then, admit the Truth
Have you ever considered the male and female seed
Is it you who create it or are We the Creator
We have designed the Laws of death among you and We are not unable
That We may change your existence and coming into being in a manner and in an environ you know not
And indeed you know the first coming into being. Why, then, do you not reflect
Have you thought of the crops that you cultivate
Is it you who grow it or are We the Grower
If We willed, We surely could turn it into chaff, then you would be left to exclaim
Behold, we are now under debt
Nay, but we are deprived
Have you thought of the water you drink
Do you bring it down from the rain-cloud or do We
If We willed, We surely could make it salty. Why, then, do you not show gratitude? (By devising an equitable system of provision for all)
Did you consider the fire you strike out
Is it you who grow the tree as its fuel, or do We grow it
We, yes, We have made this (fire) a reminder, and a gift for all of you who surely need it. (The use of fire is one of the Divine gifts that distinguishes mankind from the Animal Kingdom)
Work hard, then, to establish the Glory of your Lord's Supreme Name
Nay, I present the stellar orbits as witness. ('Mawaqi' = Different locations in the orbits)
And behold! This, indeed, is a great witness if your knowledge can encompass it
That this Qur'an is, indeed, a Noble Monograph
In a well-guarded Book. (As conveyed to you)
The Book which none but the pure of mind can touch. (Those who approach the Qur'an with minds contaminated with preconceived notions and extrinsic material, will never understand it)
A Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds
Now, is it this Hadith that you would hold in low esteem? (To uphold some other hadith)
And make its denial your daily bread? (Peddling conjecture as a means of minting money)
Why, then, as the last breath comes up to the throat
And as you look on
And We are closer unto him (the dying person) than you are, although you see not
Why not, then, if you owe nothing to Us
Make the departing return, if you are men of truth? (Denying the Fact that Allah alone is the Giver of life and death, and man owes his abilities, limited or abundant, to Him)
Now, if he is of those drawn near (for having walked aright)
(For him) Jubilation, and inner fulfillment, and a Garden of Bliss
And thus he is of the blessed ones
So, "Salutation of Peace be upon you!" - from the blessed ones
But if he is of the rejecters, the straying
Then the welcome will be smoldering anguish
And scorching heat before the Insurmountable Barrier
Verily, this is the most Certain Truth
Work hard, then, to establish the Glory of your Lord's Supreme Name
All things in the heavens and the earth are working relentlessly to fulfill the Divine Plan. And He is the Almighty, the Wise
Unto Him belongs the Dominion of the heavens and the earth. His are the Laws of life and death and He has Power over all things
He has no beginning and He has no ending. He is the Evident in His Attributes and the Hidden in His Person. And He is the Knower of all things. (Time and Space are His creation the totality of which is beyond the grasp of human intellect)
He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth in six stages, and is established on the Throne of His Almightiness of Supreme Control. (7:54), (10:3), (13:2), (20:5), (25:59), (32:4), (57:4). He knows all that enters the earth and all that comes forth from it, and all that descends from the sky, and all that ascends therein. And He is with you wherever you may be. And Allah is Seer of what you do
Unto Him belongs the Kingdom of the Highs and the Lows, and unto Allah return all affairs. (His Laws determine the final outcome of all actions)
He merges the night into the day, and merges the day into the night. He is Knower of all that is in the hearts
Believe in Allah and His Messenger. And spend of what He has made you trustees (your wealth and persons), on others. Those of you who believe and spend, theirs will be a Great Reward
And what is amiss with you that keeps you from having conviction in Allah? And the Messenger invites you to believe in your own Sustainer and has indeed taken your pledge, if you are truly believers
He it is who sends down clear Revelations to His servant, to bring you out from the depths of darkness unto the splendorous Light. And behold, for you Allah is Compassionate, Merciful
And why should you not spend in the Cause of Allah when to Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth? Those who spend and fight before the victory are not at the same level as the rest of you. They have a greater rank than those who spend and fight after the victory. Unto each Allah has promised good. He is Aware of what you do. (55:)
Who is it that will lend unto Allah a goodly loan that He may increase it manifold, and his may be a generous reward
On the Day when you will see the believing men and the believing women, their lights shining forth before them, blessing them, (it will be said) "A glad news for you this Day! Gardens beneath which flow rivers, to abide therein. This, this is the Supreme Triumph
On that Day the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women will say to the believers, "Wait, look on us. Let us borrow from your light!" It will be said, "Go back behind you and seek light." Then a barrier will be put up with a gate therein. On the inner side of it will be Grace, and on the outer side of it the doom
They will cry unto them, "Were we not with you?" The believers will answer, "Yes, verily - but you let your "Self" succumb to temptation. And you tempted one another, hesitated (watching which side was prevailing), and doubted (Allah's promise). And your fantasies misled you until there issued the Command of Allah. And indeed, the deceiver deceived you concerning Allah. (Deceiver = Desire)
So this Day no ransom can be accepted from you, nor from the open rejecters. Your home is the Fire. That is your care taker and a miserable destination it is
Is it not time for the believers that their hearts feel humble at the remembrance of Allah and the Truth which has been revealed? Become not like those who were given the Scripture before, and whose hearts were hardened with time. And so, a great many of them have drifted away from Truth
Know that Allah gives life to the land after it has been dead. For you We have indeed made Our Messages clear so that you might use your intellect
Behold, the men and women who stand true to their proclamations of belief and lend a goodly loan to Allah, they will be repaid manifold. And theirs will be a generous reward
For, those who (thus) believe in Allah and His Messengers, it is they - they who are indeed true, and they who are the witnesses to (the Glory of) their Lord. For them is their reward and their light. But, those who openly reject Our Messages and those who deny them in practice - it is they who will be companions of the Insurmountable Barrier (that bars their "Self" from developing)
Know that (in comparison to Eternity) the life of this world is only play and a fleeting delight and decor and your mutual bragging, and pursuit of riches and children. Its example is that of rain - The plantation which it causes to grow, pleases the farmers. But then, it may wither and you can see it turn into yellow hay. And in the end it crumbles into dust! But in the Hereafter it is either grievous suffering or forgiveness from Allah and Approval. Again, the life of this world is nothing but a fleeting enjoyment of illusion. (Therefore, invest in the life to come for lasting rewards)
So, be foremost in seeking absolution of your faults through the Laws of your Lord and thus a Paradise as vast as the heaven and the earth. (It transcends spatial boundaries encompassing the whole Universe (3:133)). It has been readied for those who attain belief in Allah and His Messengers. Such is the Bounty of Allah which He bestows upon him who wills it. And Allah is the Lord of a tremendous bounty
No disaster befalls the earth, nor yourselves but according to the Laws that We have already recorded in the Book of Decrees. Verily, all this is easy for Allah
Thus despair not over whatever has left you, nor exult for whatever you have been given. For, Allah does not love any of those self-centered boasters
Who withhold wealth and enjoin upon people to hold back resources. And whoever turns away - verily, Allah alone is self-Sufficient, Owner of Praise
Indeed, We sent Our Messengers with the evident Truth and revealed with them the Law and the Balance of right and wrong that mankind may deal in justice. And We have bestowed the iron in which there is awesome power and many benefits for people, and that Allah may mark out him who helps Him and His Messengers although the victory is initially unseen. Verily, Allah is Strong, Almighty
And indeed, We sent Noah and Abraham and granted their descendants Prophethood and the Scripture. And among them there is he who goes aright, but a great many of them have drifted away
Then, in succession, We followed them up with (other of) Our Messengers. We caused them to be followed by Jesus son of Mary and gave him the Gospel. And We placed kindness and compassion in the hearts of those who followed him. As for monastic asceticism - We had never ordained it to them. They invented it themselves to seek Allah's Approval. But then, they did not uphold the Gospel with right observance. And so those who truly believed among them, We gave them their reward. But, a great many of them have been drifting away
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be mindful of Allah and put faith in His Messenger. He will grant you double the reward of His Grace, here and there, and appoint for you a light wherein you shall walk, and will absolve your faults. For, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
And the People of the Scripture should know that they have no power whatsoever over the Bounty of Allah. All Bounty is in Allah's hand and He grants it according to His Laws. And Allah is the Lord of a tremendous bounty. (He is the Lord of the Worlds and the Lord of all mankind and discriminates not between people ()
Allah has indeed heard her who pleads with you (O Prophet) concerning her husband, and complains unto Allah. And Allah has heard your mutual dialogue. Verily, Allah is Hearer, Seer
Those of you who make senseless declarations about their wives, they by no means become their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave birth to them. And so, behold, they only utter what is contrary to reason, and thus, false. And behold, Allah is Absolver of faults, Forgiving. (The procedure of divorce has been clearly expounded in (2:228-230), (4:3), (4:19), (4:35), (4:128), (33)
Hence, those of you who have made senseless declarations about their wives, and then put them away into separation, and then wish to go back on their utterance - they should free a human being from bondage before the couple may 'touch' each other. This you are hereby admonished to perform. And Allah is Aware of all you do. (Freeing from bondage includes relieving someone from any kind of oppression and from a crushing burden of debt)
However, he who does not have the means thereof, let him resort to Abstinence (as in the month of Ramadan) for two consecutive months before the couple may 'touch' each other. And if he is unable to do that either, he should arrange the feeding of sixty needy ones. This is so that you might be true to your faith in Allah and His Messenger. Now these are the bounds ordained by Allah. And for the deniers of the Divine Commands is a painful doom
Verily, those who oppose Allah and His Messenger will be disgraced as were disgraced those before their times. Thus, We have sent down Clear Messages, and for the rejecters is a shameful suffering
On the Day when Allah will raise all of them together, He will inform them of what they truly accomplished. Allah ever keeps a meticulous record even though they may have forgotten it. For, Allah is Witness over all things
Do you not realize that Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. There is no secret meeting of three but He is their fourth, nor of five but He is their sixth, nor of less than that or more but He is with them wherever they may be. And ultimately, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they truly accomplished. Verily, Allah is Knower of all things
Have you not noticed those who were forbidden to conspire in secret meetings, and yet they revert to what they were forbidden, and continue to conspire together - for hampering progress, creating wedges of dissension in the society, and disobedience of the Messenger? And when they come to you (O Messenger), they greet you not in the way that Allah greets you - And say to themselves, "Why does not Allah punish us for what we say?" Sufficient for them is Hell (in both lives) wherein they burn. And how miserable that destination is
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When you consult with one another confidentially, never consult aiming hampering progress of the community, nor in creating wedges of discord therein, and disobedience of the Messenger. But consult together for expansion of individual and social potential and seeking ways to facilitate collective right conduct. And always remain mindful of Allah unto Whom you all shall be gathered. (And all your actions end up facing His Law of Requital in both lives)
Behold, conspiracy comes forth from selfish desire, in the end causing grief to the believers, but it cannot harm them contrary to Divine Laws. Hence, in Allah should the believers put their trust. (Satan or the selfish desire cannot overwhelm the believers unless they forsake Divine Commands (15:42), (17)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When you are told, "Accommodate one another in your collective life", do accommodate, seeing that Allah will open up His resources for you. And when you are told, "Rise up", do rise up to the occasion. Allah will exalt to high ranks those of you who truly believe in the Divine Commands, and who use the knowledge that they have been given. For, Allah is Aware of all you do. ('Fas-h' = Open up = Make room = Accommodate others)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Whenever you wish to confer with the Messenger by yourself, give something in charity to the needy or do an act of benevolence. That will be for your own good and cleanse the imprints of your faults on your 'Self'. But if you have no opportunity, then, behold, Allah is Absolver of faults, Merciful. (He rewards good intentions)
Is it that you are afraid of a transgression if you are not able to do such an act of kindness before you confer with the Messenger? Yet if you fail to find an opportunity to do it, Allah has already accepted your repentance (58:12). Hence, stay focused on establishing Salat - the Divine System, and setting up the Just Economic Order of Zakat. And obey Allah and His Messenger. For, Allah is Aware of all you do
Have you not seen those who befriend a people whom Allah disapproves? They are neither of you nor of them, and they knowingly swear on falsehood
Allah has readied for them a severe suffering. Behold, very disruptive is their behavior indeed
They use their oaths as cover and bar others from the Path of Allah. So theirs will be a shameful doom
Their wealth and their children and party will avail them not against Allah. It is they who are companions of the Fire, therein to abide
On the Day, when Allah will raise them together, all of them, they will then swear unto Him as they now swear unto you - deeming themselves to be accepted as reliable. Nay! Verily, it is they, they who are the liars
Their selfish desire has overpowered them, and made them oblivious to Allah's Reminder. Such as these are the party of the Satan. Oh, verily, it is they, the Satan's party who are the ultimate losers
Verily, those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, it is they who will finally be brought low
For, Allah has decreed, "I shall dominate, I and My Messengers." Behold, Allah is Strong, Almighty
You will not find those who truly believe in Allah and the Last Day endear anyone who opposes Allah and His Messenger, even though they be their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their tribe. Allah has inscribed conviction on their hearts, and has strengthened them with Energy from Himself. Hence, He will admit them into Gardens underneath which rivers flow. Well pleased is Allah with them, and well pleased are they with Him. They are the party of Allah. Oh, verily, it is they, the party of Allah, who are truly successful
All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth is incessantly working to manifest the Glory of Allah and to fulfill His Plan. For, He is Almighty, the Wise
He it is Who got out the rejecters among the People of the Book from their dwelling places at the very gathering of the forces. You deemed not that they would leave and they deemed that their strongholds would defend them against Allah. But Allah reached them in a manner they little expected and caused awe in their hearts. So they dismantled their dwellings by their own hands and the hands of the believers. Learn a lesson, then, O You who have vision
And if Allah had not decreed banishment for them, behold, He would have punished them harder in this world, yet for them is suffering of the Fire in the life to come
This, because they had opposed Allah and His Messenger. And whoever opposes Allah, for him Allah is Stern in grasping
Whatever softness you disregarded, or kept up by way of principle, was in accord with Allah's Command, in order that He might disgrace those who drifted away from their treaties.('Lina' = Softness, gentleness = Soft young palm tree. 'Fasiq' = One who drifts away)
And whatever Allah has turned over to His Messenger, you did not toil on any horse or camel for it. But Allah gives His Messengers upper hand according to His Laws. For, Allah is the Appointer of due measure for all things
Whatever Allah has turned over to His Messenger from those communities belongs to Allah and His Messenger (the Central Authority). (The Messenger will spend it on): The Central Government (The Central Authority). The welfare of the families of the believers. The orphans. Those who still feel left alone in the society. The widows. Those who have no means of earning their livelihood. The disabled who cannot move around looking for the Bounty of Allah. The homeless son of the street. Those who are on their way to join you, and Those who travel a distance to seek help
And it is for the poor refugees who have been expelled from their homelands and their property. And they seek Allah's Bounty and Approval, and support Allah and His Messenger. It is they, they who are true to their faith
Also those who resided in the city (Madinah) before them and attained faith. They love those who immigrated to them, and find no hesitation in their hearts in helping them. But rather give them preference over themselves, even though poverty be their own lot. And whoever is saved from greediness of the heart, such are the ones who truly prosper
And those who come after the first immigrants, say, "Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who came into Faith before us, and let not be any malice in our hearts toward those who believe. Our Lord! Verily, You are Compassionate, Merciful
Have you not noted the hypocrites how they told their disbelieving brethren among the People of the Scripture, "If you are driven out, we certainly will go forth with you, and shall never heed anyone against you. And if you are attacked, certainly shall we help you." But Allah bears witness that they surely are liars
For indeed, if they (Bani'n Nadhir) are driven away, they (the hypocrites) will not go forth with them, and if indeed they are attacked they will help not. And even if they try to help them, they will turn their backs in flight, and themselves find no help
Nay, you believers arouse a fear in their hearts more intense than even the fear of Allah. This is because they are a people who do not understand (that all strength comes from following Divine Laws)
Never will they fight you, even if they form a coalition, other than from within fortified strongholds or from behind walls. Within themselves is great adversity for each other. You may think they are united but their hearts are far apart. This, because they are a people who use not reason
Their example is the same as of those who lately preceded them. They tasted the calamity for their (wrong) decisions, and theirs is the awful doom
They (the hypocrites) are like Satan. He says unto man, "Deny the Truth!" But as soon as man has denied the Truth, it says, "Behold, I am not responsible for you. Verily, I fear Allah, Lord of the Worlds
Thus, the end for both is in the Fire, therein to abide. Such is the reward of those who relegate the Truth. ('Both' = Selfish desire + The human personality)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Be mindful of Allah and watch everyday what you have invested for your 'Self' for tomorrow. Again, remain conscious of the Laws of Allah (today and every day). Behold, Allah is fully Aware of all your actions
And be not like those who forgot Allah, therefore, He (His Law) made them forget themselves. It is they, they who have drifted away (from the road to Success)
Not equal are the dwellers of the Fire and the dwellers of the Garden. Dwellers of the Garden - it is they, they who are crowned with honor
Had We sent down this Qur'an upon a mountain, you would have indeed seen it humble itself and rent asunder for Awesomeness of Allah. Such examples We cite for mankind, so that they might think
He is Allah, other than Whom there is no god, Knower of the Invisible and the Visible. He is the Instant and Sustaining Source of all Mercy and Kindness
He is Allah, other than Whom there is no god ('no deity, no Law-giver and no one worthy of worship or obedience). The King Supreme, the Impeccable, the Peace and the Source of all peace, the Guardian of Faith and Security, the Watcher of the Universe, the Majestic, the All Powerful, the Superb. Glorious is Allah, far Above what they ascribe unto Him
He is Allah, the Supreme Creator, the Shaper out of nothing, the Designer. His Names are the Most Beautiful Names, and His alone are the Attributes of Perfection. All things in the heavens and the earth constantly work to manifest His Glory and to fulfill His Plan. And He is Almighty, the Wise. (He runs the Universe in His Infinite Power with His Infinite Wisdom)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not take My enemies - who are your enemies as well - for friends. Do you extend love and friendship to them when they reject the Truth that has come to you, driving out the Messenger and you because you believe in Allah, your Lord? If you are committed to strive in My Way and to seek My Approval, befriend them not. Do you show them friendship in secret, when I am best Aware of what you conceal and what you reveal? And whoever among you does that, he has certainly strayed from the right way
If they ever overcome you, they will divide you, and smite you with their hands and tongues causing much disruption. For, they will love to see you reject the Truth. ('Idia' = Wedge = Wedge of division = Enmity = Dissension = Distance. 'Su' = Disruption = Imbalance = Evil = Inequity)
(Divine Ideology comes first. Know that) Your family, relatives and your children will avail you not on the Resurrection Day. He will decide between you on individual merit alone. And Allah is Seer of all that you do
Indeed there is an Excellent Pattern for you in Abraham, and his companions. They said to their folk, "Verily, we stay clear of you and of what you worship instead of Allah. We denounce you and between us and you has arisen distance and aversion until you believe in Allah alone." The only exception was Abraham's saying to his father, "I will indeed pray for your forgiveness, although I have no power to achieve anything from Allah on your behalf." Then he prayed, "Our Lord! In You we place our trust, unto You we turn, and unto You is the Final Destination. (9:113), (14:41), (19:47), (3)
Our Lord! Let us not be made a target of persecution at the hands of the rejecters. And protect us, our Lord!" Verily, You, You alone are the Mighty, the Wise." ('Ghafara = Helmet, armor = Protection = Forgiveness = Absolution of faults = Protection against intrinsic or extrinsic loss)
In them, indeed, you have an excellent pattern, for anyone who looks forward to Allah and the Last Day. And whoever turns away, behold! Allah, He is Independent, the Owner of All Praise
It may well be that Allah will bring about affection between you and those whom you now consider enemies. Allah is the Powerful Appointer of His Laws. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah does not forbid you from being kind, and fully equitable to those who do not fight you on account of Religion, and do not evict you from your homelands. Behold, Allah loves those who lead a just, balanced life
Allah only forbids you from befriending only those who fight you on account of Religion and evict you from your homelands, or help others in evicting you. Whoever befriends them, it is they, they who will be wrongdoers
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When believing women come to you as immigrants, investigate their case, although only Allah is best Aware of their Faith. Once you establish that they are indeed believers, do not return them to the rejecters of the Truth. They are not lawful for the rejecters, nor are the rejecters lawful for them. Give the rejecters what they have spent on them (as dowry). And there is no blame on you if you marry these women, when you have given them their due marital gift. And do not hold on to wedlock with women who continue to deny the Truth. And you may ask them for the dowry you had paid, just as the rejecters have the right to ask the return of what they spent. This is the Judgment of Allah. He judges between you, for Allah is all-Knowing, all-Wise
If the dower of a believer's immigrant wife has gone to the disbelievers, at your turn (when a believing woman comes to you for asylum, the government will) compensate your men from what they had given (to their disbelieving wives as dower). Be mindful of Allah in Whom you are believers
O Prophet! When believing women come unto you taking oath of allegiance to you (they shall pledge that they will) - Not associate anyone with Allah. Not steal the rights of others. Not commit immodesty. Neither kill their children, nor deprive them of good rearing. Not indulge in fabricating slander, either overtly or covertly. Not disobey you in the Qur'anic Values. When they have made the pledge, accept their allegiance and ask Allah to bestow upon them the protection of forgiveness. For, behold, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Do not befriend a people whom Allah has condemned. Of the Hereafter they are already in despair - just as the deniers of the Truth despair (the resurrection) of those who are in the graves
All things in the heavens and all things in the earth are constantly working to manifest the Glory of Allah and to fulfill His Plan. For, He is the Almighty, the Wise
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Why do you say something which you don't do
Most reprehensible it is in the Sight of Allah that you say that which you do not
Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in columns as if they were a rock solid wall
(The people of Moses so frequently said what they did not do that) Moses had to tell them, "O My people! Why do you hurt me, even though you know that I am Allah's Messenger to you?" But when they kept deviating, Allah let their hearts deviate. For, Allah shows not the Way to those who keep drifting away from their word. ('Fasiq' = One who drifts away - from? - depends on the context)
And (the same happened when) Jesus son of Mary said, "O Children of Israel! Behold, I am a Messenger of Allah unto you. I confirm the Divine Origin of the Torah, and give you the glad news of a Messenger to come after me whose name shall be Ahmad (the Praised One.") But when he has come unto them with the self-evident Truth, the People of the Scripture say, "It is obviously a magical lie
And who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah when he is invited to
They aim to put out Allah's Light with their mouths (utterances), but Allah has willed to spread His Light in all its fullness, however hateful this may be to the deniers of the Truth
He it is Who has sent forth His Messenger with the Guidance, and the Religion of Truth, that He may make it prevail over all religion (other systems of life) however hateful this may be to those who ascribe partners to Him. (9:31-33), (14:48), (18:48), (
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Shall I tell you of a trade that will save you from a painful doom (in both lives)
That you put your Faith in Allah and His Messenger and strive in Allah's Cause with your wealth and person. This is for your own good, if your knowledge could encompass it
He will guard you from trailing behind in humanity, and admit you into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, and into beautiful mansions in the Gardens of Eden, (Gardens of Eternal Bliss). That is the Supreme Triumph
And yet another thing that you so dearly love! Help from Allah and imminent victory (soon in this very life). So give glad news to the believers (O Prophet)
O You who have chosen to be blessed with belief! Be Allah's helpers. As an example - Jesus son of Mary said to the disciples, "Who are my helpers for Allah?" They said, "We are Allah's helpers." Thus a group from the Children of Israel accepted him, and another group rejected him. Then We strengthened those who believed, against their foe, and they became triumphant
All things in the heavens and all things in the earth strive to manifest the Glory of Allah, the King Supreme, the Impeccable, the Almighty, the Wise
He it is Who has sent a Messenger among those who had never before received a Scripture - to convey unto them His Messages, and to make them grow in humanity, and to instruct them in the Scripture (as it is being revealed) and Wisdom, Judgment and establishment of Allah's Rule on earth. Whereas before that they were obviously lost in error
And (sent for) others who have not yet joined them in place and time. For, He is Almighty, the Wise
Such is Allah's Bounty - which He bestows upon him who is willing to receive it. (His Light is available to whoever turns it on). For, Allah is the Lord of Great Bounty
(The Book of Allah is to be read and understood, and not placed in high niches.) The example of those who were entrusted with Torah, and did not apply it in their daily lives, is that of the donkey that carries a load of books. Tough indeed is the example of people who deny Allah's Verses by their actions. Allah does not show the Way to people who displace the Revelation from its rightful station. ('Kizb' = Belie = Give lie = Deny in practice. 'Kufr' = Reject openly = Darkness = Denial = Ingratitude. 'Zulm' = Dislodge from the rightful place = Relegate the Truth = Give preference to other sources = Oppression = Wrongdoing = Violation of human rights)
Say, "O' You who follow the Jewish faith! If you claim that you are friends of Allah to the exclusion of the rest of mankind, then long for death if you are truthful
But never will they long for it because of the deeds their hands have sent ahead. And Allah is fully Aware of those who relegate the Truth
Say, "Behold, the death from which you shrink so much is bound to overtake you, and then you will be returned to the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible. And then He will inform you of what you truly accomplished
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! When the prayer is announced on the Day of the Congregation, hasten to the remembrance of Allah and leave your commerce. That is for your own good if you use your knowledge to understand
And when the prayer is ended, disperse freely in the land and seek of Allah's Bounty. And remember Allah often so that you may prosper
Yet when they see some bargain or entertainment, they rush to it, and leave you standing. Say, "That which is with Allah is better than all entertainment and all bargain. And Allah is the Best of providers
When the hypocrites come to you (O Prophet), they say, "We bear witness that you are indeed Allah's Messenger." Yes, Allah knows that you are truly His Messenger, and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are in fact deniers in practice
They make their oaths and proclamation of Faith a cover so that they may bar others from the Path of Allah. Miserable indeed is what they do
This, because they profess (before you) that they have believed whereas afterward (among their folk) they reject the Truth. And so a seal has been set upon their hearts, thus they understand not. (Variation between utterance and action hampers the power of reasoning within human psyche)
Now when you see them, their looks may impress you. And if they speak, you are inclined to listen to their speech. But they are like wooden logs propped up. (Empty of inner strength unable to stand on their own feet). They think that every call is directed against them. These are the real enemies, so beware of them. Allah condemns them. They are far deviated
And when it is said to them, "Come! Allah's Messenger will ask for your forgiveness", they shake their heads, and you see them pause, and then draw back in false pride
It is the same for them whether you pray for their forgiveness, or not pray for their forgiveness. Allah will not forgive them. For, behold, Allah does not guide those who keep drifting away from reason
They it is who say, "Spend nothing on those with Allah's Messenger, so that they disperse (and leave the city)." However, to Allah belong the Treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites comprehend not. ('Ansar' the Muslim residents of Madinah were supporting the needy 'Muhajirin' or immigrants from Makkah)
And they say (upon returning from Banu Mustaliq in 5 A.H.), "Indeed, when we return to
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Let not your wealth nor your children distract you from the Reminder of Allah. For, any who does so, it is they, they who are the losers
And spend on others of what We have provided you with, before death comes to one of you. And he then says, "My Lord! If only You would delay this for a short while, so that I could give in charity and be among the righteous
But never does Allah delay to a person when his term has come. And Allah is fully Aware of what you have accomplished in life
All things in the heavens and all things in the earth relentlessly strive to fulfill Allah's Plan, and manifest Allah's Glory. To Him belongs the Supreme Kingdom, and all Universe is a living witness of His Praise. The Universe itself displays that He is Able to do all things. He is the Powerful Appointer of His Laws and of due measure of all things
He it is Who created you (and endowed you with free will). Hence, one of you is a denier of the Truth and one of you chooses to be graced with belief. And Allah is Seer of all you do
He created the heavens and the earth in Truth and with a Sublime Purpose. And He formed you and formed you so well with beautiful potentials. And unto Him is the Final Destination
He knows every detail in the Highs and the Lows and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. For, Allah is Knower of what is in the hearts
Has not the news reached you of those who denied the Truth in the earlier times, and so they did taste the calamity for their (wrong) decisions? And for them was a painful chastisement
This, because their Messengers kept coming to them with self-evident Truth, but they said, "Shall mere human beings guide us?" And so they rejected and turned away. And Allah was ever Self-Sufficient. For, Allah is Independent, Owner of Praise
Those who reject the Truth think that they will never be raised again. Say, "Yes indeed, by my Lord! You will be raised again. And then you will be informed of what you really accomplished. For, this is easy for Allah
Therefore, put your Faith in Allah, His Messenger and the Light which We have revealed. For, Allah is fully Aware of your actions (how intricately they harm or benefit you)
The Day when He shall gather you all on the Day of the Gathering, that will be the Day of loss and gain. And whoever chooses to be graced with belief, and helps others, Allah will blot out the imprints of his faults and admit him into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, therein to abide forever. That is the Supreme Triumph
But those who frankly reject, or practically deny Our Messages, such are companions of the Fire. They will abide therein, and how miserable a destination it is
No calamity befalls but by Allah's Laws. And whoever believes in Allah, he guides his own heart. (Such a person understands that the Divine Laws in the entire Universe are changeless. That forms the basis of all science, and such nations keep improving their preventive and restorative capacities). And Allah is the Knower of all things and events
Obey Allah and obey the Messenger (the Central Authority). But if you turn away, the duty of Our Messenger is only to convey the Message clearly
Allah! There is no god but He. In Allah, then, let the believers put their trust. (They know that His Laws never change)
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Behold, among your spouses and your children may be enemies unto you. (They could create a wedge between you and the Divine Order). So beware of them! And if you pardon, ignore, and absolve their imperfections, then, behold Allah is Absolver of imperfections, Merciful
Your wealth and children provide you with a test. (If you maintain balance in this life and the life to come, and take good care of them (2:221)), thus with Allah is a Tremendous Reward
So be mindful of Allah as best as you can. And listen, and obey, and spend on others (your wealth and person). That is good for your own 'Selves'. For, any who is protected from his own greediness - it is they, they who are truly successful
If you lend unto Allah a goodly loan, He will multiply it for you and will grant you the protection of forgiveness. Allah is Appreciative, Clement
Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Mighty, the Wise
O Prophet! When you men intend to divorce women, make sure that the waiting period is observed. Keep precise account of this interim. Be mindful of Allah, your Lord. Never expel them from THEIR homes, nor shall they themselves leave their homes unless they commit open immorality. These are, then, the limits imposed by Allah. And whoever crosses Allah's limits, he verily hurts his own 'Self'. You know not that Allah may bring about thereafter a new situation (help create reconciliation)
And so when they have reached their waiting term, either retain them in kindness or part with them in kindness. And let there be two just persons among you to witness, and establish the evidence straight for Allah. This exhortation is for him who believes in Allah and the Last Day. And anyone who is mindful of Allah, He will always grant a way out for him (from difficult situations)
And will provide for him in a manner he has not expected. And whoever places his trust in Allah, He will suffice him. Behold, Allah always brings His Command to pass. Indeed, for all things Allah has appointed due gauge
And such of your women as no longer expect menstruation, as well as those women who do not have menstruation (for any physiological reason), to resolve your doubts, their waiting period is ordained to be three months. And for those who are pregnant, the waiting period ends when they deliver their burden. And anyone who is mindful of Allah, He will make his situation easy for him
That is the Commandment of Allah which He reveals unto you. Anyone who is mindful of Allah, He will absolve his faults and amplify for him the reward
Let them (the divorced women) live where you live with the same standard of living that you have, and according to your best means. Harass them not to make life difficult for them. And if they are pregnant, spend on them freely until they deliver their burden. Then, if they nurse your baby, give them their due recompense. And frequently consult together amicably. And if both of you find it difficult, let another woman suckle the baby on his behalf. (The father shall pay for the services of a foster mother)
Let the affluent man give according to his affluence, and the poor man give according to what Allah has given him. Allah does not burden any human being with more than what He has given him. Allah will soon bestow relief after hardship
And how many a community has rebelled against the Command of its Lord and His Messengers! Hence, We called each to account with a stern accounting and punished it with an exemplary punishment
And thus it tasted the calamitous outcome of its own doing. For, the consequence of their deeds was an utter loss
Allah has readied for them awful suffering (in the Hereafter as well). So always be mindful of Allah, O Men and women of understanding - you who have chosen to be graced with belief! For, indeed, Allah has sent down to you a Reminder
(A Reminder) A Messenger who conveys to you Clear Messages of Allah so that he might lead those who have chosen to be graced with belief, and help others, from the depths of darkness into the Light. (5:15-16), (7:157), (76:4). And whoever believes in Allah and works for the good of others, He will admit him into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, therein to abide forever. Indeed, Allah has made for him excellent provision
Allah it is Who has created seven Highs and their seven Lows. Through all of them descends His Command. (This is said) for you to know that Allah is the Powerful Appointer of His Laws. He has gauged everything, and that Allah encompasses all things in His Knowledge. ('Seven' also means several. Every height has its low, hence every heaven or sky has its 'earth'. Mankind must strive to live by Divine Commands as does the entire Universe)
O Prophet! Would you prohibit something that Allah has made Lawful for you, even to please your wives? For, Allah is Absolver of (their) imperfections, Merciful
Allah has already decreed for you believers the procedure for dealing with your oaths. (2:225), (5:89). Allah is your Master, and He is the Knower, the Wise
(Family life must be a relation of mutual trust. Now follows an example for the believers.) The Prophet confided a certain statement to one of his wives but then she divulged it. And Allah let this known to him. He then informed his wife of part of the issue and disregarded part. She asked him, "Who informed you of this?" He said, "The Knower, the Aware has informed me
If you two turn in repentance to Allah, (it shall be good for you) since your hearts had deviated. But if you back up each other against him (in divulging family matters), then, behold, Allah is with him, and so is Gabriel (who brings the Revelation), and the righteous believers. Also angels are his helpers. ('Angels' here denotes perseverance, restraint, courage, resolve, contentment (3;126), (8:9), (9:26), (33:56)). (Here is the absolute refutation of the Hadith collectors who obnoxiously peep into fabricated accounts of the Prophet's private life)
If he divorces any of you, it may happen that his Lord substitute other wives in your stead who are better than you, submissive to Allah, staunch believers, devoted, repentant, serving Allah, traveling with him, widows or maidens
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! (Family life must be a matter of trust and confidence) so guard yourselves and your families against a Fire whose fuel is people and their stone hearted leaders. The guardians of this Fire are the invincible, changeless Divine Laws that never fail to execute Allah's Ordinance, and carry it out without exception
O You rejecters of the Truth! Make no excuses for yourselves this Day. You are only being paid for what you used to do
O You who have chosen to be graced with belief! Turn to Allah in sincere repentance. Your Lord will then erase your misdeeds, and admit you into the Gardens underneath which rivers flow - on the Day when Allah will not let be degraded His Messenger and those who are with him in Faith. Their Light will run ahead of them as grace for them. They will say, "Our Lord! Perfect our Light for us making it last forever, and absolve our imperfections. Verily, You are Controller of all things
O Prophet! Strive against the rejecters of the Truth and the hypocrites, and be stern with them. Hell will be their home, and how pathetic a destination
Allah cites an example for those who deny the Truth. The wife of Noah and the wife of Lot, they were wedded to two of Our righteous servants yet each one betrayed her husband so that neither of them (their husbands) could avail them at all against Allah. And it was said, "Enter the Fire along with others who enter it
And Allah gives an example for those who have chosen to be graced with belief: The wife of Pharaoh when she said, "My Lord! Build for me a mansion in the Paradise, and save me from Pharaoh and his doings, and save me from the oppressors
And Mary, daughter of Imran, who guarded her modesty (in very adverse circumstances. She revolted against the non-Divine institution of monasticism, and got married adopting the natural family life). And We breathed into her (baby) something from Our Energy (free will, as We do to all human beings (2:30)). And she put faith in the Commands and Laws of her Lord, and was of the obedient
Eternally Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Supreme Kingdom of the Universe, and He is the Powerful Designer of His Laws for everything
He has created death and life to distinguish for yourselves who would do better. The Almighty, the Absolver of imperfections, has designed this System in His Infinite Wisdom
He has created seven Cosmic Systems in great harmony. Look! No fault will you see in the creation of the Beneficent. And turn your vision upon it once more. Can you see any flaw
Then look again and yet again, and every time your vision will fall back upon you, dazzled and defeated
And indeed, We have beautified the sky of the world with shining lamps. And made them objects of futile guesses for the satans. (15:17), (37:6-9), (72:8). And for them We have prepared the doom of blazing flames
Suffering in Hell awaits all who thus blaspheme against their Sustainer. What a miserable destination
When they are flung into Hell, they will hear and feel its fury as it fumes
As if it would burst with rage. Whenever a group is cast in it, the guardians of Hell will ask them, "Did you not receive a Warner
They will say, "Yes, verily, a Warner did come to us but we denied him saying that Allah has not revealed anything! You are but lost in a great error
And they will say, "If we really listened and used our sense, we would not be among the dwellers of the Flames
They will acknowledge that they did trail behind in humanity. Thus, far removed are the dwellers of the Flames from Divine Grace
Those who fear violating the Laws of their Lord even in privacy, for them is the protection of forgiveness and a Great Reward. (They keep in mind that every action has a consequence, even though it may not be immediately apparent)
Whether you hide your word and thought or make it known, behold, He is the Knower of what is in the hearts. ('Qaul' = Word = Saying = Utterance. It also signifies thought, opinion, belief and idea)
How could it be that He Who has created all should not know all things and events? For, He is the Unfathomable, the Aware
He it is Who has made the earth humble at your service. So move through its tracts and enjoy His provisions. Bear in mind that the revival to New Life will again be in His Dominion
Can you ever feel secure that the High Sovereign will not cause the earth to swallow you up when it begins to quake? (Life of the world is too brief and unpredictable to postpone the good until tomorrow (67:21), (67)
Or can you ever feel secure that the High Sovereign will not let loose on you a deadly hurricane? So that you shall know how My disapproval was
And verily nations before them rejected, then, how awesome was My rejection of them
Have they, then, never seen the birds above them spreading their wings and drawing them in? Nothing upholds them but the Beneficent - for, verily, He is ever Seer of all things
Nay, who is there besides the Beneficent, that could be an army unto you to shield and help you? They who deny this truth, are but lost in self-deception
Who is there to provide for you if He should withhold His providence? Nay, they are victims of their own pride and hatred (for the poor)
Is the one who goes prone on his face close to the ground (like an earthworm), better guided or one who walks straight on the Straight Path
Say, "He it is Who brought you into being and gave you hearing, sight and the faculty of understanding. But how seldom are you grateful by way of using them to full potential
Say, "He it is Who has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him shall you be gathered." (You will always remain within His Supreme Kingdom)
But they say, "When will this promise be fulfilled if you are men of truth
Say, "This knowledge rests with Allah alone and I am only a plain Warner
But when they see it close at hand, grieved will be the faces of the rejecters, and they will be told, "This it is which you were calling for
Say (O Messenger), "Have you ever thought? Whether Allah causes me and my companions to perish or embraces us in His Grace, who will protect the rejecters from the doom of suffering
Say, "He is the Beneficent. In Him we believe and in Him we place our trust, (so our Mission will succeed). And soon you will come to know who it is that is in obvious error
Say, "Do you see? If all your water were to vanish into the earth, who, then, could bring you fresh water springs?" ((56:63-74), (67:21). Likewise, who can bestow upon you the graceful Spring of guidance but Allah
Nuon. The Inkpot. And the Pen, and all that they write, stand witness. (The high domain of knowledge will bear out that)
You (O Messenger), by the Grace of your Lord, are not a madman
And, behold, yours will be an everlasting reward
For, verily, you are of the noblest moral character
And soon you will see and they will see
Which of you is the demented. (Outstanding knowledge plus sublime character can only be compatible with a great mind)
Verily, your Lord knows best him who strays from His Way, and He knows best those who are rightly guided
Hence, pay no heed to the rejecters
They wish that you strike a deal with them so that they can strike a deal (and compromise on a middle grounds between Truth and Falsehood (10:15), (11:)
And yield not to any petty oath-monger. (Repetitious swearing hurts the credibility of a person)
Or to a defamer that goes about spreading slander
Or to a withholder of the good and of wealth, trespasser of values, low in virtue
Or to one greedy to the extent of insensitivity, and, in addition, worthless to the society
Or he who because of his riches and party
Says, "Fables of ancient times", whenever Our Messages are conveyed to him
We shall brand such a person with manifest disgrace! ('Branding the snout' alludes to bringing to visible disgrace a person who chooses to live at the subhuman level)
Behold, We have tried such people as We tried the owners of the garden who swore that they would pluck its fruit in the morning
And made no exception (for the needy poor)
Then a tornado from your Lord struck it while they slept
So that by the morning it was barren, bleak
Now, in the morning, they called out unto one another
Go early to your field if you want to pick the fruit
So they went off whispering unto one another
Let not a single poor come near you today
And early they went strong in their resolve (to keep the poor away)
But when they saw it, they said, "Behold, we have lost our way
(Then they realized), "Ah! Now we are destitute
Said the most balanced among them, "Did I not tell you - why did you not work aright (thinking of the poor)?" ('Sabh' = Swim in strides = Work hard = Labor for a noble cause)
They said, "Glorified is our Lord! Verily, it is we who have been offenders." (Refusing the Divine Right of the needy)
And then they confronted one another, blaming
They said, "Oh, woe unto us! We were trespassers of goodness
It may be that our Lord grants us something better than this. Behold, we turn to our Lord affectionately
Such is the suffering! But far greater is the suffering of the Hereafter - if they knew it
Behold, for those who walk aright are Gardens of Bliss with their Lord
Shall We, then, treat those who submit (to Our Laws) like the guilty
What is the matter with you? How do you judge (the right and wrong and their logical consequence)
Or do you have a scripture wherein you learn
That you shall indeed get the outcome of your choosing
Or have you a solemn oath, binding on Us till Resurrection Day, that yours shall be all that you order
Ask them which of them guarantees it
Do they have 'partners'? Then let them bring their 'partners' if they are truthful
On the Day when they are confronted with the stark reality and they are summoned to prostrate, they shall not be able to prostrate. (It will be too late to submit)
Their eyes drooping, humiliation will overwhelm them! And they had been repeatedly invited to prostrate when they were able
So leave unto Me him who denied this Message (39:23). We shall lead them step by step to a reprisal from directions they had never conceived
Though I give them respite, behold, unwavering is My Plan
Or is it that you ask them any reward so that they are burdened
Or is it that theirs is the future that they have written down
(O Prophet) Go ahead steadfastly in establishing your Lord's Command. And be not like him (Jonah) of the fish who cried out in distress. (21)
If it were not for the Bliss of his Lord, he would have been cast into the wilderness and in the wilderness of thought
But his Lord had elected him and included him among those who have worked for reform and to actualize their 'Self
And behold, those who deny the Truth, offend you (O Prophet) with their eyes when they hear the Reminder. And they say, "Behold, he is a madman
Nay, this Reminder is a giver of eminence to all nations
The Inevitable Reality
How awesome is the Inevitable Reality
Ah, what can give you an idea what the Inevitable Reality is
Thamud and Aad denied the oncoming Uproar
As for Thamud, they were destroyed by a thunderous blast
And as for Aad, they were annihilated with raging hurricane winds
Which He made it rage upon them for seven long nights and eight long days. Such that you could imagine those people as uprooted hollow palm-trunks
Now, can you see any remnants of them
And there came Pharaoh, and many others before him, and the townships that were overthrown. All of them committed fault upon fault
For, they disobeyed the respective Messenger of their Lord. Consequently, He grasped them with a firm grasp
Behold! When waters topped the levels, We carried you upon the watercraft
(These events are conveyed to you) so that We might make it a lesson for you, and that any attentive ear might take it to memory
Hence, think when the Trumpet will be sounded with a single Blast
And the earth will be moved and the mountains, and struck with a stroke
Then, on that Day when the Episode will come to pass
And when the sky will be rent asunder, such that frail will it be that Day
And the Divine Laws in Nature will rally around and your Lord's Supreme Control will reign over eight Universes that Day. (Instead of the current seven)
On the Day you will be brought, not a single hidden deed of yours will remain hidden
Then he who is given his record in his right hand, will say, "Come all of you around! Read this my record
Behold, I always thought that my account would be given to me
Then he will be in a state of Bliss
In a lofty Garden
With its fruit at hand
Eat and drink gleefully for what you did in the days past
But as for him who is given his record in his left hand, he will say, "Oh, I wish I was never given my record
And knew not my account
Oh, could this be the end of me
Of no help is my wealth
Vanquished is all my control
Take him and shackle him! (Halt from further development)
And then hurl him in the blazing flame of his deeds
And then make him a link in the very long chain of people like him. (Seventy cubits = Very long)
Behold, he failed to grace himself with faith in Allah, the Tremendous
And arranged not to feed the needy
And so, he has no friend here today
Nor any food but the discarded shreds he gave to others
Which none eat but those who faulted through life
But nay, I call to witness all that you see (that actions have consequences of their like)
And all that you see not (the subtle progression of the Law of Requital)
Behold, this is indeed the revealed Word in the dialect of a noble Messenger
This is not the speech of a poet. Seldom do you reach conviction
Nor is it the word of a soothsayer. Little of your intellect do you bring to use
It is a Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds
And if he had ascribed his sayings unto Us
We would have taken him by the right hand
And would have cut off his Aorta
And none of you could stop Us from doing that
But, verily, it is a Reminder and a giver of eminence to those who wish to walk aright
And behold, We know well that among you will be deniers
And behold, this denial will become a source of regret for the rejecters
For, verily, it is Truth Absolute
Therefore, work hard to manifest the Glory of your Lord's Tremendous Name
A questioner might ask about the catastrophe that is bound to fall
Upon those who deny the Truth. None can repel it
From Allah, Lord of the Stairways of Ascent. (He enables all things to ascend, evolve and become what they are destined to be)
The Universal forces and the Divine Energy ascend unto Him in a Day the measure of which is fifty thousand years
Therefore, you shall do your part with a most handsome steadfastness
Behold, they see it far away
But We see it near
The Day when the sky will melt away
And the mountains will become as flakes of wool
And a friend will not ask about his friend
Even though they will be within sight of one another. The guilty will desire to give his own children to ransom himself from suffering of the Day
And his wife and his brother
And his whole family and the tribe that raised and sheltered him
And all who lived on earth - all of them if then it might save him
But nay! Behold, it is a raging flame
That burns all coverings and defenses
It calls him who turned and fled from Truth
And hoarded wealth, and withheld it
Verily, man is created with an anxious disposition
Nervous when harm touches him
And niggardly when good reaches him
Except the MUSALLEEN. (Who are Musalleen? NOT the so-called ritualistic praying ones)
MUSALLEEN are those who always follow the Divine System
And in whose wealth and possessions is a KNOWN RIGHT
For him who asks for help, and for him who is deprived
(And Musalleen are) those who have conviction in the Day of Judgment. And hence, in the Law of Recompense
And those who are fearful of their Lord's Law of Requital
(They know that) Verily, their Lord's Law of Requital makes no exceptions, so that none can feel secure
Those men and women who preserve their chastity
They have intimate relations only with their spouses - that is, those who are rightfully theirs through wedlock. For such relationship they are free of blame. ('Aw' = Or = That is = And)
But anyone who seeks beyond this, those are the transgressors
(And Musalleen are those) who guard their trusts and duties assigned to them, and their pledges, as a shepherd guards his flock
And those who are truthful in witness and stand by their testimony
And those who consolidate and protect the Divine System
(Musalleen are the ones who collectively build it on earth and) inherit the Paradise in the Hereafter. Such are the honored ones
What, then, is the matter with the rejecters that they rush to and fro before you, confused? (Instead of joining hands)
On the right and on the left, in groups
Does everyone of them hope to enter the Garden of Bliss with this attitude
Nay! Verily, they know full well what potentials We created them with
But nay! I call to Witness the Lord of all points in the East and all points in the West, behold, We are Able
To replace them by others better than they are. For, there is nothing to prevent Us
Let them chat and play until they meet their Day which they are promised
The Day they shall come forth in haste from their dead states, as if racing toward a goal post
With their eyes subdued in shame, humiliation overwhelming them. Such is the Day which they were promised again and again
Behold, We sent Noah unto his nation, "Warn your people before an awful doom comes to them
He said, "O My people! Behold, I am a plain Warner to you
That you serve Allah and be mindful of Him. Now, do pay heed to me
He will then protect you from the detriment of trailing behind in humanity and respite you until a term appointed. Behold, when the term appointed by Allah comes, it cannot be delayed - if you but knew this (Law)
He said, "My Lord! Verily, I have been calling unto my people night and day
But my call only increases their fleeing
And, behold, whenever I call unto them to be forgiven by You, they thrust their fingers in their ears - and veil themselves in their garments. And they persist in this behavior glorifying themselves in pride
And, behold, then I called unto them aloud
And, behold, I addressed them in gatherings and spoke to them individually in private
And I have said, "Seek forgiveness of your Lord. Behold, He is ever Forgiving
He will shower upon you heavenly blessings
And will help you with goods and riches and flourishing families, and will grant you gardens and will bestow upon you flowing rivulets
What is the matter with you that you seek not for dignity toward Allah? (His Laws can give you dignity and eminence)
Knowing that He has created you in successive stages
Don't you realize how Allah has created the seven heavens in great harmony
And made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a radiant lamp
And Allah has caused you to grow as a growth from the earth
Then He returns you into the earth and He will bring you forth again, a new bringing
And Allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
That you may travel thereon on spacious valley-ways
Then Noah said, "My Lord! Behold, they have opposed me throughout, for they follow him whose wealth and children have led him increasingly into ruin
And they plot tremendous schemes
And keep telling one another, "Do not abandon your gods! And forsake not Wadd, nor Suw'a, nor Yaghuth and Ya'uq and Nasr
And they have thus led a great many people astray (and divided them). And Your Laws let go more and more astray those who displace Truth with falsehood
And so, because of faults upon faults, they were drowned, then made to enter a Fire. And they found out that they had no helpers besides Allah. (Made to enter: Before Allah is Eternal Now. The past tense also indicates the inevitable outcome)
And Noah said, "My Lord! Leave not any of these rejecters to dwell in this valley
If you should leave them, they will mislead Your servants and they will only beget division and ingratitude
My Lord! Grant unto me the protection of forgiveness and unto my parents and whoever enters my house in Faith, and unto all the believing men and the believing women (of all times). And increase the oppressors in nothing but ruin of their evil schemes
Say (O Prophet): It has been revealed to me that a tribe of nomads listened, and then they said, "Behold, we have heard a marvelous Recital
It shows the way to Enlightenment, so we have come to believe in it. And we shall never again ascribe a partner unto our Lord
And that Exalted in Glory is our Lord. No wife has He ever taken nor a son
And that the foolish among us uttered such outrageous lies about Allah
And behold, we used to think that people, whether civilized or uncivilized, would never utter a lie about Allah
And indeed some people of towns used to seek shelter with some of the nomads and increased them in confusion
And they thought as you nomads thought that Allah would never again send forth anyone." (As His Messenger, and so, the claimants of the occult sciences would carry on with their deceptions)
And we tried to feel the heaven but found it well attended by mighty guards and flames." (The shining Knowledge in the Qur'an dismisses all conjecture of the astrologers, fortune-tellers, and other claimants of occult sciences)
(The nomads continued), "And we used to sit on places listening to the 'heavenly news'. But now whoever listens will find a flame waiting for him." (The brilliant flame of Divine Revelation is now ever-ready to torch the conjecture of the astrologers (37)
And we know not whether harm is intended for the inhabitants of the earth, or whether their Lord wills for them Enlightenment." (It remains to be seen how people will react to this revolutionary Message)
(The nomads continued their conversation), "And some of us are righteous and others are far from that, and we follow varying paths
Now we know that wherever we are in the earth, we cannot defy the Laws of Allah nor can we flee to escape
And as soon as we heard the Enlightenment, we believed in it. And whoever chooses to be graced with belief in his Lord, need not fear a diminished return, nor unfairness
And some of us have submitted (to Allah) while there are others who are taking a middle course. And whoever submits - such are they who have resolved to get enlightened
And those who maintain a middle course (between the Right and the Wrong) - they are but fire-wood for the Hell
(Such was their conversation.) Now, if they take an unwavering stand on the Highest Discipline, We will shower them with abundant bounties. ('Tareeqah' = Layer upon layer arranged in great harmony = Discipline = Way = Course. 'At-Tareeqah' = The Highest Discipline = Divine Revelation. 'Ma' = Water, heavenly blessings = Bounties)
That We might test them (let them try their own mettle) thereby. And whoever turns away from his Sustainer's Reminder, He will cause him to undergo an ever-increasing torment
And know that all Masjids are for Allah. (Adoration, prostration, submission is due to Allah alone). Hence, invoke not anyone along with Allah. (9:17). ('Masjid' = Mosque = Places of worship = Collective acts of Prostration = Ways of Adoration = Obedience of Divine Commands = Centers of administering the Divine System)
Yet whenever a servant of Allah stands up with invitation to Him, they crowd on him in hostility
Say, "I call unto my Lord alone and associate no one with Him (I heed no one against His Laws)
Say, "Behold, I do not own the power to harm you or enforce enlightenment upon you
Say, "Behold, No one can shelter (even) me from (the consequences of violating the Laws of) Allah, nor can I find a hide-out from Him
If I fail to convey to people what I receive from Allah and make His Messages known." Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, behold, for him is Hellfire, to abide therein forever
Until they see what they are promised. And so, soon will they find out who is really helpless and counts for less
Say, "I know not whether the promise made to you is near or if my Lord will delay it
The Knower of the Unseen and the future, and He discloses to none His secrets
Except as He wills unto a Messenger whom He has elected. And then He ensures that the Revelation is guarded in his life and after him. (This Eternal guarding is promised for the final Revelation)
That He may make manifest that it is indeed their Lord's Messages (and nothing else) that these Messengers deliver. For, He it is Who encompasses all the Revelation they have, and takes account of all things
O You (Prophet) the great selector of companions, the best caravan leader
Stay vigilant even by night, and never fall short on it
Half an effort or less than perfect
Or, you shall increase it whenever warranted. And convey the Qur'an in a calm distinctive manner, stage by stage
Behold, We are charging you with a substantial Declaration (a Lofty Mission)
Verily, the vigil of the night impresses the minds most strongly, and the speech is most upright. (Mutual consultation with your companions is more effectively done at night)
Behold, by day you are engaged in continued strife
Keep eminent the Name of your Lord and detach yourself from needless pursuits for His sake
Lord of the East and the West! There is no god but He. Hence, hold on to Him as Dispenser of affairs
And endure with patience whatever people may say, and leave them with a noble leaving
And leave the deniers of the Truth unto Me - these 'masters of luxury'. And you give them some time
Behold, with Us are shackles and a blazing Fire
And a choking food and an awful doom
The Day is coming when the masses and the wealthy tyrants will shake, and the leaders will become heaps of sand
Behold, We have sent unto you a Messenger to be a witness concerning you, just as We had sent unto Pharaoh a Messenger
But Pharaoh rebelled against the Messenger, whereupon We seized him with a calamitous seizing
So, how, if you keep rejecting, will you guard yourselves on a Day which will turn children gray. (A Day of horrifying events)
The very sky will then be rent asunder. (The arrogant leaders will be scattered). His Promise always come to pass
Behold, this Qur'an is a Reminder, a Giver of eminence. Now, whoever wills' let him set out on a Way to his Lord
Behold, (O Messenger!) Your Lord is fully Aware (that you are dedicated to your Mission). There are nights when you stay up working two thirds, one half, or one third of the night as do your companions. But Allah has designed night and day. You and your companions cannot over-work indefinitely. So He turns to you in kindness. (He does not ordain for you hardship). Inculcate, then, as much of the Qur'anic teachings in their hearts as you may do with ease. He knows that among you are sick people, and others have to earn their living and travel for it. And those who have to fight in the Cause of Allah. Recite and convey the Qur'an, then, at ease. And establish the Divine System and set up the Just Economic Order. And lend unto Allah a goodly loan. Whatever good you send forth for your 'Selves' you will find with Allah, better and more excellent in reward. And seek forgiveness of Allah. Behold, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O You founder of the most Benevolent Order
Rise up to the occasion and post danger signs on the highway of life
Establish the Greatness of your Lord on earth
Keep a meticulous character! (Literally, purify your garments)
Leave alone the opponents
And give your wealth and person selflessly (
Steadfastly for your Sustainer
For when the Trumpet will sound
That will be that Day - A Day of hardship
Not of ease, for all who deny the Truth
Leave Me alone to deal with him whom I have created alone
And then granted him abundant wealth and resources
And children and party abiding in his presence
And made life comfortable for him like a cradle
But he keeps increasing in greed, desiring more and more
Nay! Behold, he has been a stubborn opponent of Our Revelations
I will cause him to walk an exhausting uphill climb
For, behold, he thought, and he designed
And thus he destroys himself, how he designs
Again, he destroys himself, how he designs
And then he looked around
And then he frowned and glared
And then he turned away in pride
And said, "All this is a remnant of ancient magic
This is nothing but the speech of a human
I shall soon cast him into Saqar
Ah, what will convey unto you what Saqar is
A Fire that lets not live and lets not die. (Fire of Regret)
Visibly written on the tablet of an individual's life
Over it are nineteen. (On the tablet of human life are inscribed nineteen patterns of behavior that lead to the Fire)
We have appointed only Universal Laws to be the keepers of the Fire. And We have made their number a trial for those who wish to remain in darkness. This admonition should grant certainty to those who received the Scripture before while the believers shall increase in faith. And that the believers and those who have been given the Scripture shall harbor no doubt to this declaration. And the hypocrites and the deniers may say, "What means Allah with such an example?" Thus, Allah lets go astray him who wills to go astray, and guides him who wills to be guided. And no one knows the Forces of your Lord but He. And this Qur'an is naught else than a Reminder to mankind
Nay! The Moon stands witness
And the Night when it departs
And the Dawn as it shines forth
Behold, this (the fore-going) is one of the Greatest allegories (that the Revolution is coming in all its splendor)
This is a fore-warning for every human being
To everyone of you, whether he chooses to advance or to lag behind
Every person is held in pledge for all that he has done
Except those who have succeeded for being upright. ('Yameen' = A metaphor for righteousness and success. They have actualized their "Selves" by doing good to others)
In Gardens they will ask
Of those who used to steal the fruit of others' toil
What has led you into Saqar?" (A Fire that lets not live and lets not die. Fire of Regret)
They will reply, "We were not of the Musalleen
Neither did we feed the hungry, nor did we take part in helping those who had lost their jobs, those whose businesses had stalled, and those whose hard-earned income was insufficient to meet their basic needs
And we were among those who used to say what they did not do
And we used to deny the Day of Judgment and that the Divine System will eventually prevail" (And that Allah's Law of Requital is totally unbiased and makes no exceptions)
Till the inevitable Truth came unto us
Then no mediation of any mediator will help
What, then, is the matter with them that they are turning away from a clear Advisory
As if they were frightened zebras
Fleeing from a lion
Nay, each of them wants to be given the scrolls of Revelation personally, unfolded (and spoon-fed)
Nay, verily, they are oblivious to the Law of Cause and Effect - that every action has its ultimate consequence
Nay, behold, this is a clear Advisory
So whoever wills may take it to heart
But they will not take it to heart except in accordance with Allah's Law of Guidance. (4:88). He is the Source of security, and the Source of forgiveness and protection. (7)
Nay! I call to witness the Day of Resurrection
Nay, I call to witness the person who shows remorse after wrongdoing. (12:53. Notice the Law taking the first step instantly)
Does the human being think that We will not assemble his bones? ((36:78), (37:16). Life goes on without its essence, the 'Self', undergoing disintegration
Yes indeed, Yes, We have the Power to restore even his finger tips with finger prints
But man is after subverting his own future
(Yet) he asks, "When will this Day of Resurrection be
But when the sight is dazzled
And the moon is darkened. (The banner of the Age of Ignorance bearing the moon logo goes down)
And the sun and the moon are brought together. (Persia and Arabia come under one Rule. Sun being the logo on the Persian banner)
On that Day man will wonder, "Where to flee!" (In this life and in the life to come. Verses 7-10 could easily allude to the merging of the super power of the times, Persia with the newly enlightened Arabia in 642 C.E., 10 years after the exalted Prophet's death)
But, nay! No height to mount above the turmoil
Unto your Lord that Day is the resting place
On the Day when man is apprised of all his acts of commission and omission. (All he has done and left undone. All deeds that advanced him and kept him behind)
Oh, but man is a telling witness against himself
Even though he were to put forward all his excuses
(Now whenever you read the verses of the Qur'an) read not in haste stirring your tongue
Behold, it is up to Us to gather it (in your heart) and the reading of it. (He will bless whatever effort we put into learning it)
Thus, when We read it, follow you the reading. (Allah has revealed the Qur'an, and bestowed upon us the faculty of understanding, hence, "When We read it)
Then, behold! It is for Us to explain it. (The Qur'an is its own best commentary. It explains itself)
Nay, but you love instant results
And give little thought to the long term. ('Akhirah' = Hereafter = Life to come = Future = Long term = What follows = Subsequent = Enduring. Tomorrow is today's 'Akhira)
Some faces that Day will beam with happiness
Looking up to their Lord
And some faces on that Day will be despondent
Expecting a back breaking calamity
Nay, when the last breaths come up to the throat
And those around cry, "Is there any charmer
But he knows that this is the parting
And it is pang upon pang
That day the drive is to your Lord
For he neither stood by the Truth, nor did he follow it. ('Sal'= To follow, like the runners-up horse closely follows the winner = To closely follow the Commands of Allah)
Rather, he used to deny and turn away
And then used to walk back to his folk and his ways gleefully
This is the most befitting for you - now this is the most befitting
Again! This is the most befitting for you - now this is the most befitting. (The impending requital befits the behavior)
Does man think he will be left alone like a soundless broken musical string
Was he not gametes that moved to join
Then he became a zygote. And He shaped and fashioned him in due proportion
And He has made of humans pairs, male and female
Is not He, then, Able to bring the dead to life
Has there not passed over man an era when he was not even worth mentioning
Behold, it is We who have created the human being from marked out cells, male and female gametes, that joined. Then We passed him through subtle changes. And then We made him a being endowed with Hearing and Sight
Verily, We it is Who have shown him the Way, whether he be grateful or ungrateful
Behold, for those who deny the Truth we have readied chains and shackles and a blazing flame. (Chains and shackles of conjecture, blind following and superstition, and the fire of confusion and regret are the logical consequences of relegating the Truth)
Behold, the truly virtuous will drink from a cup sweetened with nectar of flowers. ('Kafur' = Camphor = Cool temperament = Nectar from the calyx of grape as it flowers = Sweet and fragrant drink of Divine Bliss)
A spring whereof the servants of Allah drink - it is they who make it flow in a flow abundant. (The true servants of Allah achieve His blessings of Guidance and all that is good, and share them with fellow human beings)
They fulfill their vows and pledges and fear (and therefore, guard against) the times when chaos and corruption might sweep the society
And they feed, for the love of nobility, the indigent, the orphan and the captive
(They do all this selflessly) saying, "We provide for you for the sake of Allah alone. We want no return from you, not even a word of thanks
Behold, we stand in awe of our Lord to ward off the times when the society might become a picture of frown and distress
Hence, Allah wards off from them the chaos of those times, and showers on them inner splendor and delight. ('Yaum' = Day = Stage = Times = Era = Eventuality = The Resurrection Day)
And for their steadfastness He rewards them with a Garden of Bliss and garments of silk (honor)
Relaxing therein on beautiful furnishings, they neither find a hot sun nor chill
Pleasant shades close upon them and clusters of fruits reach them low
And they are served with goblets of silver and cups of crystal
Silver trays shining as crystal - all this design they have determined (with their good deeds)
And delicious invigorating drinks they shall be given. (43:71), (76:5), (83:27). Camphor: an allegory for cool relaxation, and ginger: warmth and action
From therein a spring named Salsabil. The water thereof seeks its own way to them. ((88:12). Salsabil = Find your way to them
And their children, immortal, playing around, lovely as pearls when you see them
And whenever you look around there you see Bliss and a Magnificent Kingdom
Upon them will be garments of green silk with gold embroidery, and they will be honored with bracelets of silver. And their Lord will give them pure refreshing drinks
Behold! All this is your Reward since your effort has found a befitting Acceptance
Behold, We, yes, We have revealed unto you the Qur'an step by step, a Revelation from Us
Therefore, hold on to your Lord's Command unwaveringly. And heed not of them any dragger of progress or devotee of darkness. ('Athim' = One who drags or pulls down progress)
Raise the Name of your Lord morning and evening. ('Zikr' = Remembrance = Commemoration = Raise = Celebration = Magnify = Give eminence = Taking to heart = Keeping in mind)
Adore Him even at night and strive to establish His Glory on earth through long nights (as you do morning and evening)
Behold, these people love only the instant gains and as a result leave behind a yesterday laden (with transgressions and wasted opportunities of doing good)
(Who gave them the mind and body to behave the way they choose?) We it is Who have created them, and strengthened their frame. And if We Will, We can replace them entirely with other nations. (Nations who will use their human potentials better)
Behold, this is an Advisory that whoever wants, may choose a Way to his Lord
Yet, you cannot will it unless you align your free will with the Will of Allah. (Guidance can only be achieved according to Divine Laws (4:88)). For, behold, Allah is Knower, Wise
He admits into His Grace everyone who wills to be admitted. But, for those who wrong their 'Self' by making wrong decisions, He has prepared an awful doom. ('Zulm' = Wrongdoing = Being unjust to others or to one's own 'Self' = Oppression = Relegation of Truth = Displacing anything from its rightful place = Violation of human rights = Transgression)
Witness are these Messages (to the Sublime Truth), sent forth one after another
As they gain strength like a tempest
And spread (the Truth) far and wide
While distinguishing the Right from Wrong with a clear distinction
In order to deliver the Reminder (into the hearts)
Whether one erases his faults or sees the danger signs. ('Uzr' = Excuse = Justification = Good news = Reasoning = Attempt to get rid of one's shortcomings. 'Nuzr' = Warning = Posting danger signs)
Behold, all that you are promised in this Writ will come to pass
So when the stars lose their luster. (The small groups of opponents fade away)
And when the sky is rent asunder. (Every high tyrant is decimated)
And when the mountains are blown away as dust. (The great ones who enslave the weak float around like flakes of wool). (2)
And when all Messengers are summoned at the time appointed. (The unanimity of the Message of all Messengers will become evident)
For what Day is the term delayed
For the Day of Decision
And what will enlighten you what that Day of Decision is
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice! ('Kizb' = Lie = Belie = Deny the Truth in practical dealings = Deny by action. 'Kufr' = Frank denial in word and action)
Did We not annihilate the former generations
Then We made them followed by later generations
Thus do We always deal with the guilty
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
Did We not create you from a humble fluid? (How, then, you forget your common origin and being humble to one another)
Which We then kept in a safe place
For a term appointed
Thus We have determined (all things). How excellent is Our determining! (Appointing due measure of all things)
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
Have We not made the earth a vessel
Both for the living and the dead? (The cycle of life and death goes on right here). (3:27), (6:95), (1)
And placed therein firm lofty mountains (serving as water reservoirs), and given you fresh water to drink
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
Walk unto that which you used to belie
Walk unto the threefold shadow
Giving neither cooling shade nor shelter from the Flame
Behold, it throws up sparks huge as castles
Moving like the caravans of bright yellow camels
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
This is a Day when they are not able to speak
Nor will they be allowed to make excuses
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
This is the Day of Decision. We have brought you and the generations of old together
Now, if you have a trick, try it against Me
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
Behold, those who walk aright, are amid shades and springs
And fruit as they desire
Enjoy, eat and drink. Welcome for what you have accomplished
Behold, thus do We reward the doers of good to others
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
Behold, you guilty ones! Enjoy and take your ease for a little while
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
And now when they are told, "Bow down", they bow not down! (They do not submit to Divine Commands)
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
In what Hadith, after this, will they believe
What are they asking about
About the Great News
On which they disagree
Nay, they will soon come to know
Nay, again, they will soon come to know
Did We not make the earth a cradle for you
And the mountains as pegs
And We have created you in pairs
And We have made sleep so that you can rest
And We have made the night as a cloak
And made the day, life. ('Ma'ash' = Economy = Subsistence = All activities of life = The state of living)
And We have built above you seven Cosmic Systems
And We have placed a Dazzling Lamp
And We send down from the rainy clouds abundant water
Thereby to bring forth grain and plant
And gardens of dense foliage
Behold, the Day of Decision is a thing appointed
A Day when the Trumpet is blown, and you come in throngs
When the gates of the sky are flung open. (Mankind learn about the high space)
And the 'great ones' lose power as if they were mirage. (20:105), (56:5), (
Behold, Hell lurks in ambush
A home for the transgressors
They will abide in it for ages. (Hell is not forever. Allah's Grace comes to rescue the dwellers of the Hellfire (6:128), (11:107), (40:12). While the abode of Paradise is Eternal
Therein they taste not coolness of comfort nor drink of satisfaction
Only burning anguish and ice-cold darkness
A befitting requital
For, behold, they never hoped to be held accountable
And they called Our Messages false with an adamant denial
But We place on Record everything
So, now, taste nothing but increasing punishment
Behold, there is supreme fulfillment for those who walk aright
Beautiful gardens and vineyards
And splendid companions, well-matched
And a cup of delight overflowing
They shall hear no senseless talk, nor falsification therein
Reward from your Lord, a generous gift
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them, the Beneficent. None has the power to lecture Him
On the Day when the Divine Energy and the Universal forces stand forth in ranks, none will speak but he whom the Beneficent allows and say only what is right
That Day will be the Moment of Truth. So whoever wills, let him take the path that leads toward his Sustainer
Behold, We warn you of a retribution near at hand. A Day when every person will see what his own hands have sent forth. And when the denier of the Truth will say, "Oh, I wish I were mere dust
Consider those who dive to bring up. (Pearls from the ocean. People from repression)
And move steadily in jubilation, releasing (the oppressed from bondage)
And working hard, swimming in strides
And then together racing to progress
And thus taking charge of their matters
The Day when the tremulous trembles
To be followed by the jolter. (The oppressors are shaken up again and again)
Some hearts throb on that Day
Their eyes subdued
They say, "What! Shall we ever be returned to the ditch of anonymity?" ('Hufrah' = Ditch = Not noteworthy = Lowly = Unremarkable = Insignificant)
Shall we ever weaken to skeletal strength
And they say, "In that case, then, it would be an investment of loss
But finally, it is a single swift call
And, behold, they will be awakened
Has the story of Moses reached you? (Such a Revolution occurred in his times)
When his Lord called him in the Sacred Valley of Revelation (18:6)
Go to Pharaoh. Behold, he has crossed all bounds of decency
And ask him, "Are you willing to be a better person?" ('Zaku' = Grow in goodness = Develop the 'Self' = Get rid of evil behavior = Attain purity = Improve in conduct = Prime the 'Self' for actualization)
Then I will guide you to your Lord so that you will have some idea of His awesome Glory
And then he presented to him the tremendous evidence of the Truth
But he denied and haughtily rejected
Then turned he away briskly
Then gathered (his chiefs) and called (his people)
And proclaimed, "I am your Lord, the Highest
So Allah took him to task, and made him an example for the later generations and the ones who soon followed
Behold, herein is indeed a lesson for him who fears (violating the Divine Law)
What! Are you the more difficult to create or is the heaven that He built
He raised high its canopy, and shaped it perfect
And He made dark its night and its splendor He brings out
And after that He made the earth shoot out from the Cosmic Nebula and made it spread out egg-shaped. ('Dahaha' entails all the meanings rendered (21)
And produced from it its own water and pasture
And the mountains He firmly fixed
A means of livelihood for you and your cattle
And so, when there comes the Great Event
On that Day man will remember all that he has ever done. (53:3)
And the Insurmountable Barrier will stand before him who finds it before him (he failed to prime his 'Self' for the felicitous development in the Hereafter (29:54), (39)
Then, the one who rebelled against the Divine Laws
And fell for instant gratifications, ('Hayat-id-duniya' = Life of this world = Short term = Instant gains = Disregard of the life to come)
Behold, the (foot of) the Insurmountable Barrier will be his home
But the one who feared standing before his Sustainer and restrained his selfish desire
Behold, the Paradise will be his home
They ask you of the Hour, "When will it come to pass
Why? What do you have to tell them about it? (7:187), (3)
Unto your Lord is the culmination of it
You are but a Warner unto him who stands in awe of it
On the Day when they see it, it will be as if they had lived no longer than an evening or its morning
Someone frowned and turned away
Because the blind man approached him
How could you know that he might have grown in goodness
Or that he be enlightened and the Reminder might benefit him
As for him who deems himself in no need of Guidance
Unto him you give attention
Yet it is not your responsibility if he grows not in goodness
But as for him who came to you in all eagerness
And feared straying
Him did you disregard
Nay, indeed this is an Advisory
So let him pay heed who will
In Scrolls Dignified
Exalted, Purified
By the hands of Scribes
Honorable and virtuous
Man destroys himself, how ungrateful, rejecting the Sublime Truth
Out of what thing has He created him
From the male and the female gametes He created him, and then fashioned him in due proportion
And then makes the Way easy for him. (Endowed with faculties)
Then causes him to die and brings him to disintegrated states. ('Qabr' = Grave = Disintegrated state = The state of sleep between physical death and Resurrection)
Then, when He will, He shall raise him to life again
Nay, man did not fulfill what He enjoined upon him
Let man consider his food. (His own food has involved so many hands from the field to the mouth. Shouldn't he share Our provision with others)
How We pour water in showers
And then We split the earth, split and cleave
And cause the grain to grow therein
And vineyards, and fresh vegetation
And olive trees and palm trees
And dense beautiful gardens
And fruits and grasses
Provision for you and your cattle
But when comes the Call
On the Day when a man will flee from his brother
And his mother and his father
And his wife and his children
To everyone on that Day will be enough his own concern
Some faces on that Day will be bright as dawn
Laughing, rejoicing at good news
And some faces on that Day will have dust upon them
With gloom overspread
These, these will be the ones who denied the Truth and divided humanity
When the Sun is folded up. (Monarchies come to an end)
And when the stars lose their glow. (Tribal dictatorships fall)
And when the mountains are moved (The 'great ones' lose their stronghold (20:105), (5)
And when the she-camels, ten months with the young, are abandoned. (A she-camel about to deliver the young has been a precious commodity, but the means of transportation will change)
And when the wild beasts are herded together. (The nomads and even the cannibals civilize and lead an organized collective life)
And when the seas bustle with ships
And when the people intermingle. (The world becomes a smaller place)
And when the little girl that was buried alive is made to ask
For what crime she was slain. (Women's rights will be restored)
And when the papers are published widely
And when the sky is unveiled. (The Space sciences advance)
And when the Blazing Fire is ignited. (The guilty are swiftly apprehended)
And when the Paradise is brought near. (A glimpse of it on the earth)
(Then) every person will see what he has prepared
Oh, but I call to witness the revolving planets
The stars which rise and set in their orbits
And the Night as it slowly closes upon
And the fresh breath of the morning
Behold, this indeed is the revealed Word in the dialect of a noble Messenger
Strengthened by Him Who is enthroned in His Almightiness of Supreme Control
(The Messenger is) to be obeyed and trusted
For, this fellow-man of yours is not a madman
And, indeed, he has found Wisdom at its highest horizon
And he withholds not in secret the least bit of the Revelation
Nor is it the utterance of a rejected satanic force. (Such as desire)
Which way, then, are you going
This Message is no less than a Reminder and giver of eminence to all mankind
Unto everyone of you who wills to walk aright
But you cannot will it unless you abide by the Laws of the Lord of the Worlds
When the sky is shattered. (The conquest of the high Space will begin)
And when the planets are dispersed. (Some of them are counted and named)
And when the oceans will overflow with traffic
And when the hidden things in the earth are overturned. (The earth will be excavated for Archaeology)
A 'Self' will know what it has done and what it has left undone. (Psychology will make strides)
O Man! What has lured you away from your Sustainer, the Bountiful
Who created you, then fashioned you, then proportioned you
Having shaped you and put you together well in accordance with His Laws
Nay, but you deny the Judgment and the Divine System of life. ('Deen' = Divine System = Final Judgment = Way of life = Erroneously, but frequently translated as religion)
Behold, there are above you guardians ever-vigilant
Noble, recording
They know whatever you do. (Verses 10, 11, 12, refer to the Divine Law of Requital)
Behold, the virtuous who create room for others in the society, will be in Bliss
And behold, those who split humanity will face an Insurmountable Barrier
They will be visibly exposed to it on the Day of Judgment
And will not be able to abscond from it
And what will enlighten you about the Day of Judgment
Again, what will enlighten you about the Day of Judgment
That is the Day when no person will have the power to help another. For, on that Day (it will become obvious) that all Command belongs to Allah alone
Woe unto the dealers in fraud
Those who demand full measure when receiving from people
But give less than due when giving them by measure or weight. (Or diminish the recompense of the laborer)
Deem they not that they are bound to be raised again
Unto an Awesome Day
The Day when all mankind stand before the Lord of the Worlds. (And the humanity will stand on its feet in this world rallying around the Divine System (39:79), (45:36-37), (84:6-8)
Nay, behold, the record of the dividers of humanity is in 'Sijjin
Ah! What will convey to you what 'Sijjin' is
A record indelibly inscribed. ('Sijjin' = Inescapable, guarded record as if it is imprisoned)
Anguish on that Day for those who deny the Truth in practice
Those who deny the Day of Judgment
And none denies it but he who drags down his own progress by crossing the bounds of reason. (The Law of Cause and Effect easily appeals to reason)
When Our Messages are conveyed to him, he says, "These are stories of the bygones
Nay, but their hearts get corroded by what they have earned
Nay, verily, on that Day they will be veiled from (the Light of) their Lord
Then, behold, they shall enter the Blazing Fire. ('Jahim' = Insurmountable Barrier = Bar to progress = Obstruction that halts = Halting of evolution = Mere survival = Hellfire = Flames of anguish = Fire of regret)
And it will be said, "This is that which you used to deny
Nay, behold, the record of those who made room for others in the community is in 'Illiyin'. ('Birr' = Virtue = Make expanse = Make room for others in the society = Help people to adjust and make progress in a new environment = Exponential growth)
Ah! What will convey to you what 'Illiyin' is
A record indelibly inscribed. ('Illiyin' = Loftiness upon loftiness)
These near ones (to Allah) find it open before them
Behold, those who made room in the society for others, verily, are in Blissful delight
On beautiful thrones, they will look up (to the Magnificent Kingdom)
You will see their faces glitter with Delight
They will be given a refreshing drink of pure nectar, sealed
The seal of it is musk. For all this, then, let every aspirant aspire
For, it consists of Nobility. ('Tasnim' = 'Tashrif' = Nobility = Ennobling = Hosting in nobility = Exalting = Imparting honor = Raising in degree)
A Spring from which the nearest (to Allah) drink
Behold, those who thrived on others' toil used to laugh at those who had attained belief
And whenever they passed by the believers they winked at each other in sarcasm. (Look, these people 'waste' their wealth and person on strangers)
And when they returned to their own folk, they used to tell jokes about them
And whenever they saw the believers they said, "Behold, these people have indeed gone astray (wandering in unmarked valleys of life)
Yet, they have not been sent as watchers over them
That Day those who have chosen to be graced with belief will be in a position to laugh at the deniers (but they won't. (7)
On beautiful thrones, they will look up (to the Magnificent Kingdom)
Are these deniers of the Truth being returned anything but their own doings? ('Thawab' = Return on an investment)
When the Sky is rent asunder. (The high Space will be explored and Astronomy will bring knowledge of the Cosmos)
It will listen to its Lord for that is what it has been decreed to do
And when the earth is spread out. (It becomes widely inhabited)
And casts out whatever is in it and becomes void. (The earth will bring forth its fossils and minerals through Archaeology, drilling and mining)
It will listen to its Lord for that is what it has been decreed to do
O Man! Behold, You have been toiling hard toward your Lord - painfully toiling - then you shall meet Him
Then whoever is given his Book in his right hand, (The follower of this Revelation is indeed blessed, for)
He truly reckons the decisions of his life with ease
And returns rejoicing to his folk (the Ideologically synchronous minds)
But as for him who is given his Book behind his back (he who has turned his back to the Book, looking back to the ancestral traditions)
He will be inviting upon himself chaos
And enter the Blazing Flame
Behold, he used to enjoy the company of his own kind
For, behold, he deemed that life would never quit revolving like this
Nay, but behold, his Lord did see all his mettle. ('Bihi' = In him = His true worth = His mettle)
Oh, I call to witness the Rosy Afterglow of sunset
And the Night and all that it enshrouds
And the Moon as it steadily grows to her fullness
That you will traverse higher and higher from one plane to another. (Civilizations will keep advancing in sciences, and individuals will always have a chance to grow in goodness. Furthermore, evolution of the 'Self' will carry on in the life to come)
What, then, is the matter with them that they believe not (in a higher form of life)
And when the Qur'an is recited to them, they prostrate not! (They adore not and humble themselves not before the eloquence, Wisdom and Majesty of the Divine Word)
Nay, but the rejecters belie
And Allah is best Knower of what they hide. (Their idols, peer pressure, traditions, malice, schemes, vested interests)
So give them the tiding of an awful doom
Except to those who choose to be graced with belief and do acts that help people - for them is a reward unending
The sky full of constellations stands witness
And the Promised Day (when you see the Truth triumph over Falsehood)
And He Who watches, and that which is being watched (will see that)
Destroy themselves all those who dig ditches for others
Igniting the fire of rage
Behold, they contemplate and wait in anticipation
And they are well aware of what they are doing to the believers
Whom they hate for no other reason than that they believe in Allah, the Almighty, the Owner of Praise.(
And to Whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. But Allah is Watcher over all things
Behold, those who persecute the believing men and the believing women, and then repent not, theirs, verily, is the doom of Hell - yes, theirs is the doom of burning
Verily, those who choose to be graced with belief and do actions that help people, theirs are the Gardens underneath which rivers flow. That is the Great Eminence
(Yet) Verily, strong is the Grip of your Lord
Behold, He it is Who originates (life) and then makes again and again
And He is the Forgiving, the Loving
Lord of the Supreme Throne
Carrying out His Plan according to His Laws. ('Fe'l' = Doing = Carrying out. 'Ma Yurid' = As He plans = As He wills = In accordance with His Laws)
Has the story reached you of the great troops
Of Pharaoh and Thamud
And yet the rejecters knowingly live in denial
But Allah surrounds them without them conceiving it. ('Minwwaraihim' = From behind them = Without them conceiving it)
Nay, but this is Sublime Qur'an
(Inscribed) upon Tablet Imperishable
The sky and the Tariq are witness to what is being said
And what will enlighten you as to what the Tariq is
The Brightest Star! The noble night-visitant with the Radiant Lamp of the Qur'an in his hand knocking at the doors of minds and hearts, giving Light
There is no person without a watch being kept over him. (The Law of Requital is ever-vigilant)
Let the human being, then, consider out of what he has been created. (And realize the common origin of all mankind. Has there not passed over man an era when he was not even worth mentioning)
He has been created from a turbulent water. (2)
That issued from between tough rocks and mingled dust
Now, verily, He (Who has thus created man), is well Able to bring him back
On the Day when all secrets will be disclosed
Then he will have no power, nor a helper
Witness is the high atmosphere that keeps returning (its water, gases and other composition)
And witness is the earth which cracks open for springs and plants
Behold, this (Qur'an) is a Conclusive Word. (That can give you a new life)
It is not an amusing idle talk
(Yet) Behold, they plot and scheme (to refute the Truth)
But My Law works its own Way
Therefore give the rejecters some time. Leave them alone for a while
Strive to raise the Name of your Lord, the Most High. (Establish His Glory on earth)
Who creates and proportions. (So that all things might become what they are meant to be)
And Who appoints due measure and then shows the way (to all things as to their functions)
And Who brings forth the lush pasture
And then turns it into rust-brown residue
(O Messenger) We shall teach you thus that you will never forget. (Mankind need Guidance like all things in the Universe do)
Allah never Wills you to forget (17:86). Behold, He knows the manifest and what is hidden
And thus We shall ease your way to the ultimate ease. (To the end that you will establish the Qur'an in the society)
Therefore, keep reminding, for, the Reminder does benefit
(Behold), he will heed who fears (the consequences of pre-emptive rejection)
And only the unfortunate will stay on the side-lines
He who will be cast into the great Fire
Wherein he neither dies nor lives. Mere survival
Successful, indeed, is he who primes his 'Self' for development. (Living upright, helping others)
And keeps foremost in mind the Name and the Attributes of his Lord and then follows through
But nay, you prefer the life of this world. (Given to instant gains instead of living upright that ensures success in both lives (2:201), (3:147), (4:134), (7:156), (10:64), (17:72), (28)
Although the Hereafter is better and more enduring
Behold, this has been said in the former Revelations as well. ('Suhuf' = Scrolls = Revelations)
The Revelations of Abraham and Moses
Has the news of the Dominating Event reached you
Some faces on that Day will be downcast
Laboring, exhausted. (They were in motion without action. They toiled without clear direction)
As they enter a sizzling Fire
Given to drink from a spring of burning anguish
No food for them but the bitterness of dry thorns (that they scattered to hurt others during their wayward journey through life)
Which nourishes not, nor relieves hunger
On that Day some faces will shine with Bliss
Happy with the fruit of their effort
In a Garden exalted in honor
Wherein you hear not senseless speech
Therein is an ever-flowing Spring of Grace
Therein are thrones of honor
And shiny glasses set at hand
And cushions set in rows
And silken carpets spread out
Will they not, then, look at: the water-laden clouds, how they are made
And at the sky, how it is raised high? (Without visible pillars)
And at the mountains, how they are entrenched
And at the earth, how it is spread out? (That you do not even feel the sphere, nor feel its speedy rotations (31:10), (39:5)
(This is some evidence, O Messenger!) Remind them, for you are one to remind
You are not a task master over them
But whoever turns away and denies the Truth
Allah will requite him with a great requital
Behold, unto Us is their return
Then it is for Us to call them to account
Witness is the Daybreak
And ten Nights
And the Even and the Odd
And Witness to the Truth is the departing of the Night of Ignorance
Is not all this a solemn evidence for every thinking person
Have you noted how your Lord dealt with Aad? (They had refused to see the Light)
Those whose capital was Iram, the city of towers and lofty mansions
The like of which (the towers and castles) were never built in other cities
And with Thamud, who slashed out for dwellings rocks in the valley. (Wadi)
And with the powerful Pharaoh of the great Pyramids
They all played God in the land, towns and cities
And increased corruption and crime therein
And so, your Lord chastised them with a whipping punishment
Behold, your Lord is ever on the watch
But as for man, whenever his Lord lets his life take a turn by giving him honor and Bliss, he says, "My Lord has honored me." (Honor or disgrace are subject to Divine Laws, and are not random phenomena)
But when He lets his life take a turn by restricting his provision, he says, "My Lord has disgraced me
Nay, nay, you honor not the orphan. (You forget to analyze what you do and what you do not do. 'Yatim' = Orphan= Widow = Solitary = Left alone in the society = The helpless. A benevolent society makes room for the 'Yatim)
And you do not encourage one another to feed the needy. ('Miskin' = Poor = Needy = Whose life is stranded for any reason = Whose business has stalled = Who has lost his job = Whose life has been hampered by circumstances. 'Ta'm' = Feeding, includes taking care of all aspects of life. A benevolent collective order takes care of everyone)
And you devour the inheritances with greed
And you love wealth with boundless love
Nay, when the earth is pounded, ground with a grinding
And your Lord comes, and His angels, rank upon rank. (A great Revolution will come and the Divine System will be established. The Universal forces will line up to that end)
And Hell is brought close that Day. On that Day man will heed the Advisory, but of what avail will then be the remembrance
He will say, "Ah, I wish I had sent forth some good for my life
For, none chastises as He will chastise on that Day
And none binds as He binds. (The logical result of disregarding the Creator's Guidance is getting bound by shackles of mental slavery)
But Oh! You human being that has attained inner peace! (By living upright (1)
Return unto your Lord, pleased and Approved
Enter, then, together with My servants
Yes, enter you My Paradise
Nay, I present this very Town as witness
The Town where (O Prophet) you have lived
And where your ancestors have multiplied. (A Sanctuary for peace for everyone)
Verily, We have created the human being for hard work. (This is the Town where Abraham and Ishmael labored, and where you began your toil to raise the Name of your Lord)
Does he think that none has Power over him
He keeps boasting, "I have wasted so much wealth
What! Does he think that no one sees him? (How much and where he spent it)
Did We not give him two eyes? ('Ainain' = Two physical eyes = Physical vision and vision of the heart = Sight and insight)
And a tongue and a pair of lips
And shown him the two highways? (Of virtue and vice)
But he hardly tries the uphill road, the Ascent
Ah, what will convey unto you what that Ascent is
Freeing others from bondage, physical or mental, and from any social, economic or political oppression. (Freeing the neck includes all the above meanings plus striving to establish the Divine System wherein the only Master is Allah's Law)
And to feed in times of hunger, famine, wars and natural disasters
And to take special care of those who despite being a part of the community feel left out. ('Za maqrabah' = Near one = Relative = Part of the community)
And helping him who remains needy though he toils in dust
And to be of those who have chosen to be graced with belief, and become living reminders of perseverance and living reminders of compassion
Such are the ones hand in hand with Bliss
And those who deny Our Messages, such are the ones hand in hand with despondence
With Fire all around them
Witness is the Sun and its radiant splendor
And the Moon that borrows its light
Witness is the day as it brightens the world
And the night that cloaks it
And the sky and its wondrous design
And the earth and its vast expanse
Consider the human 'Self, and how it is capable for being balanced out
And how it is instilled with the capacity to disintegrate or become secure
Successful indeed is he who grows the 'Self
And failure is indeed he who keeps it buried (under ignorance and superstition)
(Disregarding this principle) Thamud rejected (Saleh) while playing God. ('Tagha' = Being 'Taghut' = Becoming a false god = Playing God = Transgressing = Rebelling = Crossing bounds of decency = Extreme arrogance)
Behold, the most forward among them was picked up for defiance
Although Allah's Messenger had told them, "It is a she-camel belonging to Allah, so let her drink!" (The land belongs to Allah, and this she-camel represents the weak among you (7:)
But they denied him and they killed her. Their Lord then doomed them all alike for their lagging behind in compliance
For none of them had any fear of what might befall them
Witness is the Night as it cloaks in darkness
And the Day as it shines with splendor
Witness is creation of the male and the female
Behold, your effort is diverse. (Your occupations and earnings are different. Let not this be a cause for division among you)
And so, he who gives and walks aright
And makes his life a manifest image of benevolence
We will indeed ease his way to the Ultimate Ease
But he who withholds and thinks himself self-sufficient becoming careless of others
And makes his life a manifest image of denial of goodness
We will indeed ease his way to hardship
And what could his wealth avail when he himself falls! (6)
Behold, it is for Us to show you the Way (through this Revelation)
And behold, unto Us belong the End and the Beginning
And so I warn you of a raging Fire
Which only the most unfortunate must endure
He who denies and turns away
But far removed from it is he who walks aright
Who gives his wealth that he may grow in goodness
Not that he is returning any favors
But only to seek the Approval of his Lord, the Most High
And soon he will be pleased
(O Sincere human being!) Consider the Daylight
And the night when it is still. (There is light at the end of the tunnel and with hardship is ease, like there is Daybreak after the Night (89:1), (92)
Your Lord has never forsaken you, nor did He ever forget you
And verily, being far-sighted is better for you than being short-sighted
And verily, soon will your Lord give unto you so that you will be well-pleased
Did He not find you in a lonely state, and give you an environment
And He found you looking for guidance, and showed you the way. ('Dhall' = Wandering = Looking for guidance = Straying)
And He found you dependent, and made you independent. (Infancy to youth)
Now you shall not treat harshly any orphan, widow, the helpless and he who feels left alone in the society
And never shall you repulse him who seeks help
But the blessings of your Lord you shall speak of by sharing. ('Haddith' = Convey and share what you have learned and gained)
Did We not expand your chest? (Endowed you with resilience, understanding and a heart and mind to accomplish the impossible)
And thus lightened your burden. (Made the journey through life easy by bestowing upon you the perceptual and intellectual faculties)
Which would weigh on your back so heavily
And exalted your renown (O Prophet!). (And gave eminence to you, O Mankind)
And behold, with every hardship comes ease
Indeed, with every hardship comes ease
Hence, whenever you are free from the immediate task, embark upon the next strife
And turn all your attention to your Lord. (Remain focused on the Mission entrusted upon you by your Lord)
Witness is the Fig and the Olive. (The Call of Allah's Messengers, the history, the places and the reaction of their people)
And Mount Sinai. ((19:52), (20:9-36), (52:1). Exodus 3:1-18 and
And now, (O Messenger!) This land of security and peace. (Makkah where the Final Revelation has begun)
We have created the human being in the best design. (With the potential to grow his 'Self)
Then We turn him to the lowest of low. (Whoever rejects Divine Values, reduces himself to a subhuman existence)
Except those who have chosen to be graced with belief, and work to augment the human potential. And theirs is a reward unending
What, then, can make you deny the Divine System of life
Is not Allah the Sovereign of the sovereigns, the Wisest of the wise, the Best of all judges? ('Hukm' carries all three meanings)
Read! With the Name of your Lord Who created
Created man from a zygote
Read! For, your Lord is the Most Generous. (He has placed a tremendous blessing in learning and teaching)
Who has taught the use of the pen
Taught man what he knew not
Nay, verily, man tries to play God! ('Tagha' = Being a false god, 'Taghut' = Grossly overweening = Arrogance beyond limits = Creating rebellion = Trespassing Divine Values)
(And) in that he looks upon himself as self-sufficient. (Forgetting how indebted he is to the Creator and the society for all his mental and physical possessions)
Behold, unto your Lord is the return. (Everything that exists goes back to the Creator as its Source and is bound by His Law. All people will be returned to Him for Judgment. Mankind will eventually return to the Divine System of life)
Have you seen the kind of man who forbids
Another servant when he follows the Divine Messages
Have you seen that if such a person were on the right road
Or his affairs were to lead him to Blissful security
Mark out that he, then, would have known that, by thus practically denying the Truth, he is turning away from all that is good
Does he not know that Allah sees to it that His Laws are enforced without exception
Nay, if such a person desists not, We (Our Law of Requital) will seize him by the forelock (to a state of humiliation)
A forelock that is given to denial and committing fault upon fault
Let him, then, call upon his advisory council
We shall summon the apprehending forces
Nay, never be intimidated by a man like this! But submit completely in adoration to Divine Commands, and let every step of yours bring you nearer to your noble Goal
Behold, We have revealed it in the Night of Majesty
Ah, what will enlighten you what it is, the Night of Majesty
The Night of Majesty is better than a thousand months. (A day of enlightenment is better than a life-time of ignorance)
The Universal forces and the Divine Revelation have descended therein, by their Lord's Leave and shall work in concert with every Decree to carry out His plan
Peace! It is a Message of Peace, and inevitably shall dawn a new Morning of Enlightenment
It is inconceivable that those who are denying the Truth, whether they are among the People of the Scripture or the idolaters, could depart from their ways till the Clear Evidence reaches them. (The Qur'an liberates them from the shackles of their man-made dogmas and brings them from darkness to Light)
A Messenger of Allah conveying to them the Purified Scrolls. (That are well-scored and well- written on parchment by honored scribes (52:2-3)
Wherein are Authoritative Scriptures
Now the People of the Scripture had divided among themselves even when the Evidence of Truth had already come to them
And they were commanded no more than to serve Allah, keeping religion pure for Him - turning away from all that is false, as men of reason upright. And to establish the Divine System, and set up the Just Economic Order of Zakat. For, that is the Perfect System of Life
Verily, those who are bent on denying the Truth, be they among the People of the Scripture or the idol worshipers under any guise, will abide in Hell. They (who see the Truth and then deny it) are the worst of all created beings
And behold, those who have chosen to be graced with belief, and do works that help others - it is they, they who are the best of all created beings
Their reward is with their Lord - Gardens of Eden (of perpetual Bliss) underneath which rivers flow - to abide therein forever. Well-pleased is Allah with them and well-pleased are they with Him. All this awaits him who fears his Lord. (Knowing that his Lord's Law of Requital is a rock solid reality, he understands that all actions have their built-in recompense)
When the earth is shaken with her mighty quaking. (A mighty Revolution will overtake the world)
And the earth yields up her burdens. (Archaeology and mining will make long strides. The heavy tyrants will be thrown out of power)
And mankind cries out, "What has happened to her?" (People will be stunned at the speed of unfolding events)
At that time she will relate her stories. (History of benevolent revolutions will repeat itself on a massive scale)
For your Lord will have sent His Command to her. (Progressive unfolding of the Divine Decree)
On that Day will all people come forth as separate entities, to be shown their deeds. (The guilty will stand apart from the innocent)
Then whoever has done an atom's weight of good, will see it
And whoever has done an atom's weight of evil, will see it. (The Justice system will improve on earth. And, finally, the Day of Judgment will deliver the Divine Justice)
Oh, the panting galloping horses of the raiders
Sparks of fire striking (with their gallops)
Charging, ambushing at dawn
Therewith raising clouds of dust
Storming into any community
Behold, man is so ungrateful to his Lord! (Robbing the fruit of others' labor)
And behold, he is a witness unto that
And behold, in the love of wealth he is ardent
Knows he not that all hidden things will be dug out? (Intentions, actions and material things that were robbed, and the disintegrated forms resurrected)
And the secrets of the hearts will be laid bare
(They will find out) on that Day - their Lord is fully Aware of them
The Catastrophe
What is the Catastrophe
Ah, What will convey to you what it is, the Catastrophe
The Day when people will be like moths scattered in confusion
And the mountains will be like flakes of wool
And then, he whose scales are heavy (with good deeds)
Will live in happiness and contentment
But as of him whose scales are light
He will be embraced by an Abyss
Ah, what will convey to you what that is
Raging Fire
The relentless greed of material gains distracts you (from the real purpose of life). (5)
Until you go down to your graves
Nay! But you will come to know
Again, Nay! You will come to know
Nay, only if you could have certain knowledge
You would see it now, the Insurmountable Barrier (in the way of your personal development (29:54), (79)
Finally, you will behold it with sure vision
And, then, on that Day you will be questioned what you did with the boon of life
Time that flies and has flown, bears witness
That man is, and has been, in a state of loss
Except those who have chosen to be graced with belief, do works that help others and exemplify Truth and exemplify perseverance
Woe unto every slanderer, fault-finder! (He himself does little but spends a lot of energy detracting the doers)
Whose efforts revolve around gathering material possessions and counting them. (Devoid of a higher goal, he opposes any semblance of reform)
Thinking as if his wealth will help him for forever
Nay, he will be flung into the Shredder
Ah, what will convey to you what the Shredder is
A Fire kindled by Allah
Which originates in the hearts. (And engulfs the hearts)
Verily, it closes upon them. (As they had kept their possessions closed in safes and vaults, and kept all kindness surrounded in the flames of jealousy)
In extended columns
Are you not aware of how your Lord dealt with the Army of the Elephant
Did He not bring their strategy to utter failure
And sent upon them swarms of flying creatures
Then you showered them with hard stones earmarked with requital. ('Sijjil' = Inscribed = Marked out)
And made them like a field of grain eaten down to stubble
For the privilege (of security) cherished by Quraish
Enjoying their winter and summer caravans. (To Yemen and Syria respectively, that makes them affluent)
It infers, then, that they ought to serve the Lord of this House alone
Who has given them freedom from want, and has made them secure against fear. ('Ta'm' = Feeding = Taking care = Fulfilling needs = Freeing from want)
Have you seen him who proclaims allegiance to the Divine System, but denies it in action? ((53:33), (75:32-33), (95:7). 'Takzeeb' = Denying in practice
Behold, that is he who repels the orphan, the widow, the helpless, the one in a lonely state. (8)
And urges not the feeding of the needy. And participates not in helping those who have lost their jobs, whose businesses have stalled, and whose hard earned income is insufficient to meet their basic needs
Ah, woe unto the praying ones
They know not what their prayer is meant to be
They only want to be seen and praised. (9:54). (They go through motions of prayer and keep announcing it)
And, with all this, they put dams before the Spring of Sustenance. ('Ma'n' = Running water. 'Mu'in' = Source of sustenance with plenty of fresh water springs)
Behold, We have bestowed upon you Abundant Good. (The ever flowing stream of Wisdom and Knowledge in this Qur'an (13:35)
Therefore, follow the Commands of your Lord and convey them to others so that they might follow as well. And sacrifice your comfort for the welfare of the community. ('Sall' = Follow closely. 'Nahr' = Sacrifice = Sacrificing a camel = Sacrificing one's own comfort and resources for a noble cause)
Verily, it is your opponent that will be cutting himself off from the Abundant Good
Say, "O You who deny the Truth, and, thus, by remaining ungrateful to the Creator's Ultimate Guidance, choose to live in darkness
I do not worship that which you worship. (Neither your idols, nor your tenets, nor your moral values, way of life, nor your holy men or leaders)
Nor do you worship that which I worship
And I will never worship that which you have ever worshiped
Nor (unless you see the Light) will you worship that which I worship
Unto you your way, and unto me my Way
When comes Allah's Help and the Victory
And you see the people enter Allah's Religion in throngs
(Think not that your job is done). Then strive hard to make the Divine System a living witness to the Glory and Praise of your Lord. And you shall remain vigilant to guard the System as a helmet guards the head. Behold, He is ever Responsive to your efforts
Perished is the power of Abi Lahab, and perished is he
His wealth and gains will avail him not! (69:27-28), (
He shall have to endure a fire blazing, glowing
And his wife, that carrier of slanderous tales, the firewood hauler
Will have her neck ornamented with a rope of palm-fiber. ((17:13). 'Jeed' = A neck decorated with an ornament
Say, "He is Allah, the One
Allah is Absolute, Eternal, Unique, Self-Sufficient, Perfect, Independent, the Uncaused Cause of all that exists, Besought of all
He begets not, nor is He begotten
And there is none that could be comparable unto Him
Say, "I seek refuge with the Lord of the Rising Dawn
From the evil aspects of created things
And from the evils of the darkness of Ignorance whenever and wherever it is encountered
And from the covert activities of people who try to put knots and complicate the simple
And from the evil of the envious when he envies (and tries to harm)
Say, "I seek refuge with the Lord of Mankind
The King of mankind
The God of mankind
From the evil of the whispering elusive tempter, the covert desire
That whispers in the hearts of people
(And) from the hidden psyche that rationalizes the evil, as well as the temptations that come from people
{
    "name": "eng-shabbirahmed",
    "author": "Shabbir Ahmed",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-shabbirahmed.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-shabbirahmed.min.json"
}