In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful
All Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
The Beneficent, the Merciful
The Ruler of the Day of Judgment
Thee alone we serve and Thee alone we ask for aid
Guide us in the Straight Path
The path of those whom Thou hast favoured; Not of those who earn Thy wrath; nor of those who go astray
ALIF LAM MIM
This is the Book! There is no doubt therein; a guide to the pious
Who believe in the unseen, and are steadfast in worship, and spend of what We have given them
Who believe in what is revealed to you (Muhammad), and what was revealed before you, and are sure of the Hereafter
These are guided by their Lord, and these are the successful
Verily, those who disbelieve, it is the same to them if you warn them or if you warn them not, they will not believe
Allah has set a seal upon their heart and on their hearing; and on their eyes is dimness, and for them is grievous woe
And there are those among men who say, "We believe in Allah and in the last day;" but they do not believe
They would deceive Allah and those who do believe; but they deceive only themselves and they do not perceive
In their heart is a sickness, and Allah has made them still more sick, and for them is grievous woe because they lied
And when it is said to them, "Do not evil in the earth," they say, "We do only what is right
Are not they the evildoers? And yet they do not perceive
And when it is said to them, "Believe as other men believe," they say, "Shall we believe as fools believe?" Are not they themselves the fools? And yet they do not know
And when they meet those who believe, they say, "We do believe;" but when they go aside with their devils, they say, "We are with you; we were but mocking
Allah shall mock at them and let them go on in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
Those who buy error for guidance, their traffic profits not, and they are not guided
Their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindles a fire; and when it lights up all around, Allah goes off with their light, and leaves them in darkness that they cannot see
Deaf, dumb, blind, and they shall not return
Or like a storm-cloud from the sky, wherein is darkness and thunder and lightning; they put their fingers in their ears at the thunder-clap, for fear of death, for Allah encompasses the disbelievers
The lightning well-nigh snatches off their sight, whenever it shines for them they walk therein; but when it is dark for them they halt; and if Allah willed He would go off with their hearing and their sight; verily, Allah is mighty over all
O you folk! Serve (adore) your Lord (Guardian) who created you and those before you; per chance (or possibly) you may fear evil (learn righteousness)
Who made the earth for you a bed and the heaven a canopy; and sent down from heaven water, and brought forth therewith fruits for your sustenance; so make no peers (rivals) for Allah, when you know better
And if you are in doubt of what we have revealed unto Our servant, then bring a chapter like it, and call your witnesses other than Allah if you tell truth
But if you do it not - and you surely cannot - then fear the Fire whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for disbelievers
But bear the glad tidings to those who believe and work righteousness, that for them are Gardens beneath which rivers flow; whenever they are provided with fruit there from they say, "This is what we were provided with before," and they shall be
Behold! Allah does not disdain to set forth a similitude even of a gnat, or anything lower or higher; and as for those who believe, they know that it is truth from the Lord; but as for those who disbelieve, they say, "What is it that Allah means by t
Those who break Allah´s covenant after the fixing thereof, and cut asunder what Allah has ordered to be joined, and do evil in the earth, these it is who are losers
How can you disbelieve in Allah, when you were dead and He made you alive, and then He will cause you to die, and then make you alive again, and then to Him will you return
It is He who created for you all that is in the earth, and He designed the heavens also and fashioned (ordered) them as seven heavens; and He knows all things
And when your Lord said unto the angels, "I am about to place a Vicegerent (Agent, Successor, Inheritor) in the earth," they said, "Will you place therein one who will do evil therein and shed blood? While we celebrate Thy praise and glorif
And He taught Adam the Names (qualities), all of them; then He propounded them to the angels and said, "Declare to Me the names of these, if you are truthful
They said, "Glory be to Thee! No knowledge is ours but what Thou Thyself have taught us, verily, you are the Knower, the Wise
Said the Lord, "O Adam declare to them the Names;" and when he had declared to them the Names, He said, "Did I not say to you, I know the secrets of the heavens and of the earth, and I know what you reveal and what you conceal
And when we said to the angels, "Bow down before Adam," they bowed before him save only Iblis, who refused and was too proud and became one of the disbelievers
And we said, "O Adam dwell, you and your wife, in Paradise, and eat there from amply as you wish; but do not draw near this tree or you will be of the transgressors
But Satan made them backslide there from and drove them out from what they were in, and We said, "Go down, one of you the enemy of the other, and in the earth there is an abode and a provision for a time
And Adam obtained certain words (revelations) from his Lord, and He relented towards him, for He is the Relenting, the Compassionate
We said, "Go down there from altogether and per chance (or possibly) there may come from Me a Guidance, and whoever follows My Guidance, no fear is theirs, nor shall they grieve
But those who disbelieve, and call Our signs lies, they are the fellows of the Fire, they shall dwell therein for ever
O you children of Israel! Remember My favours which I have favoured you with; fulfil My Covenant and I will fulfil your covenant; therefore, fear Me
Believe in what I have revealed, verifying what you have got, and be not the first to disbelieve in it, and do not barter My signs for a little price, and keep your duty to Me
Cloak not truth with vanity and falsehood, nor knowingly hide the truth
Be steadfast in worship, give alms, and bow down with those who bow
Will you order men to piety and forget it yourselves? You read the Book, do you not then understand
Seek aid with patience and prayer, though it is a hard thing save for the humble
Who know that they will meet their Lord, and that to Him they are returning
O you children of Israel! Remember My favours which I have favoured you with, and that I have preferred you above all others in the world
Fear the day wherein no soul shall pay any recompense for another soul, nor shall intercession be accepted for it, nor shall compensation be taken from it, nor shall they be helped
When We saved you from Pharaoh´s people who sought to wreak evil and woe on you, slaughtering your sons and letting your women live; in that was a great trial for you from your Lord
When We divided for you the sea and saved you and drowned Pharaoh´s people while you looked on
When We treated with Moses forty nights, then you chose the calf after he had gone and you did wrong
Yet then We forgave you after that; perhaps you may be grateful
And remember when We gave Moses the Scriptures and the Criterion; you had a chance to be guided
And remember when Moses said to his people, "O my people! You have wronged yourselves in taking this calf; repent unto your Creator and kill the guilty yourselves; that will be better for you in your Creator´s eyes; and He relented towards you
And remember when you said to Moses, "O Moses! We will not believe in you until we see Allah manifestly," and the thunderbolt caught you while you yet looked on
Then We raised you up after your death; perhaps you may be grateful
And We overshadowed you with the cloud, and sent down the manna and the quails; "Eat of the good things we have given you." They did not wrong Us, but it was themselves they were wronging
And when We said, "Enter this city and eat there from as plentifully as you wish; and enter the gate worshipping and say "hittatun" (repentance and surrender to Allah). So will We pardon you your sins and give increase unto those who do rig
But those who did wrong changed it for another word than that which was said to them: and We sent down upon those who did wrong, wrath from heaven for that they had so sinned
When Moses, too, asked drink for his people and We said, "Strike with your staff the rock," and from it burst forth twelve springs; each tribe among them knew his drinking place. "Eat and drink of what Allah has provided, and transgress not
And when they said: "Moses, we cannot always bear one kind of food; pray then to your Lord to bring forth for us of what the earth grows, its green herbs, its cucumbers, its garlic, its lentils, and its onions." Said He, "Do you ask what is
Verily, whether it be of those who believe, or those who are Jews or Christians or Sabaeans, whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and acts aright, they have their reward with their Lord, and there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve
And when We took a covenant with you and held the mountain over you; (saying) "Accept what We have brought you with strong will, and bear in mind what is therein, per chance (or possibly) you yet may fear
Then even after that did you turn aside, and were it not for Allah´s grace towards you and His mercy, you would have been of those who lose
You know also of those among you who transgressed upon the Sabbath, and how We said to them, "Be you (as) apes, despised and spurned
Thus We made them an example unto those who stood before them, and those who should come after them, and a warning unto those who fear Allah
And remember when Moses said to his people, "Allah bids you slaughter a heifer." they said, "Are you making a jest of us?" Said he, "I seek refuge with Allah from being one of the unwise
They said, "Then pray to your Lord for us to show us what she is to be." He answered, "He said it is a cow, not old, nor young, of middle age between the two; so do as you are bid
They said, "Pray now to your Lord to show us what her colour is to be." He answered, "He said it is a fawn-coloured heifer, intensely fawn, her colour delighting those who look upon her
Again they said, "Pray to your Lord to show us what she is to be; for cows appear the same to us; then we, if Allah will, shall be guided
He answered, "He said, it is a heifer, not broken in to plough the earth or irrigate the tilth, a sound one with no blemish on her." They said, "Now have you brought the truth." And they slaughtered her, though they came near leaving i
Remember when you slew a soul and disputed thereupon, and Allah brought forth that which you had hidden
Then We said, "Strike him with part of her (the heifer)." Thus Allah brings the dead to life and shows you His signs, that per chance (or possibly) you may understand
Yet were your heart hardened even after that, till they were as rocks or harder still, for verily, there are some rocks from which streams burst forth, and others burst asunder and water issues out, and others there are that sink down for fear of Allah; b
Do you hope that they should believe you when already a sect of them have heard the word of Allah and then perverted it knowingly after they had understood it
Behold, when they meet men of faith they say, "We believe," but when they meet in private they say, "Will you talk to them of what Allah has opened up (revealed) to you, that they may argue with you upon it before your Lord? Do you not ther
Do they not then know that Allah knows what they conceal and what they make known abroad
And some of them there are, illiterate folk, that know not the Book, but their own fancies, conjectures and idle tales
But woe to those who write out the Book with their own hands and say "This is from Allah"; to buy therewith a little price! And woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they gain
And then they say, "Hell fire shall not touch us save for a few number of days." Say, "Have you taken a covenant with Allah?" but Allah breaks not His covenant. Or do you say of Allah that which you do not know
Nay, whoever gains an evil gain, and is encompassed by his sins, those are the fellows of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein for ever
But such as act aright, those are the fellows of Paradise, and they shall dwell therein for ever
And remember when We took from the children of Israel a covenant, saying, "Serve you none but Allah, and to your two parents show kindness, and to your kindred and the orphans and the needy, and speak to men kindly, and be steadfast in prayer, and gi
And remember when We took a covenant from you, "shed not your kinsman´s blood, nor turn your kinsmen out of their homes:" then did you confirm it and were witnesses thereto
Yet you were those who slay your kinsmen and turn a party out of their homes, and back each other up against them with sin and enmity. But if they come to you as captives you ransom them! - and yet it is as unlawful for you to turn them out. Do you then b
Those who have bought this worldly life with the price of the Hereafter, the torment shall not be lightened from them nor shall they be helped
We gave Moses the Book and We followed him up with other apostles, and We gave Jesus the son of Mary manifest signs and aided him with the Holy Spirit. Do you then, every time an apostle comes to you with what your souls love not, scorn him with pride, an
They say, "Our heart are wrappings (preserving Allah´s truth)" nay, Allah has cursed them in their unbelief, and few it is who do believe (or little it is they believe)
And when a Book came down from Allah confirming what they had with them, though they had before prayed for victory over the faithless, yet when that came to them, which they recognised, then they refused to believe it. Allah´s curse is on the faithl
For a miserable price have they sold their souls, in not believing what Allah has revealed, grudging because Allah sends down of His grace on whomsoever of His servants He will; and they have brought on themselves wrath after wrath and for the disbeliever
And when they are told to believe in what Allah has revealed, they say, "We believe in what has been revealed to us only;" but they disbelieve in all beside, although it is the truth confirming what they have. Say, "Why did you kill Allah&a
Moses came to you with manifest signs, then you took up with the calf when he had gone and did wrong
And remember when We took a covenant with you and raised the mountain (Sinai) over you, "Take what We have given you with resolution and hear (the Law);" they said, "We hear but disobey;" and they were made to drink (the sin of) the ca
Say, "If the abode with Allah is your s alone and not for mankind, then seek you for death if you are sincere
But they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent on before them; but Allah is well acquainted with the wrong doers
Why, you will find them the greediest of men for life; even more than the idolaters; each one would fain live for a thousand years,- but he will not be reprieved from punishment by being allowed to live that long, for Allah sees what they do
Say, "Who is an enemy to Gabriel? For he has revealed to your heart, with Allah´s permission, confirmation of what had been before, and a guidance and glad tidings to believers
Who is an enemy to Allah and His angels and His apostles and Gabriel and Michael? - Verily, Allah is an enemy to the unbelievers
We have sent down to you conspicuous signs, and none will disbelieve therein except the perverse
Or every time they make a covenant, will a part of them repudiate it? Nay, most of them are faithless
And when there comes to them an apostle confirming what they have, a party of those who have received the Book repudiate Allah´s book, casting it behind their backs as though they did not know
And they follow that which the devils recited against Solomon´s kingdom;- it was not Solomon who disbelieved, but the devils who disbelieved, teaching men sorcery, and what has been revealed to the two angels, Harut and Marut, at Babylon, yet neithe
If they had kept their faith and protected themselves from evil, far better had been the reward from their Lord, if they but knew
O you men of faith! Say not "rahina" (a word having ambiguous meanings, including "attend to us") but say "unthurna" (an unambiguous word having the same meaning), but words of respect and hearken; for to disbelievers shall b
They who disbelieve, whether of those who have the Book or of the idolaters, would fain that no good were sent down to you from your Lord; but Allah especially favours with His mercy whom He will, for Allah is Lord of abounding Grace
Whatever verse We may annul or cause you to forget, We will bring a better one than it, or one like it; do you not know that Allah has power over all
Do you not know that Allah´s is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth? Nor have you besides Allah a patron or a helper
Do you wish to question your Messenger, as Moses was questioned in the past? But whoever takes disbelief in exchange for faith has erred from the Level Way (sawaa = even, smooth, symmetrical, proportionate, righteous, balanced, appropriate, relevant)
Many of those who have the Book would fain turn you back into infidelity after you have once believed, through selfish envy, after the truth has been made manifest to them; but pardon and shun them till Allah accomplishes His purpose; verily, Allah is mig
Be you steadfast in prayer, and regular in charity; and whatsoever good you send before you for your own souls, you shall find it with Allah, for Allah sees all you do
They say, "None shall enter Paradise save such as be Jews or Christians;" that is their vain desire. Say thou, "Bring your proofs, if you are speaking truth
Nay, whoever surrenders his face (his countenance, nature, honour, glory, cause, will, his whole self) to Allah, and does good, he shall have his reward from his Lord, and no fear shall be on them, and they shall not grieve
The Jews say, "The Christians base themselves on naught;" and the Christians say, "The Jews base themselves on naught"; and yet both read the (same) Book. They say the same things as those people say who know not; but Allah shall judge
But who is more unjust than he who forbids that His name should not be mentioned in the places for the worship of Allah, and who strives to ruin them? It is not fitting for such to enter into them except in fear. For them is disgrace in this world, and in
To Allah belongs the East and the West, and wherever you turn there is Allah´s face (presence); for verily, Allah is All-pervading and All-Knowing
They say, "Allah takes unto Himself a son." All Glory is to Him! Nay, His is whatever is in the heavens and the earth, and all things worship (obey, glorify, praise) Him
The Originator of the heavens and the earth, when He decrees a matter He does but say unto it, "BE," and it is
And those without knowledge say, "Why does not Allah speak to us?" or "Why does no sign come to us?". So spoke those before them in words of similar meaning. Their hearts are all alike. We have made manifest the signs unto a people tha
Verily, We have sent you with the truth, a bearer of good tidings and of warning, and you shall not be questioned as to the fellows of hell
The Jews will not be satisfied with you, nor yet the Christians, until you follow their creed. Say, "Allah´s guidance is the (sufficient, correct or only) guidance;" and if you were to follow their lusts (desires, prejudices, fantasies, su)
They to whom We have brought the Book and who read it as it should be studied, they are the ones that believe therein; and whoever rejects faith therein, it is they who are the losers
O children of Israel! Remember My favours which I bestowed on you, and that I have preferred you over the (other people of the) worlds
And fear the day when no soul shall pay a recompense for another soul, nor shall an equivalent be received there from, nor any intercession avail; and they shall not be helped
And remember when his Lord tried Abraham with words, and he fulfiled them, He said, "Verily, I will set you as an Imam (high priest, leader, model, example, guide) for the nations." Said he, "And of my seed also?" Allah said, "My
And when We made the House (Kaaba) a place of assembly unto men, and a sanctuary, and (said to them) "take the station of Abraham for a place of prayer"; and covenanted with Abraham and Ishmael, saying, "Do you two cleanse my house for thos
When Abraham said, "Lord, make this a City of Peace, and provide the dwellers there with fruits, such as believe in Allah and the Last Day!" (Allah) said, "And he who reject the faith, I will give him but little to enjoy, then will soon dri
And when Abraham raised up the foundations of the House with Ishmael, (with this prayer) "Lord! Receive it from us, verily, you are All-Hearing and All-Knowing
Lord! Make us Muslims (submissive) unto Thee, and of our seed also a nation of Muslims (resigned), bowing to Thy will, and show us our rites, and turn towards us, verily, Thou art the Oft-Relenting, the Most Merciful
Our Lord! Send them an apostle of their own, to read to them Thy signs and teach them the Scripture and Wisdom, and to purify them; verily, you are the Mighty and the Wise
Who is averse from the religion of Abraham save one who is foolish of soul? For We have chosen him in this world, and in the Hereafter he is surely in the ranks of the righteous
Behold! His Lord said to him, "Surrender" he said, "I have surrendered unto the Lord of the worlds
And Abraham instructed his sons therein, and so did Jacob (saying), "O my sons! Verily, Allah has chosen for you the (true) religion, do not therefore die save as those who have surrendered (as Muslims)
Were you then witnesses when Jacob was facing death, when he said to his sons, "What will you serve when I am gone?" They said, "We will serve your God, the God of your fathers Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, one God; and unto Him have we
That is a nation that has passed away, theirs is what they gained; and your s shall be what you have gained; you shall not be questioned as to that which they have done
They say, "Become you Jews or Christians then shall you be guided by Abraham." Say, "Not so! But we follow the religion of Abraham, the upright; he was not of the idolaters
Say you "We believe in Allah, and what has been revealed to us, and what has been revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Tribes, and what was brought to Moses and Jesus, and what was brought unto the Prophets from their Lord
If they believe in that in which you believe, then are on the right path; but if they turn back, then are they only in a schism, and Allah will suffice you against them, for He both Hearer and Knower
(We take our) dye of Allah (Our Religion is the Baptism of Allah)! And who is better than Allah at dyeing? And we are worshippers of Him
Say, "Do you dispute with us concerning Allah, and He is our Lord and your Lord? You have your works and we have ours, and unto Him alone are we sincerely loyal
Do you say that Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, "Do you know better than Allah? Ah! Who is more unjust than one who conceals a testimony that he has from Allah? But Allah is not unmindful of wh
That was a nation that has passed away. Theirs is what they earned, and your s shall be what you have earned; you shall not be questioned as to that which they have done
The fools among men will say, "What has turned them from their Qiblah (direction, focus, goal), to which they were used?" Say, "Allah´s is the East and the West, He guides whom He will unto the Straight Way
Thus have We made you a middle (or justly balanced) nation, to be witnesses against men, and that the Apostle may be a witness against you. We have not appointed the Qiblah (direction, focus, goal) which you were used to, save that We might know (test) wh
We see you often turn your face towards the heavens, but We will surely turn you to a Qiblah you shall like. Turn then your face towards the Sacred Mosque (Kaaba in Mecca); wherever you are, turn your faces towards it; for verily, the People of the Book
And even if you should bring to the People of the Book every sign, they would not follow your Qiblah (direction, focus, goal); and you are not to follow their Qiblah; nor do some of them follow the Qiblah of the others: and if you follow their lusts (vain)
Those whom We have given the Book know this as they know their own sons, although a sect of them does surely hide the truth which they themselves know
The truth (is) from your Lord; be not, therefore, one of those who doubt
Every sect has a huwa (goal) to which Allah turns him; but do you strive onwards together to do good works; wherever you are Allah will bring you all together; verily, Allah has power over all things
From wherever you come forth, there turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque, for it is surely truth from your Lord; Allah is not unmindful about what you do
And from wherever you come forth, there turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque, and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it, that men may have no argument against you, save only those of them who are bent on wickedness; and fear them not, but fear
Thus (similarly) have We sent amongst you an apostle from yourselves, to recite to you Our signs, to purify you and teach you the Book and wisdom, and to teach you what you did not know
Remember Me, then, and I will remember you; thank Me, and do not disbelieve (or reject faith)
O you who do believe! Seek aid from sabr (patience, perseverance, self-restraint and constancy) and from prayer, verily, Allah is with the patient
And say not of those who are slain in Allah´s Way (the Way of striving, sacrifice and restraint) (that they are) dead. Nay, they are living; but you do not perceive it
We will try you with something of fear, and hunger and loss of wealth, and lives and fruits (of toil); but give good tidings to those who patiently persevere
Who, when there falls on them a calamity say, "Verily, we are Allah´s and, verily, to Him is our return
These are they on whom are blessings from their Lord and Mercy, and they it is who receive Guidance
Verily, Zafa and Merwah (mountains near the Kaaba) are of the beacons (symbols) of Allah, and he who makes the pilgrimage unto the House, or visits it at other times, it is no crime for him to compass them both about; and he who obeys his own Impulse to G
Verily, those who hide what We have revealed of manifest Signs and of Guidance after We have manifested it to men in the Book, them Allah shall curse, and those entitled to curse shall curse them too
Save those who turn (repent) and make amends and openly declare the truth; these will I turn to again, for I am Oft-Relenting, Most Merciful
Verily, those who disbelieve (or reject faith) and die while still in disbelief, on them is the curse of Allah, and of the angels, and of all mankind
They will dwell therein (in the curse) for ever; the torment shall not be lightened for them, nor shall they have any respite
Your God is one God; there is no God but He, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, and in the ship that sail the seas with that which profits mankind, and in the rain which Allah sends down from heaven and quickens therewith the earth after it
Yet are there some amongst mankind who take to themselves (for worship) peers other than Allah; they love them as they should love Allah. But those who have faith are overflowing with love for Allah. O that those who are unjust could only see, they would
When those who are Followed clear themselves of those who Follow them, they would see the Penalty, and the cords between them would be cut asunder
And those who Follow would say, "Had we but another turn, then would we clear ourselves of them as they have cleared themselves of us." So will Allah show them the fruits of their deeds; for them are regrets, and they shall have no way out of th
O you folk! Eat of what is in the earth, things lawful and things good, and follow not the footsteps of Satan, verily, to you he is an open foe
He does but bid you what is evil and shameful, and that you should speak against Allah what you do not know
When it is said to them, "Follow what Allah has revealed," they say, "Nay, we will follow the way of our fathers." What! Even though their fathers had no sense (or wisdom) at all or guidance
The likeness of those who disbelieve (or reject faith) is as the likeness of him who shouts like a goat-herd, to that which hears him not, save only a call and a cry; deaf, dumb, and blind they are devoid of understanding
O you who do believe! Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and give thanks unto Allah if it be Him you serve
He has only forbidden for you what is dead, and blood, and flesh of swine, and whatsoever has been consecrated to other than Allah; but he who is forced by necessity, neither revolting nor transgressing, it is no sin for him; for verily, Allah is Oft-Forg
Verily, those who hide what Allah has revealed of the Book, and sell it for a miserable profit, they swallow nothing save fire; and Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, but for them is grievous woe
They are those who sell guidance for error, and pardon for torment, how bold are they of the fire
That (is), because Allah has revealed the Book with truth, but verily those who seek causes of dispute in the Book are in a schism far (from the goal)
Righteousness is not that you turn your faces towards the East or the West, but it is righteousness to believe in Allah, and the Last Day, and the Angels, and the Book, and the Messengers, and to spend of your wealth for love of Him, for your kindred, and
O you who believe! Retaliation (or the Law of Equivalence) is prescribed for you. In cases of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, the female for the female; yet he who is pardoned at all by the brother of the slain, then grant any reas
In retaliation (or the law of Equivalence) there is life for you, O you possessors of understanding! That you may ward of evil
It is prescribed for you that when any of you is facing death, if he leaves any goods, that he makes reasonable bequests to his parents, and to his kinsmen. It is a duty upon all those that are God-fearing
But he who alters it after that he has heard it, the sin thereof is only upon those who alter it; verily, Allah is Hearer and Knower
And he who fears from the testator a wrong intention, or a crime, and does make peace between the parties, it is no sin to him; verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving and Merciful
O you who believe! There is prescribed for you the fast as it was prescribed for those before you; per chance (or possibly) you may learn self-restraint
(Fasting) A certain number of days, but he amongst you who is ill or on a journey, then (let him fast) another number of days. And those who can do it with hardship may redeem it by feeding a poor man; but he who gives more of his own will, it is better f
The month of Ramadan, wherein was revealed the Quran as a Guidance to mankind, and as manifest Sign, and as a Discrimination. So he amongst you who is at his home during this month then let him fast through it; but he who is sick or on a journey, then ano
When My servants ask you concerning Me, then, verily, I am near; I listen to the prayer of every suppliant when ever he calls to Me. So let them also, with a will, listen to My call, and let them believe in Me; per chance (or possibly) they may be direct
Lawful for you on the night of the fast is association with your wives; they are a garment unto you, and you a garment unto them. Allah knows that you did defraud yourselves, wherefore He has turned towards you and forgiven you; so now go in unto them and crave what Allah has prescribed (or ordained) for you, and eat and drink until a white thread can be distinguished by you from a black one at the dawn. Then fulfil the fast until the night, and go not in unto them while you are at your devotions in the mosques. These are the bounds that Allah has set, so draw not near thereto. Thus does Allah make manifest His signs to men, that per chance (or possibly) they may learn restraint
Devour not your wealth among yourselves vainly, nor present it to the judges that you may devour a part of the wealth of other men sinfully and knowingly
They will ask you about the New Moon; say, "They are indications of time for men and for the pilgrimage." And it is not righteousness that you should enter into your houses from behind them (in superstition), but righteous is he who fears (Allah)
Fight in the Cause of Allah with those who fight you, but transgress not the limits (or begin not hostilities); verily, Allah loves not those who transgress (or the aggressors)
Kill them wherever you find them, and drive them out from whence they drive you out; for persecution (oppression or sedition) is worse than slaughter; but fight them not by the Sacred Mosque unless they fight you there; If they fight you then kill them, f
But if they desist, then, verily, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
But fight them until there be no more oppression (persecution or sedition) and that the Din (religion, faith, justice, the attitude and way of life) may be Allah´s; but, if they desist, then let there be no hostility save against the unjust oppresso
The sacred month for the sacred month; for all sacred things demand retaliation (the Law of Equivalence); and whoever transgresses against you, transgress against him likewise as he transgressed against you; but fear Allah, and know that Allah is with tho
Expend in alms in the cause of Allah and be not cast by your own hands into perdition; but do good, for Allah loves those who do good
And fulfil the pilgrimage and the visitation to Allah; but if you be prevented (or besieged), then what is easiest for you by way of gift. But shave not your heads until your gift shall reach its destination; and he amongst you who is sick or has a hurt u
The pilgrimage is (in) well-known months: whoever then makes it incumbent on himself (let him have neither) commerce with women, nor fornication, nor a quarrel on the pilgrimage; and whatsoever of good you do, Allah knows it; then provide yourself for you
It is no crime to you that you seek the bounty of your Lord; but when you pour forth from Arafat, remember Allah by the Sacred Monument. Remember Him how He guided you, although you were, before this, surely of those who are in error
Then quickly pass you forth from whence it is usual for multitudes to pour forth and ask pardon of Allah; verily, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
And when you have performed your rites, remember Allah as you remember your fathers, or with a keener memory still. There is among men such as says, "Our Lord! Give us in this world;" but then they have no portion in the Hereafter
And some there be who say, "Our Lord! Give us in this world good and good in the Hereafter; and defend us from the torment of the fire
These have their portion from what they have earned; for Allah is swift at reckoning
Remember Allah through the appointed days; but whoever hastens off in two days, it is no sin to him, and he who lingers on it is no sin to him, for him who fears. So fear you Allah and know that unto Him shall you be gathered
There is among men a type whose speech about the life of this world pleases you, and he calls on Allah to witness what is in his heart; yet is he most fierce in opposition unto you
And when he turns away, he strives upon the earth to do evil therein, and to destroy the tilth and the stock; verily, Allah loves not evil doing
And when it is said to him, "Fear Allah," then pride leads him to sin; but hell is enough for him! Surely an evil bed is that
And there is among men a type who sells his soul, craving, those things that are pleasing unto Allah, and Allah is kind unto His servants
O you who believe! Come, one and all (or wholeheartedly), into surrender (Islam), and follow not the footsteps of Satan; verily, to you he is an open enemy
And if you slip after the manifest signs have come to you, then know that Allah is the Mighty, the Wise
Do they expect that Allah should come unto them in the shadow of a cloud with angels? (Would this settle the question? Or is this the excuse?) But then their case would have been judged already. Unto Allah do all cases return
Ask the children of Israel how many a manifest sign We gave to them; and whoever alters Allah´s favours after that they have come to him, then Allah is strict at following up
Beautiful is the life of this world to those who disbelieve; they jest at those who do believe. But those who keep their duty shall be above them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah gives provision unto whom He will without measure
Mankind were one nation once, and Allah sent them prophets with good tidings and with warnings, and sent down with them the Book in truth, to judge between men in that wherein they disagreed; but only those unto whom the scripture was given disagreed ther
Did you count on entering Paradise, while there had nothing come to you like that which came to those who passed away before you; they encountered affliction and adversity, and they were made to quake, until the Messenger and those who believed with him said, "When (comes) Allah´s help? Surely, Allah´s help is nigh
They will ask you what they are to expend in alms: say, "Whatsoever good you expend it should be for parents and kinsmen, and the orphan and the poor, and the son of the road (wayfarers); and whatsoever good you do, verily, of it Allah is Aware
Prescribed for you is Warfare, though it is hateful to you. But it is possible that you hate a thing while it is good for you, and it is possible that you love a thing while it is bad for you; Allah knows, and ye, you do not
They will ask you about warfare in the Sacred Month. Say, "Fighting therein is a great sin; but turning people away from Allah´s way, and disbelief in Him and in the Sacred Mosque, and to expel His people out there from, is a greater sin in the
Verily, those who believe, and those who flee, and those who fight (strive and struggle) in Allah´s way; these may hope for Allah´s mercy, for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
They will ask you about wine and el maisar (getting something too easily, i.e. gambling, usury etc.), say, "In them both is great sin and some profit to men; but the sin of both is greater than the profit of the same." They will ask you what they shall expend in alms: Say: "The surplus (what is beyond need)." Thus does Allah manifest to you His signs; per chance (or possibly) you may reflect
Upon this life and the Hereafter! They will ask you about orphans: say, "It is best to do what improves their lot." But if you mingle their affairs with your s - they are your brethren, and Allah knows him who means mischief from him who means w
Wed not with idolatrous women until they believe, for surely a believing handmaid is better than an idolatrous woman, even though she please you. And wed not (your girls) to idolatrous men until they believe, for a believing slave is better than an idolat
They will ask you about menstruation: say, "It is a hurt and a pollution." So keep apart from women at such times, and go not near them till they are cleansed; but when they have purified themselves you may come in to them as Allah has ordered y
Your women are your tilth (to cultivate), so come into your tillage how you choose; but do a previous good act for yourselves, and fear Allah, and know that you are going to meet Him; and give good tidings unto those who do believe
Make not Allah an excuse in your oaths against doing good and observing your duty to Him, and make peace amongst men, for Allah is both Hearer and Knower
He will not call you to account for the unintentional word in your oaths, but He will call you to account for the intentions of your heart; but Allah is Forgiving and Clement
Those who take an oath of abstention from their wives, they must wait four months; but if they break their vow Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
And if they intend to divorce them, verily, remember Allah is Hearer and Knower
Divorced women must wait, apart, for three courses; and it is not lawful to them that they hide what Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and in the Last Day. Their husbands will do better to take them back in that (case) if they wis
Divorce is permissible only twice (after an intermediate reconciliation); then keep them in honour, or let them go with kindness. It is not lawful for you to take from them anything of what you have given them, unless both fear that they cannot keep withi
But if he divorce her (a third time) she shall not be lawful to him after that, until she marry another husband; but, if he divorce her too, it is no crime in them both to come together again, if they think that they can keep within Allah´s bounds
When you divorce women, and they have reached the prescribed time, then keep them in kindness (or equity), or release them in kindness (or equity). but do not keep them by force to transgress; for whoever does that, he is unjust to his own soul: and do no
When you divorce women, and they have reached their prescribed term, do not put difficulties in their marrying their husbands, if it is agreed between them in kindness (or equity). This instruction is for all amongst you who believe in Allah and in the La
Mothers shall suckle their children two whole years for those who wish to complete the time of suckling; the duty for feeding and clothing nursing mothers in adequate manner is upon the father of the child; but no soul shall be obliged beyond its capacity
Those of you who die and leave wives behind, let these wait by themselves for four months and ten days; and when they have reached their prescribed time, there is no crime in them for what they do with themselves in reason; for Allah is well informed of w
Nor is there any crime in you if you make them an offer of marriage, or that you keep it secret in your minds. Allah knows that you will remember them; but do not make a secret contract with them except in honourable terms (or use a recognised form of wor)
It is no crime in you if you divorce your women ere you have yet touched them, or settled for them a settlement. But provide fair maintenance for them; the wealthy according to his power, and the straitened according to his power - a duty this upon the vi
And if you divorce them before you have touched them, but have already settled for them a settlement; then pay half of what you have settled, unless they (the women) agree to remit it, or he in whose hand is the marriage tie (the husband) remits it (his h)
Observe prayers, especially the middle (afternoon) prayer, and stand you before Allah with full attention and devotion
And if you stand in danger, then pray afoot or on horseback; but when you are in safety remember Allah, how He taught you what yet you knew not
Those of you who die and leave wives, should bequeath to their wives maintenance for a year, without expulsion (from their home); but if they go out of their accord, there is no crime in you for what they do of their own rights. Allah is Mighty and Wise
And divorced women should have a maintenance in reason, - a duty this on those that fear
Thus does Allah explain to you His revelations so that you may understand
Do you not look at those who left their homes by thousands, for fear of death; and Allah said to them "Die," and then He quickened them again? Verily Allah is Lord of Grace to men, but most men give no thanks
Fight then in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is both Hearer and Knower
Who is there that will lend to Allah a goodly loan? He will increase it many times; Allah closes His hand and holds it out (i.e. He gives want or plenty), and unto Him shall you return
Do you not look at the chiefs of the children of Israel after Moses´ time, when they said to a prophet of theirs (Samuel), "Raise up for us a king, and we will fight in Allah´s way?" He said, "Will you perhaps, if it be prescrib
Then their prophet said to them, "Verily, Allah has raised up for you Talut (Saul) as a king;" they said, How can the kingdom be his over us; we have more right to the kingdom than he, for he has not an amplitude of wealth?" He said
Then said to them their prophet, "The sign of his kingdom is that there shall come to you the Ark with the shechina (peace, security and reassurance) in it from your Lord, and the relics of what the family of Moses and the family of Aaron left; the a
And when Saul set out with his army, he said, "Behold, Allah will try you with a river, and he who drinks there from, he is not of mine; but whoever tastes it not, he is of mine, save he who sips it with his hand." But they drank from it save a
And when they went out against a Goliath and his forces, they prayed saying, "Lord, pour out on us endurance, make firm our steps, and help us against the faithless
And they routed them by the permission of Allah, and David slew Goliath; and Allah gave him the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him of what He willed. And were it not that Allah repelled some men by means of others the earth would become corrupted; but All
These are the signs of Allah, which We recite unto you in truth, for, verily, you are of those who are sent (Our Messengers)
Of these Messengers, We preferred some above others. Of them are some to whom Allah spoke; and We have exalted some of them by degrees; and We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, manifest signs, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. And, if Allah had willed
O you who believe! Expend in alms of what We have bestowed upon you, before the day comes in which is no barter, and no friendship, and no intercession. The faithless, they are the miscreants
Allah, there is no God but He, the Living, the Eternal. Slumber takes Him not, nor sleep. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. Who is it that intercedes with Him save by His permission? He knows what is before them and w
There is no compulsion in religion; the right way is henceforth distinct from the wrong. And whoever rejects Taghut (false deities) and believes in Allah, he has grasped a firm handle which will not break; but Allah is both Hearer and Knower
Allah is the patron of those who believe, He brings them forth from darkness into light. But those who disbelieve, their patrons are false deities; these bring them forth from light to darkness. Such are fellows of the Fire, they will dwell therein
Have you not seen him who disputed with Abraham about his Lord, that Allah had given him the kingdom? When Abraham said, "My Lord is He who gives life and death," he said, "I give life and death." Abraham said, "But verily, Allah
Or the like of him who passed by a town, when it was desolate and in ruins, and said, "How will Allah revive this after its death?" And Allah made him die for a hundred years, and then He raised him, and said, "How long have you tarried?&qu
And when Abraham said, "Lord, show me how you will revive the dead," He said, "What, do you not yet believe?" Said he, "Yea, but that my heart may be quieted." He said, "Then take four birds, and take them close to yours
The likeness of those who expend their wealth in Allah´s way is as the likeness of a grain that grows to seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains, for Allah will give many fold unto whom He pleases; for Allah is All-Embracing and All-Knowing
Those who expend their wealth in Allah´s way, then do not follow it up by taunting and by annoyance, these have their reward with their Lord, and no fear is on them, neither shall they grieve
Kind speech and pardon are better than almsgiving followed by injury. Allah is Absolute and Clement
O you who believe! Make not your almsgiving vain by reproach (or reminders of your generosity) and injury, like him who expends what he has for the sake of appearances before men, and believes not in Allah and the Last Day; for his likeness is as the like
But the likeness of those who expend their wealth craving the goodwill of Allah, and to strengthen their souls, are as the likeness of a fertile garden on a hill. A heavy shower falls on it, and it brings forth its yield twofold; and if no heavy shower fa
Would one of you like to have a garden of date-palms and vines, with rivers flowing beneath it, in which is every fruit; and when old age comes to him and he has weak children, that it should be stricken by a storm wind with fire therein, and burnt up? Th
O you who believe! Spend of the good things that you have earned, and of what We have brought forth for you out of the earth, and do not take the vile (or worst) thereof to spend in alms, that you would not take for yourselves save with closed eyes (or di)
The devil promises you destitution and bids you sin, but Allah promises you pardon from Him and grace, for Allah is both All-Embracing and All-Knowing
He brings wisdom unto whom He will, and he who is brought wisdom is brought much good; but none will remember save those endowed with understanding
Whatever alms you expend, or vow you swear, Allah knows it; but the unjust have no helpers
If you display your almsgiving, then it is well ; but if you hide it and bring it to the poor, then is it better for you, and will atone for you some of your evil deeds; for Allah is Informed of what you do
It is not your duty (O Muhammad) to guide them; but Allah guides whom He will; and whatever good you expend it is for yourselves when you spend not save for Allah´s sake. And what you spend of good, it shall be repaid you in full, and you shall not
(Alms are for) the poor who are straitened in Allah´s way, and cannot travel about in the earth. The ignorant think them to be rich because of their modesty; you will know them by their mark, they do not beg from men with importunity; but what you s
Those who expend their wealth by night and day, secretly and openly, they shall have their reward with their Lord. No fear shall come on them, nor shall they grieve
Those who devour usury shall not rise again, save as he rises whom Satan hath paralyzed with a touch; and that is because they say "trade is only like usury," but Allah has made selling (or trade) lawful and usury unlawful; and he to whom the ad
Allah has cursed usury, but made charity fruitful, for Allah loves not the ungrateful and faithless
Verily, those who believe, and act righteously, and are steadfast in prayer, and pay the poor due, their reward is with their Lord; there shall no fear come on them, nor shall they grieve
O you who believe! Observe your duty to Allah, and remit the balance of usury, if you be, in truth, believers
And if you will not do it, then hearken to the proclamation of war from Allah and His Apostle; but if you repent, your capital is your s. Wrong not, and you shall not be wronged
And if a debtor be in difficulties, then wait for easier circumstances; but to remit the debt as alms is better for you, if you did but know
Guard yourselves against the day when you shall return to Allah; then shall each soul be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
O you who believe! If you contract a debt for a stated time, then write it down, and let a scribe faithfully record it in writing between you in equity; nor let a scribe refuse to write as Allah taught him, but let him write, and let him who owes dictate
But if you are upon a journey, and you cannot find a scribe, then let a pledge be taken. But if one of you trust another, then let him who is trusted surrender his trust, and let him fear Allah his Lord, and conceal not testimony, for he who conceals it
Allah´s is what is in heaven and in the earth, and if you show what is in your souls, or hide it, Allah will call you to account; and He forgives whom He will, and punishes whom He will, for Allah is Able to do all things
The Messenger believes in what is sent down to him from his Lord, and so do the believers. Each believes in Allah, and His angels, and His Scriptures, and His Messengers, - We make no distinction between any of His Messengers - and they say, "We hear
Allah will not require of the soul beyond its capacity. It shall have what it has earned, and it shall owe what it deserves. "Our Lord, condemn us not, if we forget or miss the mark; Our Lord, load us not with a burden as Thou hast loaded those befor
ALIF LAM MIM
Allah, there is no God but He, the Living, the Self-Subsisting, Eternal
It is He who has sent down to you the Scripture with truth, confirming what was revealed before it, and has revealed the Torah and the Gospel before this for the guidance of mankind, and has revealed the Discrimination (Criterion)
Verily, those who disbelieve in the signs of Allah, for them is a severe penalty, for Allah is Mighty and Avenging
Verily, from Allah, there is nothing hidden in the earth, nor in heaven
He it is who fashions you in the womb as He pleases. There is no God but He, the Mighty, the Wise
He it is who has revealed to you the Book, in which there are some verses that are Basic (decisive, or of established meaning) they are the mother (foundation) of the Book; and others are allegorical. But as for those in whose heart is perversity, they fo
O Lord! Pervert not our heart after Thou hast guided us, and grant us mercy from Thee, for Thou, only Thou art the Bestower (the Giver of Bounties)
O Lord! It is Thou Who gathers together mankind unto the Day wherein is no doubt. Verily, Allah will not depart from His promise
Verily, their wealth shall not help the faithless, nor their children, against Allah at all; they will be fuel for the fire
As was the case with Pharaoh´s people and their predecessors: they said Our signs were lies, and Allah seized them for their sins, for Allah is severe in punishment
Say to those who disbelieve, "Soon you shall be overcome and driven together to Hell, an evil bed will it be
You already have had a sign in the two parties who met (at the battle of Badr); one party fighting in the way of Allah, the other disbelieving; these saw, with their very eyes, twice the number as themselves. Thus Allah strengthens with His help tho
Beautiful unto men is the life of lust for women, and children, and heaps of hoarded gold and silver, and of horses well bred, and cattle, and well tilled land; these are the comforts for the life of this world; but Allah, with Him is the more excellent r
Say, "But shall we tell you of a better thing than this?" For the righteous are Gardens with their Lord, beneath which rivers flow; they shall dwell therein for ever, and pure companions and grace from Allah; for all His servants are in Allah&ac
Those who say, "Lord, we do, indeed, believe. Forgive you our sins and keep us from the torment of the fire
Those who show patient, firmness and self-control, the truthful in word and deed, the devout in worship, and those who spend, and pray for forgiveness at dawn
Allah, Himself, bears witness that there is no God but He, and so do the angels, and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation in justice. There is no God but He, the Mighty, the Wise
Verily, (the true) religion in Allah´s sight is The Surrender (to His will, i.e. Islam), and those to whom the Book was given formerly disagreed not until after knowledge came to them, through mutual envy. But whoever disbelieves in Allah´s re
And if they dispute with you, then say, "I have surrendered my whole self unto Allah, and so have those who follows me." And say to those who have been given the Book, and unto the unlearned (or unread or Gentiles), "Have ye, too, surrender
Verily, those who disbelieve in Allah´s revelations, and kill the prophets wrongfully, and kill those from among mankind who bid what is just, promise them a grievous woe
These are they whose works are void in this world and the Hereafter, and they have no helpers
Did you not see those who have been given a portion of the Book? They called on the Book of Allah to decide disputes between them; and then a sect of them turned their backs and opposes it
That is because they say, "The fire shall not touch us save for a certain number of days." But that which they had invented in their religion deceived them
How will it be when we have gathered them together on a Day whereof there is no doubt, when each soul shall be paid what it has earned in full, and they shall not be wronged
Say, "O Allah, Lord of the Kingdom! Thou givestst the kingdom (or power and authority) to whomsoever Thou pleases, and withdraws the kingdom (or power and authority) from whomsoever Thou pleases; Thou honours whom Thou pleases, and abases whom Thou p
Thou dost turn night to day, and do turn day to night, and do bring forth the living from the dead, and Thou brings forth the dead from the living. Thou dost give sustenance for whom Thou chooses without stint
Let not those who believe take disbelievers for their friends rather than believers. He who does this has no part with Allah at all, unless, indeed, you guard yourselves against them. But Allah bids you beware of only Himself, for unto Allah is your journ
Say, "If you hide that which is in your breasts, or if you show it, Allah knows it: He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, for Allah is Able to do all things
On the day when every soul shall find itself presented with what it has done of good and what it has done of evil, then it will long that there were between itself and that evil a wide distance. Allah bids you beware of Himself, but Allah is gentle with H
Say, "If you love Allah then follow me, and Allah will love you and forgive you your sins, for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
Say, "Obey Allah and the Messenger"; but if they turn away Allah loves not disbelievers
Verily, Allah has preferred Adam, and Noah, and Abraham´s family, and Imran´s family above all people
Offsprings one of the other. Allah Hears and Knows all things
When Imran´s wife said, "Lord! I have vowed to dedicate unto Thee what is within my womb. Accept it then from me. Verily, you are Hearer and Knower
And when she brought it forth she said, "Verily, I have brought forth a female" - Allah knew best what she brought forth; and a male is not like a female - "I have called her Mary, and I seek a refuge in Thee for her and for her seed from
And her Lord accepted fully, and gave her a goodly growth, and assigned her to Zachariah´s care. Whenever Zachariah entered her chamber he found beside her a provision, and he said, "O Mary, whence comes this to you?" She answered, "I
Therefore prayed Zachariah to his Lord, and said, "Lord, grant me from Thee good seed. Verily, Thou hears prayer
And an angel called out to him as he was standing praying in the chamber (and said) "Allah gives you the glad tidings of John, to confirm the Word from Allah, a noble and a chaste one, and a prophet of the righteous
He said, "My Lord, how can there be to me a boy when old age has reached me, and my wife is barren?" The angel answered, "Thus Allah does what He pleases
He said, "My Lord, make for me a sign." The angel said, "The sign unto you is that you shall not speak to men for three days, save by gesture; but remember your Lord much, and celebrate His praises in the evening and the morning
And when the angels said, "O Mary! Verily, Allah has chosen you, and has purified you, and has chosen you above the women of the world
O Mary! Be obedient unto your Lord, and adore and bow down with those who bow
This is (one) of the declarations of the unseen world which we reveal to you (Muhammad), though you were not by them when they threw their lots as to which of them should take care of Mary, nor were you by them when they did dispute
When the angel said, "O Mary! Verily, Allah gives you the glad tidings of a Word from Him; his name shall be the Messiah Jesus, the son of Mary, honoured in this world and the Hereafter and of those whose place is nigh to Allah
And he shall speak to people in his cradle and in his manhood, and shall be among the righteous
She said, "Lord! How can I have a son, when man has not yet touched me?" He said, "Thus Allah creates what He pleases. When He decrees a matter He only says: BE! And it is
And He will teach him the Scripture and wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel
And he shall be a Messenger to the people of Israel (saying), "Verily, I have come to you, with a sign from Allah, namely, that I will create for you out of clay a form of a bird, and I will blow thereon and it shall become a bird by Allah´s pe
And I come confirming what was before you of the Torah, and to make lawful for you some of that which was forbidden unto you. I come to you with a sign from your Lord, so fear Allah and follow me
Allah is my Lord, and your Lord, so worship Him: - this is the straight path
And when Jesus perceived their unbelief, He said, "Who will be my helpers in the cause of Allah?" The disciples said, "We will be Allah´s helpers. We believe in Allah, so bear you witness that we have surrendered (unto Him)
Lord, we believe in what Thou hast revealed, and we follow him whom Thou hast sent, so write us down with those who bear witness
But they (the Jews or unbelievers) schemed, and Allah schemed, for Allah is the best of schemers
Behold! Allah said, "O Jesus! I will take you and raise you up to Myself, and will cleanse you (of the falsehoods) of those who disbelieve, and will set those who follow you above the faithless until the Day of Resurrection. Then unto Me is your retu
And as for those who disbelieve, I will punish them with grievous punishment in this world and the next, and they shall have none to help them
But as for those who believe and do good works, He will pay them their wages in full, for Allah loves not the wrongdoers (or unjust)
This which We recite unto you is of the Signs (revelations) and of the Wise Reminder (the Message of Wisdom, the Quran)
Verily the likeness of Jesus with Allah is as the likeness of Adam. He created him from earth, then He said to him: BE! And he was
This is the truth from your Lord, so be you not of those who are in doubt
And whoever disputes with you after what has come to you of knowledge, say, "Come, let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves: then we will earnestly pray and invoke Allah´s curse on those who
Verily, those are the true stories, and there is no God but Allah, and, verily, Allah He is the Mighty, the Wise
But if they turn away, Allah is Aware of the evildoers (corrupters, mischief-makers)
Say, "O you people of the Book, come to an agreement between us and you, that we will not serve other than Allah, nor associate aught with him, nor take others for Lords rather than Allah." But if they turn away then say, "Bear witness that
O people of the Book, why do you dispute about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until after him? What! Do you not understand
Here you are, disputing about what you have some knowledge of; why then do you dispute about what you have no knowledge? Allah knows and you know not
Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a Christian, but he was a "Hanif" (an upright man) who had surrendered, and not of the idolaters
Verily, the people who have most claim to (or are nearest of kin to) Abraham are those who follow him, and this prophet, and those who believe: - Allah is the patron of the believers
A sect of the people of the Book long to lead you astray, but they only lead themselves astray, and they perceive not
O people of the Book! Why disbelieve you the revelations of Allah, when you yourselves witness them
O people of the Book! Why do you clothe the truth with falsehood and knowingly hide the truth
A sect of the people of the Book say, "Believe in what was revealed to those who believed at the first appearance of the day, and disbelieve it at the end thereof" - that (others) may perchance go back (from their faith)
Do not believe save one who follows your religion." Say (unto them), "Verily, the (true) guidance is the guidance of Allah (alone), that any one should be given like what you are given." Or would they dispute with you before your Lord
He especially selects for His mercy whom he pleases, for Allah is Lord of Unbounded Grace
And among the people of the Book, there are some who, if you entrust them with a hoard of gold, will readily return it to you; and others among them, if you entrust them with a single coin, will not return it unless you keep standing over them. That is be
Nay, whoever fulfils his covenant and acts righteously, - verily, Allah loves those who act righteously
Verily, those who sell Allah´s covenant and their oaths for a small price, these have no portion in the Hereafter. Allah will not speak to them, and will not look upon them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He make them grow (spiritually); but th
And, verily, amongst them is a sect who twist the Scriptures with their tongues, that you may suppose it to be from the Book, but it is not from the Book. They say, "It is from Allah," but it is not from Allah, and they tell a lie against Allah
It is not possible for a man to whom Allah has given the Scripture and the Wisdom and the Prophethood, that then he should say to men, "Be you servants of mine rather than of Allah;" but (what he said was) "Be you rather faithful servants o
He does not command you to take the angels and the prophets for your Lords; would He bid you faithlessness after you have surrendered
When Allah made the covenant with the prophets, (He said) "Behold, what I have given you of the Book and Wisdom. Then shall come to you a Messenger confirming that which you possess. You shall believe in him and help him." And He said, "Are
But they who turns back after this, these are the miscreants
Seek they other than Allah´s religion? When to Him surrenders whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and unto Him shall they return
Say, "We believe in Allah, and what has been revealed to you , and what was revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and what was given to Moses, and Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord, - we make no distinction bet
Whoever craves a religion other than the Surrender (Islam), it shall surely not be accepted from him, and he shall be a loser in the Hereafter
How shall Allah guide people who have disbelieved after believing and bearing witness that the Apostle is true, and after there come to them manifest signs? Allah guides not the unjust folk
As for such their reward is that on them is the curse of Allah, and of the angels, and of all mankind (collectively)
They shall dwell therein - the torment shall not be lightened from them, nor shall they have respite
Save those who repent after that, and do right (or make amends), for verily, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
Verily, those who disbelieve after believing, and then increase in disbelief, their repentance shall not be accepted; these are those who are astray
Verily, those who disbelieve (or reject faith) and die in disbelief, there shall not be accepted from any one of them the earth-full of gold, though he should give it as a ransom. For them is grievous woe, and no helpers have they
You cannot attain to righteousness until you spend freely of what you love. But what you spend, of that Allah is aware
All food was lawful to the children of Israel save what Israel made unlawful to itself before the Torah was revealed. Say, "Bring the Torah and recite it, if you speak the truth
But whoever invents against Allah a lie, after that, they are, indeed, the wrong-doers
Say, "Allah speaks the truth, then follow the faith of Abraham, a "Hanif" (an upright or righteous man), who was not of the idolaters
Verily, the first House founded for men was surely that at Bekkah (Mecca), a blessed place and a guidance to the worlds
Therein are manifest signs - Abraham´s station, and whoever enters it is safe. It is a duty to Allah for man to make the pilgrimage unto the House, for whoever can find his way there (or can afford it). But whoever disbelieves - Allah is Independent
Say, "O people of the Book! Why do you disbelieve in Allah´s revelations, when Allah is witness of what you do
Say, "O people of the Book! Why do you turn from the way of Allah him who believes, craving to make it crooked, when you are yourselves witnesses (of Allah´s covenant)? But Allah is not unmindful of what you do
O you who believe! If you obey the sect of those to whom the Book was brought, they will turn you from believers to unbelievers again
How can you disbelieve while unto you are recited the revelations of Allah, and among you is His Messenger? But whoever takes tight hold on Allah, he is guided into the Straight Way
O you who believe! Observe your duty to (or fear or respect) Allah with the right observance (or with the fear or respect that He deserves), and die not save as those who have surrendered (in a state of Islam)
Hold fast, all together, to the cable of Allah, and do not separate (divide or part in sects); but remember the favours of Allah towards you, when you were enemies and He made friendship between your heart, and on the morrow you became brothers, by His gr
And that there may spring from you a nation who invite to goodness, and bid right conduct, and forbid what is wrong (or indecent); these are the successful
Be not like those who parted in sects and disagreed after there came to them manifest signs; for them is mighty woe
On the day when faces shall be whitened and faces shall be blackened. As for those whose faces are blackened, - "Did you disbelieve after your faith, then taste the torment for your disbelief
But as for those whose faces are whitened, in Allah´s mercy they shall dwell forever
These are the revelations of Allah. We recite them to you in truth, for Allah desires not injustice unto the worlds (or His creatures)
Allah´s is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and unto Allah do all affairs return
You were the best of nations brought forth unto man. You bid what is reasonable, and forbid what is inappropriate (indecent, wrong), believing in Allah. Had the people of the Book believed, it would have been better for them. There are believers among the
They shall surely not harm you save a trifle; and if they fight you, they shall show you their backs (flee), then they shall not be helped
They are smitten with abasement wherever they be found, save for the rope of Allah and the rope of man (the ties of the covenant); and they draw on themselves wrath from Allah and are smitten with wretchedness; that is because they did disbelieve in Allah
They are not all alike. Of the people of the Book there is an upright community, reciting the revelations of Allah throughout the night, falling prostrate (in Surrender)
They believe in Allah, and in the last day, and bid intelligent (or right) conduct, and forbid what is stupid (or wrong), and vie with one another in good works; these are among the righteous
What good they do, surely Allah will not deny its merit, for Allah is Aware of those who fear (or repel) evil
Verily, those who disbelieve, their wealth and children are of no service to them against Allah; they are the rightful owners of the Fire, and they shall dwell therein
The likeness of what they spend in this life of the world is as the likeness of wind wherein is a cold blast that falls upon the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves and destroys it. It is not Allah who wrongs them, but it is themselves they wr
O you who believe! Take not for intimates others than your own folk, who would not fail to ruin you; they love to obstruct you. Hatred is shown by their mouths; but what their breasts conceal is greater still. We have made manifest to you Our revelations
Verily, it is you who love them, but they love not you; and you believe in the whole of the Scripture. But when they meet you they say, "We believe;" and when they go aside they bite their fingertips at you through rage. Say, "Die in your r
If good luck touches you it is bad for them, but if bad luck befalls you they rejoice therein; yet if you are patient and fear, their tricks shall not harm you. Lo, Allah is surrounding what they do
When you did set forth early from your household to settle for the believers the positions for battle, Allah was Hearer and Knower
When two companies of you almost fell away in cowardice but Allah was their Guardian (or Protecting Friend), for on Allah surely do believers put their trust
Allah gave you victory at Badr when you were in a contemptible force; so do your duty to Allah in thankfulness
When you did say unto the believers, "Is it not enough for you that your Lord supports you with three thousand of the angels sent down from on high
Yea, if you persevere and avoid evil, and the enemy attacks you suddenly, your Lord will assist you with five thousand of His angels with force
Allah ordained this only as glad tidings to comfort your heart withal, for victory comes but from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
That He may cut off some of the faithless, or overwhelm them that they may retire frustrated (from their purpose)
It (the concern, responsibility or decision) is not for you whether He turns towards them again or punish them; for, verily, they are evil-doers
To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and in the earth. He forgives whom He will, and punishes whom He will. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
O you who believe! Devour not usury doubling and redoubling, but do your duty to Allah that you may be successful
Avoid the fire which is prepared for the faithless
And obey Allah and His Messenger, that you may get mercy
And vie with one another for pardon from your Lord, and for Paradise, the breadth of which is as the heaven and the earth, prepared for those who fear (or avoid) evil
Those who give charity, both in prosperity and in adversity, for those who control their rage, and those who are forgiving towards mankind. Allah loves the good
Those who when they do an evil, or wrong themselves, remember Allah, and ask forgiveness for their sins - and who forgives sins save Allah alone? - And do not knowingly repeat the wrong they did
The reward for such is forgiveness from their Lord, and gardens beneath which rivers flow, dwelling therein for ever - an excellent reward for those who strive
Systems have passed away before your time. Do travel in the earth, and see what was the consequence of those who denied (the prophets or Allah´s guidance)
This is an explanation unto men, and a guidance and a warning unto those who fear evil
Do not give way nor grieve, for you shall overcome them if you but be faithful
If a wound touches you, a similar wound has touched the others: these are only the vicissitudes of varying fortune which we bring in turn to mankind that Allah may know those who it is that believe, and may choose from you witnesses, for Allah loves not t
And that Allah may prove those who believe, and blot out the disbelievers
Did you think that you can enter Paradise without Allah testing those of you who fight (or strive) hard, and remain steadfast
Verily, you used to long for death before you met it! Now you see it (and flinch)
Mohammed is but a Messenger, messengers (the like of whom) have passed away before his time. What if he die or is killed, will you retreat upon your heels? He who retreats does no harm to Allah at all; but Allah will recompense the thankful
It is not for any soul to die, save by Allah´s permission, written down for an appointed time; but he who wishes for the reward of this world We will give him of it, and he who wishes for the reward of the Hereafter We will give him of it, and We wi
How many prophets, with them large numbers of devoted men, fought (in the cause of Allah)! They did not lose heart at what befell them in Allah´s way, nor did they weaken, nor did they demean themselves - Allah loves the steadfast
And their word was only to say, "Lord, forgive us our sins and wasted efforts; and make firm our footing, and help us against the faithless folk
So Allah gave them the reward of this world, and also good reward in the Hereafter. Allah does love those whose deeds are good
O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will turn you back upon your heels, and you will retreat as losers
Nay, Allah is your Protector; He is the best of helpers
We will throw dread into the heart of those who disbelieve, for that they associate partners unto Allah, for which He has revealed no authority; but their resort is fire, and evil is the resort of the wrong-doers
Allah has truly kept His promise, when you routed them by His permission, until you showed cowardice, and wrangled, and rebelled, after He had shown you what you loved (booty). Amongst you are those who love this world, and amongst you are those who love
And when you climbed (the hill) and looked not round upon any one, although the Messenger was calling you from your rear. Therefore did Allah reward you with trouble on trouble that you should not grieve after what you had missed, nor for what befell you
Then, after grief, He sent down upon you security, as drowsiness crept over one company of you, while another company became anxious about themselves, wrongly suspicious of Allah, with the suspicion of ignorance, and saying, "Have we any part (or cha)
Verily, those of you who turned your backs on that day when the two armies met, it was but Satan who made them slip because of something they had earned. But Allah has now pardoned them; verily, Allah is Forgiving and Clement
O you who believe! Be not like those who disbelieve, and say unto their brethren who went about in the earth, or are fighting in the field, "Had they but been with us, they would not have died or been killed." That Allah might make it a cause fo
And if, indeed, you be killed in Allah´s way or die therein, surely forgiveness from Allah and mercy is better than what you gather
And if you die or be killed it is to Allah that you shall be assembled
It was by the mercy of Allah that you did deal gently with them (O Muhammad), for had you been rough and fierce of heart they would have dispersed from around you. But pardon them, and ask forgiveness for them, and consult with them on the conduct of affa
If Allah help you, there is none that can overcome you; but if He withdraws his help, who is there that can help you? Upon Allah then let believers rely
It is not for the Prophet to deceive; and he who deceives shall bring his deceit with him on the Day of Resurrection. Then shall each soul be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
Is he who follows the pleasure of Allah, like him who has drawn on himself anger from Allah, whose resort is the Fire? An evil journey´s end
There are degrees with Allah, and Allah sees what you do
Allah was surely very gracious to the believers, when He sent amongst them a Messenger from among themselves (or of their own), who recite to them His revelations, and causes them to grow (or be purified), and teaches them the Scripture and wisdom, althou
What! When a small disaster befalls you, though you have smitten them with twice as much, do you say, "How is this?" Say, "It is from yourselves. Verily, Allah has Power over all things
And what befell you the day when the two armies met, it was by Allah´s permission; that He might know the true believers
And He might know those who are hypocrites; for it was said to them, "Come, fight in Allah´s way," or "Repel (the foe)" But they said, "If we knew how to fight we would surely follow you." They were that day far nearer
Those who said of their brethren, whilst they themselves stayed at home, "Had they been guided by us they would not have been killed." Say (unto them), "Then repel from yourselves death, if you are truthful
Think not those who are slain in the way of Allah as dead. Nay, they are living; with their Lord they have sustenance
Rejoicing in what Allah has brought them of His Bounty, glad for those who have not reached them yet, those left behind; there is no fear for them, and they shall not grieve
They rejoice at the favour from Allah and grace, and that Allah wastes not the wages of the believers
Whoever answered to the call of Allah and of His Prophet after sorrow had befallen them, for those, if they do good and fear evil, there is a great reward
Those unto whom men said, "Verily, men have gathered against you, therefore, fear them," but it only increased their faith, and they say, "Allah is enough for us. He is the Most Excellent Disposer of affairs
Then they returned with the favour and grace from Allah; no evil touched them; for they followed the pleasure of Allah, and Allah is Lord of infinite Bounty
It is only Satan who frightens his friends. Fear them not, but fear Me, if you be true believers
Let not their conduct grieve you, those who vie with each other in disbelief. Verily, they cannot hurt Allah at all. Allah wills not to give them a portion in the Hereafter; but for them is an awful doom
Verily, those who purchase disbelief for faith, they do not hurt Allah at all, and for them is grievous woe
Let not those who disbelieve imagine that the respite they have is good for themselves. We only let them have their rein that they may increase in sin. And for them is shameful woe
Allah will not leave the faithful in your present state until He separates the vile from the good. And Allah will not inform you of the unseen, but Allah chooses of His Apostles whom He pleases. So believe you in Allah and His Messenger; and if you believ
And let not those who hoard what Allah has given them of His Bounty think that it is best for them; nay, it is worse for them. What they hoard will be a collar round their necks on the Day of Resurrection. Allah´s is the heritage of the heavens and
Verily Allah heard the speech of those who said, "Verily, Allah is poor and we are rich." We will write down what they said, and how they killed the prophets undeservedly and say, "Taste you the torment of burning
This shall they suffer for what their hands have sent on before: - for verily, Allah is no oppressor to His servants
Who say, "Verily, Allah has covenanted with us that we should not believe in a Messenger until he brings us a sacrifice which fire devours." Say, "There have come to you Messengers before me with manifest signs, and with the very thing you
And if they deny you, even so did they deny Messengers before you, who came with manifest signs, and with the Psalms, and with the illuminating Scriptures
Every soul must taste of death; and you shall only be paid what you have earned on the Day of Resurrection. But he who is forced away from the Fire and brought into Paradise is indeed triumphant; but the life of this world is but a possession of illusion
You shall surely be tried in your wealth, and in your persons, and you shall surely hear much wrong from those who have had the Scripture before you, and from the idolaters. But if you be patient and fear evil, verily, that is the determining heart of aff
When Allah took the covenant from those who have received the Scripture, (and said), "You shall of a surety manifest it unto men, and not hide it", they cast it behind their backs, and bought therewith a little gain, but evil is what they buy th
Think not that those who rejoice in what they have given, and love to be praised for what they have not done, - think not that they are in safety from woe - for them is painful woe
Allah´s is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Mighty over all things
Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the succession of night and day, are signs for those who possess understanding
Such as remember Allah standing and sitting or reclining, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth, (and say) "O Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain. Glory be to Thee; preserve us from the torment of the fire
Our Lord! Verily, whomsoever Thou hast made to enter the fire, him, indeed, Thou hast disgraced; and for the wrongdoers there are no helpers
Our Lord! Verily, we heard a crier calling to the faith, ´Believe you in your Lord,´ and we did believe. Lord! Therefore, forgive us our sins and remit from us our offences, and let us die the death of the righteous
Our Lord! Bring us what Thou hast promised us by Thy Messengers, and disgrace us not upon the Day of Resurrection; for, verily, Thou dost not break Thy promises
And the Lord shall answer them, "I waste not the works of a worker amongst you, be it male or female, - you proceed one from the other. So those who fled, and were turned out of their houses, and were harmed in My cause, and who fought and were kille
Let not the vicissitudes of the faithless deceive you
It is but a brief comfort, and then their resort is Hell; an evil couch shall it be
But those who keep their duty to their Lord, for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall dwell therein for ever - a welcoming gift from Allah. That which Allah has is best for the righteous
Verily, of the people of the Book are some who do believe in Allah, and in what has been revealed to you, and what was revealed to them, humbling themselves before Allah. They purchase not a small gain for the revelations of Allah. These shall have their
O you who believe! Endure and vie with one another in endurance, and be on the alert, and fear Allah, in order that you may succeed
O mankind! Be careful of your duty to your Lord, who created you from one soul, and created there from its mate, and scattered from the twain a multitude of men and women. Be careful of your duty towards Allah, in whose name you claim rights of one anothe
And give unto the orphans their property, and give them not the vile in exchange for the good, and devour not their property into your own property; verily, that would be a great sin
But if you fear that you cannot do justice by orphans, then marry women who seem good to you, two, three, or four; and if you fear that you cannot be equitable to them, then only one, or what your right hands possess (captives, slaves). This is more likel
And give women their dowries freely; and if they of their own will remit any of it, then accept and enjoy it with good cheer
But give not unto the weak-minded the property which Allah has entrusted to you to maintain; but feed and clothe them from it, and speak words of kindness and justice to them
Prove orphans until they reach a marriageable age, then, if you perceive in them good judgment, hand over to them their property, and do not consume it wastefully and in haste lest they grow up. And the guardian who is rich, let him abstain from remunerat
Men should have a portion of what their parents and kindred leave, and women should have a portion of what their parents and kindred leave, whether it be little or much, a determinate (legal) portion
If at the time of division, other relatives, orphans or the poor are present, then bestow on them out of it, and speak to them in words of reason and kindness
And let those disposing of the property have the same fear as they would have had they left behind offsprings of their own. Let them fear Allah, and speak appropriately (with consideration)
Verily, those who devour the property of orphans unjustly, only devour fire into their bellies, and they shall broil in flames
Allah instructs you concerning your children; for a male the like of the portion of two females, and if there be more than two women, then let them have two-thirds of the inheritance; and if there be but one, then let her have a half. And as to the parent
And you shall have half of what your wives leave, if they have no child; but if they have a child, then you shall have a fourth of what they leave, after payment of any bequests or debts. And they shall have a fourth of what you leave, if you have no chil
These are the limits of Allah, and whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger He will make him enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall dwell therein for ever; that is the great success
But whoever rebels against Allah and His Messenger, and transgresses His bounds, He will make him enter into fire, and dwell therein for ever; and for him is shameful woe
As for those of your women who commit adultery, call witnesses four in number from among yourselves; and if these bear witness, then keep the women in houses until death release them, or Allah shall make for them a new way. (See)
And if two of you commit it, then punish them both; but if they repent and amend, leave them alone, verily, Allah is easily Relenting, Merciful
Allah is only bound to forgive those who do evil through ignorance and then repent. Surely, these are the ones to whom Allah is relenting. Allah is Knower Wise
His forgiveness is not for those who do evil until death approaches and then he says, "Now I repent", nor yet for those who die faithless. For such We have prepared a grievous woe
O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will; nor to restrain them so that you may take away part of what you gave them, unless they commit flagrant lewdness; but associate with them with kindness and equity, for if you
But if you wish to exchange one wife for another, and have given one of them a dower (money, gold), then take nothing back from it. What! Would you take it by slander and manifest wrong
How can you take it when one of you has gone in unto the other, and they have taken from you a solemn contract
And do not marry women your fathers married - except what has already happened - for it is an abominable and hateful practice, and an evil way
Unlawful for you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your sisters, and your paternal aunts and maternal aunts, and your brother´s daughters, and your sister´s daughters, and your foster mothers, and your foster sisters, and your wive&acu
And all married women (are forbidden unto you), save such as your right hands possess (captives of war) - It is a decree of Allah for you. But lawful for you are all beyond these. So seek them with your wealth in honest marriage and not lust. But such of
But whoever of you cannot marry free women who believe, then marry from what your right hands possess, believing maids; Allah knows best about your faith. You arise one from the other, so marry them with the permission of their people, and give them their
Allah wishes to explain to you and to guide you into the ordinances of those who were before you, and would turn towards you in mercy, for Allah is Knowing, Wise
Allah wishes to turn towards you in mercy, but those who follow their own lusts (desires, prejudices, addictions, superstitions) wish that you should go far astray
Allah wishes to make the burden light for you, for man was created weak
O you who believe! Squander not your property amongst yourselves vainly, but use it in trade by mutual consent. And do not destroy yourselves (or kill one another); verily, Allah is ever Merciful unto you
But whoever does that maliciously and unjustly, we will broil him with Fire; for that is easy with Allah
If you avoid great sins from which you are forbidden, We will remit (or expel) your lesser offences (or all evil in you) and make you enter a noble gate
And do not covet that by which Allah has preferred one of you over another. The men shall have what they earn, and the women what they earn; but instead (of envy) ask Allah for His Bounty, verily, Allah is All-Knowing
To every one have we appointed sharers (heirs, kinfolk, partners) to property left by parents and relatives. And to those with whom you have joined right hands (made pledges, contracts, marriages), give them also their portion. For, verily, Allah is Witne
Men are qawwam (have charge of, are protectors, maintainers) of women in that Allah hath made them superior in strength (or advantages), and in that they expend of their wealth (in support of women). So virtuous women are devoted (or obedient), careful (i)
And if you fear a breach between the two (husband and wife), then appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people. If they wish for reconciliation, Allah will arrange between them; verily, Allah is Knower and Aware
And serve Allah; associate nothing with Him; show kindness to parents, and to kindred, and orphans, and the needy, and to the neighbour who is a kin, and the neighbour who is a stranger, and the fellow traveller, and the wayfarer, and those whom your righ
Who hoard their wealth and bid men to (or promote) avarice, and who hide what Allah has given them of His Bounty. We have prepared for the disbelievers a shameful woe
And for those who expend their wealth in alms for appearance sake before men, and who believe not in Allah nor in the last day. Whoever takes Satan for his mate, an evil mate has he
What harm would it do them if they believed in Allah and in the Last Day, and expended in alms of what Allah has provided them? But Allah has full Knowledge about them
Verily, Allah would not wrong by the weight of an atom; and if it´s a good work, He will double it and bring from Himself a mighty reward
What if We bring from every nation a witness, and bring you as a witness against these
On the day when those who disbelieve and rebel against the Messenger would wish that they were levelled with the earth, but they cannot hide the facts from Allah
O you who believe! Approach not prayer while you are drunk (or mentally dull), until you know (can understand) what you are saying; nor yet while polluted - unless you are on a journey - until you have washed yourselves. But if you are sick, or on a journ
Do you not see those who have been given a portion of the Book? They buy error, and they wish that you may stray from the way
But Allah knows best who your enemies are, and Allah suffices as a Patron (or protecting friend), and sufficient is Allah as a Helper
And some Jews change words from their context, and say, "We hear but we disobey"; and "We listen without hearing," and "Ra´hina ("Attend to us")" distorting it with their tongues (to mean "Take us to past)
O you who have been given the Book! Believe in what We have revealed, confirming what you had before; ere we deface your faces and turn them into hinder parts, or curse you as we cursed the Sabbath-breakers. The command of Allah´s is always done
Verily, Allah pardons not associating anything with Him, but He pardons anything short of that, to whomsoever He pleases; but associating anything with Allah is to devise a mighty sin indeed
Do you not see those who pride themselves for sanctity? Nay, Allah sanctifies whom He will, and they shall not be wronged a straw
Behold, how they devise lies against Allah, and that is manifest sin enough
Do you not see those to whom a portion of the Book has been given? They believe in Gibt and Taghut (Idols and False Deities, vain things, sorcery, superstition), and they say of those who disbelieve, "These are better guided in the way than those who
These are those whom Allah has cursed, and whom Allah has cursed no helper shall he find
Shall they have a portion of the kingdom? Why, even then they would not give to men a jot
Do they envy man for what Allah has given of His grace? We have given to the House of Abraham the Scripture and Wisdom, and we have given them a mighty kingdom
And of them are some who believe therein, and of them are some who turn from it, but Hell is flaming enough for them
Verily, those who disbelieve in Our signs, We will broil them with Fire; whenever their skins are well done, then We will change them for fresh skins, that they may taste the torment. Verily, Allah is Mighty and Wise
But those who believe and do right, We will make them enter gardens beneath which rivers flow, and they shall dwell therein for ever. For them therein are pure companions; We will admit into a shades, cool and deep
Verily, Allah bids you repay your trusts to their owners, and when you judge between men to judge with justice. Verily, excellent is what He admonishes you; verily, for Allah is both Hearer and Seer
O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger and those in authority amongst you; and if you dispute (quarrel or argue) about anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger, if you (in truth) believe in Allah and the Last Day; that is better and fa
Do you not see those who pretend that they believe in what has been revealed to them, and what was revealed before you; they wish to refer their judgment to Taghut (the Evil One, or False Deities and authorities), but they were bidden to reject him. But S
And when it is said to them, "Come round to what Allah has sent down and unto the Messenger," you see the hypocrites turning from you in aversion
How then when there befalls them a misfortune through their own actions? Then will they come to you, and swear by Allah, "We meant naught but good and concord (harmony, reconciliation)
These people - Allah knows the secrets of their heart. Turn you away from them and admonish them, and speak to them words to reach their souls (or about their souls)
We have never sent a messenger save that he should be obeyed by the permission of Allah; and if they, when they have wronged themselves, come to you and ask pardon of Allah, and the Messenger asks pardon for them, then they will find Allah easily Forgivi
But no! By your Lord! They will not believe, until they have made you judge of what they differ on; then they will not find in themselves any hindrance to what you have decreed, and they will fully surrender
But had we prescribed for them, "Sacrifice your lives, or leave your homes" they would not have done it, save only a few of them. But had they done what they were told, then it would have been better for them, and more strengthening
And then We would surely have brought them from Our Presence a mighty reward
And We would have guided them into the Straight Way
Whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, these are in the company of those unto whom Allah has shown favour, of the prophets and saints and martyrs and the righteous; - the fairest company are they
Such is the Bounty of Allah, and Allah suffices as Knower
O you who believe! Take your precautions and go forth in groups or all together
Verily, there are some who tarry behind, and, if a mischance befalls you, they say, "Allah has been gracious to us, since we are not martyrs with them
But if a fortune from Allah befalls you, they would surely say - as though there were no friendship between you and them - "O would that I had been with you, then I would have achieved a great success
Let those then fight in Allah´s way who sell the life of this world for the Hereafter; and whoever fights in Allah´s way, then, be he killed or be he victorious, We will give him a mighty reward
What ails you that you do not fight in Allah´s way, and for the weak (oppressed) men, women and children, who cry, "Lord, rescue us from this town of oppressive people, and raise for us from Thee a Patron (or protecting friend), and raise for u
Those who believe fight in the way of Allah; and those who disbelieve fight in the way of Taghut (The Evil One); fight you then against the friends (supporters, protectors, patrons) of Satan, verily, Satan´s strategies are feeble indeed
Do you not see those to whom it is said, "Restrain your hands, but be steadfast in prayer and give alms (do charity);" and when it is prescribed for them to fight then, behold, a section of them fear men, with the fear justly due to Allah, or wi
Wherever you be, death will overtake you, though you were in lofty towers." And if a good thing befalls them, they say, "This is from Allah," but if a bad thing, they say, "This is from you (Muhammad)." Say (unto them), &quo
Whatever befalls you of good (O man) it is from Allah; and whatever befalls you of evil it is from your own soul. We have sent you to (instruct) mankind as a Messenger, and Allah suffices for a witness
Whoever obeys the Messenger he has obeyed Allah; and he who turns away - We have not sent you as a warder over them
They say, "Obedience!" But when they sally forth from you, a company of them ponder (meditate, plan, brood) by night over something other than that which you have said; but Allah writes down that over which they ponder. Turn then from them and r
Do they not meditate on the Quran? If it were from other than Allah they would find in it many a discrepancy (inconsistencies, contradictions)
And when there comes to them a matter of security or fear they broadcast it; but if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority amongst them, then those of them who can think would know it; but were it not for Allah´s grace upon
Fight, then, in the way of Allah; impose nothing on anyone else but on thyself (or you are responsible only for thyself), and urge on (or rouse, encourage) the believers. Perchance Allah will restrain the violence of those who disbelieve, for Allah is Mig
Whoever intercedes (recommends, promotes, encourages) well in a good cause shall have the reward there from; but he who intercedes (recommends, promotes, encourages) with a bad intercession shall have the like thereof, for Allah oversees all things
And when you are greeted with a good (courteous, friendly, beneficial) salutation, salute with a better one, or return it; verily, Allah takes account of all things
Allah! There is no god but He! He will surely assemble you on the Day (of Judgment or Resurrection), about which there is no doubt; Whose word is truer than Allah´s
What ails you that you have become two parties regarding the hypocrites, when Allah hath cast them back for what they earned? Do you wish to guide those whom Allah hath led astray? Whoever Allah hath led astray you shall surely find for him no path
They desire that you disbelieve as they disbelieve, that you might be alike; take you not friends from among them until they too flee in Allah´s way; but if they return to enmity, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them, and take from t
Save those who join (or take refuge among) a people betwixt whom and you is an alliance, or those who come to you because their heart forbid them from fighting you or fighting their own people. But had Allah pleased He could have given them power over you
Thee will find others who seek for security from you, and security from their own people; whenever they obtain it, they are tempted back to hostility: but if they retire not from you, nor offer you (guaranteed) peace, nor restrain their hands, then seize
It is not for a believer to kill a believer save by mistake; and whoever kills a believer by mistake then let him free a believing slave and compensation must be paid to his people, unless they remit it as charity. But if he be from a tribe hostile to you
And whoever kills a believer purposely, his reward is hell for ever. Allah will be wrath with him, and curse him, and prepare for him a mighty woe
O you who believe! When you go forth in the way of Allah be discriminate, and do not say to him who offers you a salutation, "You art no believer," craving after the goods of this world´s life (wishing to exploit him), for with Allah are a
Not alike are those of the believers who sit at home, except those have a disability, and those who strive in Allah´s way with their wealth and their lives. Allah hath preferred those who strive with their wealth and their lives to those who sit sti
Degrees of rank from Him, and pardon and mercy, for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
Verily, the angels when they take the souls of those who had wronged themselves, they say, "What state were you in?" They say, "We were but weak (and oppressed) in the earth;" They say, "Was not Allah´s earth wide enough for
Save for the weak (oppressed) men, and women, and children, who had no means, stratagem or guidance
These it may be Allah will pardon, for Allah is Clement and Forgiving
Whoever flees (migrates) in the way of Allah shall find in the earth many a spacious refuge; and he who goes forth from his house, fleeing unto Allah and His prophet, and then death catches him up - his reward becomes incumbent on Allah, and Allah is Forg
And when you travel about in the earth, it is no crime to you that you shorten your prayer for fear that unbelievers will set upon you. Verily, the unbelievers are your obvious foes
When you (Muhammad) are amongst them, and stand up to pray with them, then let a party of them stand up with you, and let them take their arms; and when they have finished their prostration (adoration, prayers), let them go to the rear, and let another pa
But when you have fulfiled your prayer, remember Allah standing and sitting and lying; and when you are in safety then be steadfast in prayer; verily, fixed times of prayer have been prescribed for the believers
And slacken not in pursuit of the enemy; if you suffer they shall surely suffer too, even as you suffer; and you hope from Allah what they cannot hope for! And Allah is Knower, Wise
Verily, We have revealed to you the Book in truth that you may judge between men by what Allah has shown you; so plead not for (or be used as an advocate by) the treacherous
But seek Allah´s pardon: Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
And contend (argue) not for those who defraud themselves; for Allah loves not him who is a fraudulent sinner
They hide themselves from men; but they cannot hide themselves from Allah, for He is in their midst while they brood at night (in darkness or in secret) in words (thoughts, concepts, attitudes) that please Him not; but Allah encompasses all they do
Here are ye, wrangling for them about this world´s life: - but who shall wrangle with Allah for them on the Day of Judgment, or who shall be their defender
Yet whoever does evil and wrongs his own soul, and then asks pardon of Allah, shall find Allah Forgiving and Merciful
Whoever commits (or reaps, earns the wages or consequences of) a wrong (sin, crime), he only commits it against his own soul, for Allah is Knowing, Wise
And whoever commits a fault or a wrong and throws it on the innocent, he has burdened himself with a falsehood and a manifest crime (sin)
Were it not for Allah´s grace upon you, and His mercy, a party of them would have tried to lead you astray; but they only lead themselves astray; they shall not hurt you at all: for Allah hath sent down upon you the Book and the Wisdom, and taught y
There is no good in much of their secret conferences; save in his who bids almsgiving, or kindness, or reconciliation between men; and whoever does this, craving the good pleasure of Allah, we will give to him a mighty reward
But he who severs himself from the prophet after the guidance has been made manifest to him, and follows other than the way of the believers, We will turn on him as he hath turned (appointing for him the path to which he himself has turned); and we will m
Verily, Allah forgives not associating anything with Him, but He pardons anything short of that, to whomsoever He will; but whoever associates aught with Allah, he hath strayed far into error
Verily, they (Pagans) call on females deities instead of Him; but they call only on Satan, the rebellious
Allah cursed him. For he said, "I will take from Thy servants a portion due to me
And surely I will lead them astray; and I will stir up vain desires within them; and I will order them and they shall surely crop the ears of cattle (superstitious practices); and I will order them and they shall surely alter (or corrupt) Allah´s cr
He promises them, and stirs up vain desires within them; but the devil promises only to deceive
These (Satan´s dupes), their resort is hell; they shall not find an escape there from
But those who believe, and do what is right, We will make them enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever - It is Allah´s promise in truth; and whose word is truer than Allah´s
Not in accordance with your vain desires, nor the vain desires of the people of the Book. He who does evil shall be recompensed therewith, and shall not find for him beside Allah a patron, or a help
But he who does good works, be it male or female, and believes, they shall enter into Paradise, and they shall not be wronged a jot
Who has a better religion than he who surrenders himself to Allah, and does good, and follows the faith of Abraham, the upright? Allah took Abraham as a friend
And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth, and Allah encompasses all things
They will ask you for a decision (or instructions) about women; say, "Allah decides for you about them, and so do the Scriptures recited to you (remember them) about female orphans to whom you do not give what is prescribed for them though you are no
And if a woman fears from her husband perverseness or aversion (ill-treatment or desertion), it is no crime in them both that they should make terms of amicable settlement, for peace (agreement) is best. But souls are prone to avarice; if you do good (act)
It may be that you will not be able to act equitably to your wives, even though you ardently desire to. But do not turn away from her, leaving her in suspense. If you come to a friendly understanding and avoid evil, then Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
But if they must separate, Allah can provide (make both independent) out of His abundance; for Allah is All-embracing, All-Knowing
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and that is in the earth! We have charged those who have been given the Book before you, and you too, that you fear (respect and do your duty to) Allah. But if you disbelieve, verily, to Allah belongs all that i
Yea, unto Allah belong all things in the heavens and on the earth! And Allah suffices as Defender
If He will He can destroy you, O mankind! and can create another race (or community, nation); Allah is able to do all that
He who wishes for a reward in this world, (know that) with Allah is the reward of this world and also of the Hereafter, and Allah is both Hearer and Seer
O you who believe! Be you steadfast in justice, witnesses for Allah, though it is against yourselves, or your parents, or your kindred, be it rich or poor, for Allah is nearer both than either. Follow not, then, lusts (prejudices, superstitions, passions)
O you who believe! Believe in Allah and His Messengers, and the Book (Scripture) which He hath revealed to His Messenger, and the Book (Scripture) which He sent down before you; for whoever disbelieves in Allah, and His angels, and His Messenger, and the
Verily, those who believe and then disbelieve, and then again believe and then disbelieve, and then increase in disbelief, Allah will never pardon them, nor will He guide them in the Way
Give to the hypocrites the glad tidings that for them is grievous penalty
Yea, to those who take the disbelievers for their patron rather than believers. Do they crave honour from them? Verily, all honour is with Allah
He hath revealed this to you in the Book, that when you hear the signs of Allah rejected and mocked, then sit you not down with them until they turn to another topic, for verily, then you would be like them. Verily, Allah will gather the hypocrites and di
Those who lie in wait for you, and if the victory be your s from Allah, say, "Were we not with you?" and if the unbelievers have a chance of success, they say, "Did we not gain an advantage over you, and defend you from the believers
Verily, the hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but He deceives them; and when they rise up to pray, they rise up lazily to be seen of men, and little do they remember Allah
Wavering (in distraction) between this and that, (belonging) neither to these nor yet to those! But whomsoever Allah causes to go astray you shall not find for him a Way
O you who believe! Take not disbelievers for friends rather than believers; do you wish to give Allah a proof (or warrant) against you
Verily, the hypocrites are in the lowest depths of hell-fire, and you will not find for them a help
Save those who repent, and do right, and take tight hold on Allah, and are sincere in religion for (or purify religion for) Allah; these are with the believers, and Allah will give to the believers mighty reward
Why should Allah punish you, if you are grateful and believe? For Allah is Responsive and Aware
Allah loves not publicity of evil speech, unless one has been wronged; for Allah is Hearer and Knower
If you do good openly or in secret, or forgive evil, verily, Allah is Forgiving and Powerful
Verily, those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and desire to make a distinction between Allah and His messengers, and say, "We believe in some and disbelieve in others," and desire to take a midway course between the two
These are the disbelievers, and We have prepared for disbelievers shameful woe
But those who believe in Allah and His messengers, and who do not make a distinction between any one of them, to these Allah will give their wages, for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
The people of the Book will ask you to bring down for them a book from heaven; but they asked Moses a greater thing than that, for they said, "Show us Allah openly;" but the thunderbolt caught them in their injustice. Then they chose the calf, a
And We held over them the mountain (Sinai) for their covenant, and said to them, "Enter you the door prostrate (in humility, worship or adoration);" and We said to them, "Transgress not on the Sabbath day", and We took from them a firm
But then because they broke their covenant, and for their disbelief in Allah´s revelations, and for their killing the prophets undeservedly, and for their saying in defiance, "Our heart are uncircumcised, (Our heart are sufficient wrappings or)
And because of their disbelief, and because of their utterance of a mighty calumny against Mary
And because of their boastful saying, "Verily, we have killed the Messiah, Jesus, the son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah," - but they killed him not, nor did they crucify him, but it was obscured for them (or it appeared so to them). And verily
Nay, Allah raised him up unto Himself; for Allah is ever Mighty and Wise
And there shall not be one of the People of the Book but must believe in him before his death; and on the Day of Judgment he shall be a witness against them
And because of the iniquity (or injustice) of the Jews, We have forbidden them the good things which We had made lawful for them, and for their much obstructing the way of Allah
And for their taking usury when We had forbidden it, and for their vain devouring of the wealth of people by false pretences, We have prepared for those of them who disbelieve a grievous woe
But those amongst them who are firm in knowledge, and the faithful who believe in what is revealed to you , and what was revealed before you, and especially the steadfast in prayer, the givers of alms, the believers in Allah and the Last Day, unto these W
Verily, We have inspired you (Muhammad) as We inspired Noah and the prophets after him, and as We inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Jacob, and the tribes, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonas, and Aaron, and Solomon; and to David did We give the Psalms
Of some messengers We have already told you; and of other messengers We have not told you; But Allah spoke directly to Moses
Messengers giving glad tidings and warning, that men should have no argument against Allah, after the coming of messengers, for Allah is Mighty, Wise
But Allah bears witness to what He has revealed to you: He revealed it from His own knowledge, and the angels bear witness too; though Allah is witness enough
Verily, those who disbelieve and obstruct the way of Allah have strayed in wide error
Verily, those who disbelieve and do wrong (are unjust), Allah will not pardon them, nor will He guide them on the Way
Save the way to hell, to dwell therein forever; that is easy enough to Allah
O you people! The Messenger has come to you with truth from your Lord: believe, then, in him, for it is better for you. But if you disbelieve, then (know) that to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Knower, Wise
O you people of the Book! Do not commit excesses in your religion, nor say against Allah anything save the truth. The Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary, was but the messenger of Allah and His Word, which He cast into Mary and a Spirit from Him; believe then
The Messiah does surely not disdain to be a servant of Allah, nor do the angels who are nigh to Him; and whoever disdains His service and is too proud, He will gather them altogether to Himself
But as for those who believe and do what is right, He will pay their due reward and will give increase to them from His Bounty. But as for those who are disdainful and arrogant, He will punish them with a grievous woe. Nor will they find, other than Allah
O you people! Convincing Proof has come to you from your Lord, for We have sent down to you manifest light
Then those who believe in Allah, and take tight hold of Him, He will admit them into His mercy and Grace; and He will guide them to Himself by a Straight Way
They ask you for a legal pronouncement; say, "Allah gives you a decision concerning remote kinship." If a man dies and have no child, but have a sister, let her have half of what he leaves; and had she died, he would be her heir, if she have no
O you who believe! Fulfil all your undertakings (and obligations). Lawful for you are beasts, save what is here announced. Forbidden you is the chase while you are on pilgrimage. Verily, Allah ordains according to His Will and Plan
O you who believe! Profane not the Symbols of Allah (things connected with the pilgrimage), nor the sacred month (of pilgrimage), nor the sacrificial offering, nor the garlands (decorating these animals), nor those who sojourn at the sacred house (Kaaba)
Forbidden to you (for food) is that which dies of itself, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is devoted to other than Allah, and that which has died by strangling, or by violence, or by a fall, or by goring, and which has been eaten by wild
They will ask you what is lawful for them? Say, "Lawful for you are all good things. And what you have trained hunting animals to catch, in the manner directed by Allah; - so eat of what they catch for you, but mention the name of Allah over it, and
This day all things good and pure are made lawful for you. The food of those to whom the Book has been given is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them; and chaste women of those who believe, and chaste women of those to whom the Book has been gi
O you who believe! When you rise up to prayer wash your faces, and your hands as far as the elbows, and wipe your heads, and your feet down to the ankles. And if you are polluted, then purify yourselves (bathe). But if you are sick, or on a journey, or if
Remember the favour of Allah to you and His covenant which He made with you, when you said, "We hear and we obey;" and fear (respect and keep your duty to) Allah. Verily, Allah knows well the secrets in your breasts
O you who believe! Stand steadfast as witnesses for Allah with justice; and let not hatred of (or towards) a people tempt you to injustice. Act with equity, that is nearer to piety, and fear Allah; for Allah is Aware of what you do
Allah has promised to those who believe and work righteousness, that for them is forgiveness and a mighty reward
But those who disbelieve and deny Our Signs, these are the fellows of hell
O you who believe! Remember Allah´s favour towards you, when a people intended to stretch their hands against you, but He withheld their hands from you. Keep your duty to Allah, and in Allah let believers trust
Allah did in the past make a covenant with the children of Israel, and raised up among them twelve chiefs; and Allah said, "Verily, I am with you, if you be steadfast in prayer, and give alms, and believe in My Messengers, and assist them, and lend t
And because they broke their covenant, We cursed them, and placed hardness in their heart. They perverted the words from their contexts, and forgot a portion of what they were admonished. you will not cease to find treachery from all, save a few of them
And of those who say, "Verily we are Christians," We have (also) taken a covenant; but they have forgotten a goodly portion of the message; wherefore have We excited amongst them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection, when Allah will in
O you people of the Book! Now has Our Messenger come to you to expound unto you much of what you used to hide in the Book, and forgiving (or abolishing) much. Now has come unto you light from Allah, and a perspicuous Book
Allah guides thereby those who seek His pleasure, to the way of peace, and leads them out of darkness into light by His decree, and guides them unto a Straight Way
They, indeed, have disbelieved who say, "Verily, Allah is the Messiah the son of Mary." Say, "Who can do anything against Allah, if He wished to destroy the Messiah, the son of Mary, and his mother, and those who are on earth altogether?&qu
But the Jews and the Christians say, "We are the sons of Allah and His beloved." Say, "Why then does He punish you for your sins? Nay, you are mortals, men whom He has created! He pardons whom He pleases, and punishes whom He pleases; for t
O people of the Book! Now Our Messenger has come to you to make things plain, after an interval in the succession of Messengers, lest you say, "There came not to us a herald of glad tidings nor a Warner." But now there has come to you a herald o
Remember when Moses said to his people, "O my people! Remember the favour of Allah towards you when He made amongst you prophets, and made for you kings, and brought you what was never given to anyone else in the world
O my people! Enter the Holy Land which Allah has ordained for you; and be not thrust back upon your hinder parts, for surely you retreat losers
They said, "O Moses! Verily, therein are giants; and we will surely not enter therein until they go out from thence; when they depart, then will we enter
Then said two of those who were God-fearing - Allah had been gracious to them both - "Enter you upon them by the gate, for once you have entered it, verily, you shall be victorious; so put your trust in Allah if you be, indeed, believers
They said, "O Moses! We shall never enter it so long as they are therein; so, go you and your Lord and fight you two; we will sit down here
Said he, "My Lord, verily, I can control only myself and my brother; therefore, part (distinguish) us from this rebellious people
He (the Lord) said, "Then, verily, this land is forbidden them for forty years; in bewilderment shall they wander about in the earth; so grieve not yourself for these sinful people
Recite to them the true tale of the two sons of Adam; truly when they offered an offering and it was accepted from one of them, and not from the other. Said the latter, "I will surely kill you." Said the former, "Surely, Allah only accepts
If you do stretch forth your hand to kill me, I will not stretch forth mine to kill you; for, verily, I fear Allah the Lord of the Worlds
Verily, I would rather that you draw upon yourself my sin and yours, and become of the fellows of the Fire, for that is the reward of the evil-doer (or unjust)
But the other´s soul compelled him to slay his brother, and so he slew him, and became one of the losers
Then Allah sent a crow to scratch in the earth and show him how he might hide his brother´s naked corpse. He said, "Alas, for me! Am I too helpless to become like this crow and hide my brother´s naked corpse?" and in the morning he w
For this cause have We prescribed to the children of Israel that whoever kills a soul, unless it be for murder or for mischief (or corruption) in the land, it would be as though he had killed all mankind; but whoever saves the life of one, it would be as
The reward of those who make war against Allah and His Messenger, and strive after corruption (or disruption) in the earth, is only that they shall be slaughtered or crucified, or their hands and feet cut off on alternate sides, or that they shall be bani
Save for those who repent before you overpower them. For know that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! Fear (be dutiful to) Allah and crave the means to approach Him, and strive in His way in order that you may succeed (or prosper)
Verily, those who disbelieve, even though they had all that is in the earth, and the like thereof with it, to offer as a ransom from the punishment of the Day of Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them; but for them is grievous woe
They may wish to go forth from the Fire, but they shall not go forth there from. For them is lasting woe
The thief, man or woman, cut off their hands (or ability to do evil or means of livelihood). It is the reward of their own deeds, an exemplary punishment from Allah (or one making an example). Allah is Mighty, Wise
But whoever repents after his wrongdoing (injustice) and makes amends, verily, Allah will relent towards him, for, verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Do you not know that Allah, His alone is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He punishes whom He pleases, and forgives whom He pleases, for Allah has power over all things
O you Messenger! Let not those grieve you who vie with each other in disbelief, be they of those who say with their mouths "We believe," but their heart are faithless; or of those among Jews, listeners to a lie, who listen to other people, but n
They are listeners to falsehood, eaters of unlawful things! But if they come to you, then judge between them or ignore them. If you turn aside from them they shall not harm you at all, but if you judge, then judge between them with justice, for verily, Al
But why should they make you their judge, when they have their own Law, wherein is Allah´s judgment? Yet they turn back even after that, for they do not really believe
Verily, it was We who have revealed the Torah in which there is guidance and light; the prophets who had surrendered did judge the Jews thereby, as did the Rabbis (masters) and doctors of Law. To them was entrusted the Book of Allah to judge by, and they
We have prescribed for you therein "a life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose, and an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth, and for wounds equal retaliation;" But whoever remits it, it is an expiation for him. Whoever ju
And We followed up the footsteps of these (prophets) with Jesus, the son of Mary, confirming that which was before him, and We bestowed upon him the Gospel, wherein is guidance and light, verifying what was before it of the Torah (Hebrew Scripture), a gui
Then let the people of the gospel judge by that which is revealed therein, for whoever will not judge by what Allah has revealed, these are the evil doers
And unto you (Muhammad) have We revealed the Book in truth, verifying what was before it, and preserving it. Judge then between them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not their lusts (prejudices, fantasies), turning away from what is given to you of
Wherefore judge you between them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not their lusts (prejudices, fantasies, superstitions); but beware lest they mislead you from part of what Allah has revealed to you ; and if they turn back, then know that Allah wis
Is it the judgment of the Time of Ignorance (i.e. before the Revelation) for which they crave? But who is better than Allah as judge for people who are certain
O you who believe! Take not the Jews and Christians for your friends (or patrons): they are friends (or patrons) to each other. Whoever amongst you takes them for friend (or patron), verily, he is of them, and, verily, Allah guides not an unjust people
You will see those in whose heart is a disease runs about among them, saying, "We fear lest a reversal befall us." It may be that Allah will give you victory, or a commandment from Himself, and they may awake repenting of their secret thoughts
Then those who believe say, "Are these they who swore by Allah with their strongest oath that they were surely with you?"- Their works have failed and they shall wake up ruined
O you who believe! Whoever of you turns away from his religion, Allah will bring (instead) a people whom He loves and who love Him, humble to believers, stern to unbelievers, striving in the way of Allah, fearing not the blame (or reproach) of any blamer
Only Allah is your friend, and His Messenger and those who believe, who are steadfast in prayer and give alms, bowing down (in prayer)
Whoever takes as friend Allah and His Messenger and those who believe - verily, the Fellowship of Allah will be victorious
O you who believe! Take not for friends and patrons those who take your religion for a jest or a sport, from either amongst those who have been given the Book before or the disbelievers; but fear Allah if you have true faith
Nor those who, when you call to prayer, take it for a jest and a sport; that is because they are a people without understanding
Say, "O people of the Book! Do you disapprove of us for no other reason but that we believe in Allah, and the revelations that have come to us, and what was revealed before, and that most of you are rebellious (and disobedient)
Say, "Shall I declare unto you something much worse than this for retribution from Allah?" It is those whomsoever Allah has cursed and been wroth with - and he has made of them (as) apes and swine - and who worship Taghut (idols), they are in a
When they come to you they say, "We believe;" but they entered with unbelief, and they went out the same way, and Allah knows best what they did hide
Thee will see many of them vying in sin and enmity, and in devouring unlawful things, - evil is it that they have done
Why do not their rabbis and their doctors forbid them from speaking sin and eating unlawful things - verily, evil is what they have performed
The Jews say, "Allah´s hand is fettered" (incapable or ungenerous), but it is their hands that are fettered and they are cursed for what they say. Nay! His hands are outspread, He spends how He pleases! And that which has been sent down to
But if only the people of the Book would believe and fear (avoid evil), We would remit their offences, and We would make them enter into Gardens of Delight
And if they had been steadfast in the Torah and the Gospel, and what has been sent down to them from their Lord, they would surely have nourishment from above them and below them. Amongst them are a people who are moderate, but many of them are of evil co
O Messenger! Make known what has been revealed to you from your Lord. If you do it not then you have not conveyed His message, and Allah will not protect you from (mischief making) men for Allah guides not people who disbelieve
Say, "O people of the Book! You have no ground to stand on till you stand fast by the Torah and the Gospel, and what is revealed to you from your Lord." But what has been revealed to you from your Lord will of a surety increase many of them in r
Verily, those who believe and those who are Jews, and the Sabaeans, and the Christians, whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and does what is right, they shall not fear, nor shall they grieve
We took a covenant in the past from the children of Israel, and We sent to them Messengers; every time there came to them a messenger with what their souls loved not, some of them they did call liars and some of them they slew
And they thought that no harm would come to them; but they were blind and deaf! And then Allah turned (in mercy) again towards them: and even then many amongst them were wilfully blind and deaf! Allah is Seer of what they did
They surely disbelieve who say, "Verily, Allah is the Messiah the son of Mary;" but the Messiah himself said, "O children of Israel! Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord." (JohnVerily, he who associates anything with Allah, Allah hath)
They disbelieve who say, "Verily, Allah is the third of three;" for there is no God but one, and if they do not desist from what they say, there shall touch those who disbelieve amongst them grievous woe
Will they not turn again towards Allah and ask pardon of Him? For Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
The Messiah, the son of Mary, is only a Messenger: Messengers like him have passed away before him; and his mother was a saintly woman. And they both used to eat food. See how We clearly explain to them the revelations, yet see how they turn aside
Say, "Will you serve, other than Allah, that which can neither hurt you nor profit you?" Allah it is Who is both Hearer and Knower
Say, "O people of the Book! Exceed not in your religion other than the Truth, and follow not the lusts (prejudices, fantasies, superstitions) of a people who have erred in the past, and who lead many astray, and who go astray from the Even Path
Those of the children of Israel who went astray were cursed by the tongue of David and of Jesus, the son of Mary; that is because they rebelled and did transgress
They would not restrain each other from the wickedness they did; verily, evil is that which they used to do
Thee will see many of them taking those who disbelieve for their friends. Surely, evil is that which their souls have sent before them, for Allah´s wrath is on them, and in the torment shall they dwell
But had they believed in Allah and the Prophet, and what was revealed to him, they would not have taken these for friends. But many of them are evildoers
Thee will surely find that the strongest in enmity against those who believe are the Jews and the idolaters (Pagans); and you will find the nearest in love to those who believe to be those who say, "We are Christians". That is because there are
And when they hear what has been revealed to the Messenger, you will see their eyes overflow with tears at what they recognize as Truth; and they will say, "O our Lord! We believe, so record us amongst the witnesses
Why should we not believe in Allah and the Truth that is given to us, nor desire that our Lord should make us enter the company of the righteous
Therefore has Allah rewarded them, for what they said, with Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever; that is the reward of those who do good
But those who disbelieve and say Our revelations are lies, they are the fellows of hell
O you who believe! Forbid not the good things which Allah has made lawful for you, nor transgress (or commit excess); verily, Allah loves not the transgressors
But eat of what Allah has provided you, lawful and good things; and fear (do your duty to) Allah, in Whom you believe
Allah will not take you to task for the unintentional (or futile) word in your oaths (or promises), but He will take you task for oaths you swear in earnest. The expiation thereof is to feed ten poor men with the average food you feed your families with
O you who believe! Verily, strong drinks (intoxicants, fermented or alcoholic drinks), and el maisar (gambling, trying to get something for nothing), and statues (idols), and divining arrows (superstitions and games of chance)) are only an abomination of
Satan only desires to place enmity and hatred between you by wine and maisar, and to turn you from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer; will you not, then, desist
Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and beware, for if you turn back then know that the duty of Our Messenger is only to deliver the message clearly
There is no crime in those who believe and do right, for having tasted forbidden food, when they fear (guard themselves from evil) and believe. So fear (do your duty to) Allah, and believe, and do what is right; and again fear (do your duty), and believe
O you who believe! Allah will try you with something of the game (by hunting) that your hands and your lances take, that Allah may know who fears Him in secret; and whoever transgresses after that, for him is grievous woe
O you who believe! Kill not game while you are on pilgrimage. But he amongst you who kills it purposely, he shall compensate the equivalent of that which he has killed, in domestic animals - of which two just persons amongst you shall judge - an offering
Lawful for you is the game of the sea, and to eat thereof; a provision for you and for seafarers; but forbidden you is the game of the land while you are on pilgrimage; so fear Allah to whom you shall be gathered
Allah has made the Kaaba, the Sacred House, to be a standard (or an Asylum of Security) for men, and also the Sacred Month, and the Offering (sacrifices) and its Garland (which mark them); this is so that you may know that Allah knows what is in the heave
Know that Allah is severe in punishment, but that Allah is also Forgiving, Merciful
The Messenger has only the duty to proclaim the message, but Allah knows what you show and what you hide
Say, "The evil shall not be deemed equal with the good, although much of evil attracts you." Fear (do your duty to) Allah then, O you who have understanding that you may succeed (or prosper)
O you who believe! Ask not questions about things which if they are shown to you would trouble you; but if you ask about them when the Quran is being revealed, they shall be made plain to you. Allah pardons this, for Allah is Forgiving and Clement
People before you have asked such questions, yet on the morrow they disbelieved therein (or lost their faith)
And Allah has not instituted (superstitions like those of) Bahirah or Saibah, nor Wazilah nor Hami, (classes of cattle revered and liberated in honour of idols) but those who disbelieve invent a lie against Allah, for most of them have no sense
And when it is said to them, "Come round to what Allah has revealed unto His Apostle," they say, "Enough for us is that wherein we found our fathers." What! Even though their fathers had no knowledge whatever and no guidance
O you who believe! You have charge of (or guardianship of) your own souls; he who errs can do you no hurt if you are rightly guided. Unto Allah will you all return, and He will declare to you the truth of that which you did
O you who believe! Let there be a witnesses among you when any of you is on the point of death at the time he makes his will - two equitable persons from amongst your family or two others from some other folk, in case you are journeying away in the land
But if it later found that they too have deserved the imputation of sin, then let two others stand up in their place with those who think them deserving of the imputation, the nearest two in kin, and they shall both swear by Allah, "Indeed, our testi
Thus is it more likely that they will bear true testimony according to its purport; else must they fear lest an oath be given to rebut their own oath. So let them be mindful of their duty to Allah and listen, for Allah guides not the people who do evil
On the day when Allah will assemble the Messengers and say, "What was your response from mankind." they will say, "We have no knowledge; verily, Thou art He who knows in full the hidden
Then Allah will say, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favours towards you and towards your mother, when I aided you with the Holy Ghost, so that you did speak to men in childhood and in maturity. Behold, I taught you the Book and Wisdom, and the T
And when I inspired the Disciples that they should believe in Me and in My Messenger, they said, ´We believe; do you bear witness that we have Surrendered. (become Muslims)´
When the Disciples said, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Is your Lord able to send down to us a table spread with food from heaven?" he said, "Fear Allah, if you be true believers
And they said, "We desire to eat there from that our heart may be at rest, and that we may know that what you have told us is the truth, and that we may be thereby amongst the witnesses
Said Jesus the son of Mary, "O Allah, our Lord! Send down to us a table spread with food from heaven, to be a feast for us, for the first of us and for the last of us, and a sign from Thee. Give us sustenance, for Thou art the best of Providers
Allah said, "Verily, I will send it down to you; but whoever disbelieves amongst you after that, verily, I will punish him with a penalty such as I have not inflicted on any one in all the worlds
And when Allah said, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Was it you who did say to men, take me and my mother for two gods, beside Allah?" He said, "Glory be to Thee! What could have ailed me that I should have uttered what I had no right to? If I had s
I never told them save that which Thou didst command me (John7:16), ´Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord,´ and I was a witness of them so long as I was amongst them (see John17:6); but when Thou didst take me away to Thyself Thou wert t
If Thou punish them, then lo! They are Thy slaves; and if Thou forgive them (lo! They are the slaves also) Lo! Thou alone are the Mighty and the Wise
Allah said, "This is the day when their truthfulness shall profit the truthful, for them are Gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they dwell in security for ever. Allah is well pleased with them, and they well pleased with Him; that is the grea
Unto Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens, and the earth, and all that is therein, and He has Power to do all things
Praise belongs to Allah who created the heavens and the earth, and hath brought into being the darkness and the light. Yet do those who disbelieve ascribe partners to Him
He it is who created you from clay; then He decreed a term - a term fixed with Him. And yet still you doubt
He is Allah in the heavens and the earth. He knows your secret (or hidden) conduct and your public (or manifest) ones, and He knows what you earn
There came to them none of revelations of their Lord, but they turned away
And now they reject the truth that has come to them, but soon shall come to them a message (They shall learn the truth) about that at which they mocked
Do not they see how many a generation We have destroyed before them, whom We had established more firmly than you, and sent them abundant rain from heaven, and made the rivers flow beneath them? Yet We destroyed them for their sins, and raised up other ge
Had We sent down to you a book on paper, and they had touched it with their hands, still those who disbelieve would have said, "This is naught but obvious magic
They say, "Why has not an angel been sent down to him?" But if We had sent down an angel, the affair would have been decided at once, and then they would have had no respite
And had We appointed an angel, We would have had to send him in the form of a man too (that he may speak to men) and this would have made perplexing for them that which they deem perplexing now
There have been Messengers before you who were mocked at, but that at which they mocked surrounded (mocked, turned the tables on) the mockers
Say, "Travel in the land and see the nature of the consequences for the rejecters (for those who called them liars)
Say, "Whose is that which is in the heavens and the earth?" Say, "Allah´s. He has imposed (prescribed) mercy on himself." He will surely gather you together on the Day (of Resurrection and Judgment), of which there is no doubt. B
His is whatsoever dwells in the night or in the day, He is Hearer and Knower
Say, "Shall I take as a patron other than Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He feeds but is not fed." Say, "I am bidden to be the first of those who Surrender;" and it was said to me, "Be not you of the idolaters
Say, "I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the retribution of an Awful Day
From whomsoever it is averted on that day, Allah hath truly had mercy on him; and that is obvious triumph (salvation, success, happiness, fulfilment)
And if Allah touch you with harm (affliction, ill fortune), there is none can remove it but He; and if He touch you with good, He has Power over all things
He is Omnipotent (sovereign) over His servants, He is the Wise, the Aware
Say, "What is the strongest evidence (testimony, witness)?" Say, "Allah is witness between you and me. This Quran was inspired in me to warn you and those it reaches. Can you really bear witness that there are other gods besides Allah
Those to whom We have brought the Book know this (revelation) as they know their own sons - those who ruin their souls do not believe
Who is more unjust than he who forges against Allah a lie, or denies His revelations? Verily, the unjust shall not prosper
On the day when We shall gather them all together, then shall We say to those who have associated others with Ourself, "Where now are those associates whom you did invent
Then they will have no excuse but to say, "By Allah our Lord, we did not associate gods with Allah
See how they lie against themselves, and how what they did invent deserts them
And among them are some who listen unto you, but We have placed a veil upon their heart lest they should understand it, and in their ears is deafness; and though they saw each sign they would not believe therein, to the point that when they come to you to
They forbid it and they avoid it; but they destroy none but their own souls, though they perceive not
But could you but see when they are set over the Fire and say, "Would that we were sent back! We would not then deny our Lord´s revelations, but we would be of the believers
Nay! Now is shown clearly to them what they did hide before; and were they to be sent back, they would return to that which they were forbidden, for they are liars
They say "There is naught but this life of ours in the world and we shall not be raised again
But could you see when they are set before their Lord, He says, "Is not this the real?" They will say, "Yea, by our Lord!" He will say, "Then taste the penalty because you did disbelieve
Losers, indeed, are they who disbelieved in meeting Allah, until, when the hour comes suddenly upon them, they say, "Alas for us, that we were neglectful!" They shall bear their burdens on their backs; evil is what they bear
Naught is the life of this world but a game (or pastime) and a sport (or amusement). Surely, better by far is the abode of the Hereafter for those who fear (and do their duty). Will you not understand
Full well We know that that which they say grieves you; but in truth they deny not you, but the unjust flout the revelations of Allah
Indeed, Messengers have been called liars before you; but they were patient under denial and persecution until Our help came to them; for there is none to alter the words of Allah. Already has there come to you the story of those He sent in the past
And if their aversion be hard for you, and if you can, seek for a shaft down into the earth, or a ladder up into the sky, to bring them a sign - if Allah pleased He could have brought them all to guidance - be you not then of the ignorant
Only those can accept who hear. As for the dead, Allah will raise them up, then unto Him shall they return
They say, "Why has not a sign been sent down from his Lord" Say, "Verily, Allah has power to send down a sign, but most of them do not understand
There is not a beast upon the earth nor a bird that flies with both its wings, but is a people like to you; We have omitted nothing from the Book. Then to their Lord shall they be gathered
Those who rejected Our signs are deaf and dumb, in darkness! Whom He pleases does Allah sends astray, and whom He pleases He places on the Straight Way
Say, "Can you see yourselves! If there should come Allah´s punishment, or there should come to you the Hour, would you call on other than Allah, (answer that) truthfully
Nay, it is on Him that you would call, and He will remove that because of which you call upon Him, if He will; and you forget that which you did associate with Him
Ere this We sent unto nations before you, and We sent them distress and adversity that per chance (or possibly) they might humble themselves
If only, when Our violence falls upon them, they had been humble, but their heart was hard, and Satan made seemly to them all that they used to do
And when they forgot what they were reminded of, We opened for them the gates of all things, until when they rejoiced at what they had, We caught them up suddenly (or unawares, unexpectedly), and Lo! They were plunged into despair
And the uttermost part of the people who did wrong were cut off. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds
Say, "Think you! If Allah should remove your hearing and your sight, and should set a seal upon your heart, who is god but Allah to restore it to you?" See how We expound the revelations unto them! Yet still they turn away
Say, "Think! If Allah´s punishment should come to you unawares or openly (expectedly), would any perish save the people who do wrong
We do not send our messengers save as heralds of glad tidings and of warning, and whoever believes and acts aright, there is no fear for them, and they shall not be grieved
But those who deny Our signs, torment shall afflict them, because they used to disobey
Say (O Muhammad), "I do not say unto you that mine are the treasuries of Allah, nor that I know the unseen, and I do not say unto you, I am an angel. I follow only that which is inspired in me." Say, "Is the blind man equal to him who sees
Admonish therewith those who fear that they shall be gathered unto their Lord; there is no patron for them but Him, and no intercessor, that per chance (or possibly) they may fear (avoid evil)
Repel not those who call upon their Lord in the morning and in the evening, seeking His Countenance (Face, Presence); they are not accountable to you in anything, and you are not accountable to them in anything. Repel them and you will be of the unjust
Thus did We try some of them by (or in comparison with) others, that they may say, "Are these those unto whom Allah has been gracious amongst us?" Does not Allah know those who give thanks
And when those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say, "Peace be on you! Allah hath prescribed for Himself mercy; verily, he among you who does evil in ignorance, and then repents and does right, verily, He is Forgiving and Merciful
Thus do We expound Our revelations, that the way of the sinners may be made plain
Say, "I am forbidden to worship those you call upon anything beside Allah." Say, "I will not follow your lusts (desires, prejudices, fantasies), for then would I err and not be of the rightly guided
Say, "I rely on a manifestation (proofs) from my Lord, which you deny. I have not with me that for which you are impatient. The decision is a matter for Allah alone, He declares the Truth and He is the best of Judges
Say, "If I had that for which you are impatient, then the matter between you and me would have been settled immediately. But Allah is best aware of the wrong-doers
With Him are the keys (and treasures) of the unseen. None knows them save He; He knows what is in the land and in the sea; and there falls not a leaf save that He knows it; nor a grain in the darkness of the earth, nor aught that is moist, nor aught that
He it is who gathers you to Himself at night, and knows what you have committed in the day; then He raises you up again, that your appointed time may be fulfiled; in the end unto Him is your return, and then will He inform you of the truth of what you hav
He is omnipotent over His servants; He sets guardians over you until, when death comes to any one of you, Our messengers receive him and they never fail their duty
Then are they returned to Allah, their true and just Sovereign. Is not His the judgment (or rule)? But He is the most swift at reckoning
Say, "Who rescues you from the darkness of the land and of the sea?" You call upon Him in humility and in secret, saying "Indeed, if He would rescue us from this, we will surely be of the thankful
Say, "Allah rescues from the darkness, and from every affliction, yet you associate others with Him
Say, "He is able to send calamities on you from above you and from beneath your feet, and to confuse you with dissenting sects, and to make you taste the violence of each other." See how We explain the Signs, in various ways that per chance (or)
Your people called it a lie, and yet it is the truth. Say, "I have not been put in charge over you
For every Announcement (Message, prophecy) there is a set term, and you will soon come to know it
When you see those who plunge deeply into vain discussion of Our Signs (revelations), turn away from them until they discuss another topic. It may be that Satan makes you forget, but sit not, after you have remembered, with the congregation of the faithle
Those who fear (or avoid evil, the righteous) are not accountable for them at all, but remind them (or give them the Reminder, i.e. the teachings of the Quran) that per chance (or possibly) they may learn to fear (Allah)
Leave alone (forsake, abandon) those who have taken their religion for a play (pastime) and a sport (jest, amusement), whom the life of the world has deceived, and remind them hereby lest a soul be destroyed by what it has earned. It has, beside Allah, no
Say, "Shall we call, instead of unto Allah, unto that which neither profits us nor harms us, and be thrown back upon our heels after Allah has guided us - like him whom Satan hath led away infatuated and bewildered in the earth, who has companions wh
And to be steadfast in prayer and to fear Him (avoiding evil), for He it is to whom we shall be gathered
He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth in truth; and on the day when He says, "BE", it is. His word is Truth; and His is the Kingdom on the day when the trumpets shall be blown, the Knower of the unseen and of the evident; He is the
Lo! Abraham said to his father Azar, "Do you take idols for gods? Verily, I see you and your people in obvious error
Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of heaven and of the earth, that he should be of those who possess certainty
And when the night overshadowed him he saw a star and said, "This is my Lord;" but when it set he said, "I love not those that set
And when he saw the moon beginning to rise he said, "This is my Lord;" but when it set he said, "If Allah my Lord guides me not I shall surely be of the people who err
And when he saw the sun beginning to rise he said, "This is my Lord, this is the greatest of all;" But when it set he said, "O my people! Verily, I am clear of what you associate with Allah
Verily, I have turned my face to Him who originated the heaven and the earth, as a ´Hanif´ (as one who is by nature upright), and I am not of the idolaters
And his people disputed with him. He said, "Do you dispute with me concerning Allah, when He has guided me? But I fear not what you associate with Him; unless my Lord should wish it (nothing can happen). My Lord does comprehend all things in His know
How should I fear that which you associate with Him, when you yourselves fear not to associate with Allah that for which you have no warrant (proof or power to do)? Which then of us two parties is worthier of certainty (of belief), tell me if you know?&qu
It is those who believe and confuse not their faith with wrong, they are those who shall have security, and they are the rightly guided
These are our arguments which We gave to Abraham against his people. We raise whom We will by degrees of wisdom. Verily, your Lord is wise and Aware
And We gave to him Isaac and Jacob, each did We guide - And before him We guided Noah - and among his seed, David and Solomon and Job, Joseph, Moses and Aaron, - for thus do We reward those who do good
And Zachariah and John and Jesus and Elias, all righteous ones
And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonas and Lot, each one have We preferred above all creatures
With some of their forefathers and their offsprings and their brethren; We have chosen them and guided them into the Straight Way
Such is the Guidance of Allah wherewith He guides those whom He will of His servants; and if they associate (for worship) anything with Him, their works would have been in vain
It is to these We gave the Book and the Judgment and Prophethood. But if they disbelieve therein, then, indeed, We shall entrust it to a people who will not disbelieve. (See Matthew 8:11-12, Galatians)
It is these that Allah hath guided, and by their guidance be you led. Say (O Muhammad), "I ask of you no fee for it. Lo! It is naught save a reminder to the worlds
They estimate not the power of Allah by its true measure (or worth) when they say, "Allah has never revealed anything to a mortal." Say, "Who revealed the Book wherewith Moses came, a light and a guidance unto men? You put it on papers whic
This is the Book which We have revealed, bringing blessing and confirming those which came before it, and to warn the Mother of Cities (Mecca) and those around her. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe therein, and they are steadfast in their worshi
Who is more wicked than he who devises against Allah a lie, or says, "I am inspired," when he has received none at all? And who says, "I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed"? But did you see when the unjust are in the floods
And you come now alone as We created you at first, and you have left behind you that which We granted you; and We see not with you your intercessors whom you pretended were your partners amongst you; so between you have all ties been cut asunder; and that
Verily, Allah it is who splits the grain and the date-stone (for sprouting); He brings forth the living from the dead, and it is He who brings the dead from the living. Such is Allah! How then can you be deluded
He it is who cleaves out the morning, and makes night a repose, and the sun and the moon two reckonings (of Time). That is the decree of the Mighty, the Wise
He it is who made for you stars that you might be guided thereby in the darkness of the land and of the sea. Now have We detailed the signs unto a people who have knowledge
He it is who made you spring from one soul, and gave you a settlement and a depository (or a temporary and a permanent residence). Now have We detailed the signs unto a people who have discerning
He it is who sends down rain from the heavens; and We bring forth therewith growths of all kinds; and We bring forth there from green crops, from which We bring forth grain in full ear; and the palm, from its sheathes come clusters of dates within reach
Yet they made the Jinn equal with Allah, though He did create them! And they ascribed to Him sons and daughters, though they have no knowledge; Glory and all Praise be to Him! Exalted is He above what they attribute to Him
The Originator of the heavens and the earth! How can He have a son, when He has no female companion, and when He has created everything, and He is Aware of all things
That is Allah - your Lord! There is no Allah but He, the Creator of all things; so worship Him, for He takes care of all things
Vision comprehends Him not, but He comprehends all vision, for He is the Subtle, the Aware
Now has insight (or proof) come unto you from your Lord, and he who sees therewith it is for his own good; but he who is blind thereto, it is against his own soul. And I am not your keeper
Thus do We expound Our Signs in various ways, that they may say, "You have studied," and that We may make clear to those who have knowledge
Follow what is inspired in you from your Lord; there is no god but He, and shun the idolaters
But had Allah pleased, they would not have associated aught with Him. We have not made you a keeper over them, nor are you for them a warder (or responsible for them)
Revile (or abuse) not those who call on other than Allah, for then they may abuse Allah openly in their ignorance. Thus We make seemly to every nation their deeds. But unto their Lord is their return, and He will inform them of the truth of what they used
They swore by Allah with their strongest oaths, that if there come to them a Sign they will indeed believe therein. Say, ´Signs are only in Allah´s hands - but understand that even when one has come, they will not believe (or understanding is)
We confound their heart and their eyesight, even as they believed not at first, We will leave them, in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
And had We sent down unto them angels, or the dead had spoken to them, or We had gathered together the hosts before their very eyes, they would not have believed unless Allah so willed - but most of them are ignorant
So have We appointed for every Prophet an enemy - devils of men and Jinns; who inspire each other with seductive, deceptive speech which leads astray; but had your Lord willed they would not have done so. So leave them with what they do devise
And let the heart of those who believe not in the Hereafter listen to it; and let them be well pleased with it; and let them gain what they can gain
Shall I seek for Judge other than Allah, when it is He who has sent down to you this Book in detail? Those to whom We gave the Book know that it is sent down from your Lord, in truth. So, be not you of those who doubt
The words of your Lord are perfected (or fulfiled) in truth and justice. There is none to change His words, for He is Hearer and Knower
But if you follow most of those who are in the land, they will lead you astray from the Way of Allah. They follow naught but opinion (conjecture or suspicion) and they only guess
Your Lord, He knows best who errs from His path, and He knows best the rightly guided
Consume then of that over which Allah´s name has been pronounced, if you believe in His signs (or revelations)
Why should you not eat from that over which Allah´s name has been pronounced, when He has detailed unto you what is unlawful for you, unless you are compelled (or under necessity). But, verily, many are lead astray (or will lead you astray) by their
Forsake the outer and inner (and the open and secret) sin, verily, those who earn sin shall be recompensed for what they have earned
But consume not of that over which the name of Allah has not been pronounced, for, verily, it is an abomination. Verily, the devils inspire their friends to dispute with you. But if you obey them, then you will be, indeed, idolaters
Is he who was dead and We have quickened (given him life) him, and made for him a light, wherein walks amongst men, like him whose likeness is one walking in utter darkness whence he cannot emerge? Thus is their conduct made seemly to the disbelievers
And thus have We placed great ones (leaders) in every town, its wicked ones, that they may plot therein. But they do but plot against themselves, though they perceive not
And when there comes to them a Sign, they say, "We will not believe until we receive something like the Messenger received." Allah knows best where to put His Message. There shall befall these wicked ones, humiliation in Allah´s eyes, and
Whomever Allah wishes to guide, He expands His breast unto the Surrender (Islam); but whomever He wishes to lead astray, He tightens and constricts his breast as though he were climbing steeply into heaven. Thus does Allah set dishonour on those who do no
This is the way of your Lord, a Straight Way. We have detailed the revelations unto a mindful people
For them is an abode of peace with their Lord. He will be their patron because of what they used to do
One day He shall gather them all together, (and say) "O assembly of Jinns! You have taken much toll of (seduced, exploited) mankind." And their clients from among mankind shall say, "Our Lord! Much advantage had we one from another, but now
Thus do We make some of the wrongdoers patrons of one another, because of what they earn
O assembly of jinn and men! Did there not come to you Messengers of your own (or from amongst you), relating to you Our Signs, and warning you of the meeting of this Day? They will say, "We bear witness against ourselves." The life of this world
That is because your Lord would never destroy a township arbitrarily, while their people are unaware (of what is wrong)
There are ranks (levels, degrees) according to their deeds; and your Lord is not unaware of that which they do
your Lord is Absolute, Merciful; if He pleases He can remove you and can cause what He will to succeed you, even as He raised you up from the seed of other people
Verily, what you are promised will surely come to pass, nor can you frustrate it
Say (O Muhammad), "O my people! Work according to your power, verily, I, too, am working; and soon shall you come to know whose is the happy outcome in the Hereafter!" Certainly, the unjust shall not prosper
They set apart a portion for Allah, from that which He raises in abundance, of tilth and of cattle, and they say, according to their fancies "This is for Allah and this is for (His) partner." But the share of their "partners" reaches n
Even so, have their "partners" made seemly to many of the Pagans (idolaters), the killing of their children, leading them to their own destruction, and to the obscuration for them of their religion. If Allah willed they would not have done so. B
And they say, " Such and such cattle and crops are inviolable; none shall taste thereof, save such as we please." - So they say - "And there are cattle whose backs are forbidden to burden (or yoke), and cattle over whom Allah´s name i
And they say, "What is in the wombs of these cattle is reserved for men and unlawful for our women, but if it be still born, then all may have shares in it." He will reward them for their superstitious attributions; verily, He is Wise and Aware
Losers are they who slay their children, from folly, without knowledge, and who forbid what Allah has bestowed upon them, inventing lies against Allah. They have, indeed erred and heeded not guidance
He it is who brought forth gardens with trailing and untrailing vines, and the palms and corn land, with various food, and olives, and pomegranates, alike and unlike. Eat from the fruit thereof whenever it fruits, and bring the dues thereof on the harvest
And cattle (He produces) some to carry burdens and some to eat. Eat of what Allah has bestowed upon you, and follow not the footsteps of Satan; verily, he is to you an open foe
Eight pairs - of sheep two, and of goats two; say, "Hath He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Inform me with knowledge if you tell the truth
And of camels two, and cows two; say, "Are the two males unlawful, or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Were you witnesses when Allah ordained this for you? - Then who is more unjust than he who devises a lie against Alla
Say, "I cannot find, in what I am inspired with, anything unlawful for the eater to eat thereof, except it be carrion, or shed blood, or the flesh of swine - for that is foul - or an abomination that is consecrated to other than Allah. But he who is
To those who were Jews did We prohibit everything that hath a solid (undivided) hoof; and of oxen and sheep did We prohibit to them the fat, save what the backs of both do bear, or their entrails, or what is mixed with bone; this in recompense for their r
And if they give you the lie, say, "your Lord is of all-embracing Mercy, but His Wrath shall never be withdrawn from the guilty
Those who associate partners with Allah will say, "Had Allah pleased, we would not associated partners (with Him), nor our fathers; nor should we have forbidden aught." Thus did they give the lie to those who came before them, until they tasted
Say, "Allah´s is the final (searching, conclusive, decisive) argument; and had He pleased He would have guided you all
Say, "Bring forward your witnesses to prove that Allah has forbidden these!" But if they do bring such witnesses, bear you not witness with them; nor follow the vain desires of those who say Our Signs (revelations) are lies, and those who believ
Say, "Come! I will recite what your Lord has made a sacred duty for you - that you may ascribe no partner unto Him; that you do good to your parents; and that you slay not your children because of poverty, for We will provide for you and them; and th
And draw not nigh unto the property of the orphan, except to improve it, until he reaches full age; and give weight and measure with justice - We place not a greater burden on the soul than he can bear - and when you speak (or give your word), then speak
Verily, this is My Straight Way; so follow it. Follow not other ways, lest you part yourselves from His way. This is what He has ordained for you, per chance (or possibly) you may fear (and avoid evil)
Moreover, We gave Moses the Book, completing for him who would do right, and an explanation and a guidance and a mercy, that per chance (or possibly) they might believe in the meeting with their Lord
And this is the Book which We have revealed as a blessing; so follow it and fear (be righteous) that per chance (or possibly) you may obtain mercy
Lest you say, "The Book (Scripture) was only sent down to two sects before us; verily, we care naught for (or are unaware of) what they read
Or, lest you should say, "Had we had a Book (Scripture) revealed to us we should surely have been more guided than they;" But now there is come to them a manifest sign from their Lord, and a guidance and a mercy; who then is more unjust (does greater wrong) than he who denies the Signs (revelations) of Allah, and turns away from them? We will reward those who turn from our Signs with a severe punishment because of their turning
Do they wait, expecting that the angels should come for them, or that your Lord (Himself) should come, or that one of the Signs of your Lord should come? On the day when the Sign does come, its faith shall profit no soul which did not believe before, nor
Verily, those who divided their religion and became sectarians, you have no concern with them. Their affair is in the hands of Allah, He will then inform them of that which they used to do
He who brings a good work shall receive tenfold the like thereof, but he who brings a bad work shall be recompensed only with the like thereof, for they shall not be wronged
Say, "As for me, my Lord has guided me unto the Straight Way, a right religion, the faith of Abraham, the upright, for he was not of the idolaters
Say, "Verily, my worship and my sacrifice, and my living and my dying belong to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
He has no partner. This I am commanded, and I am foremost of those who surrender (unto Him)
Say, "Shall I crave for other than Allah for Lord, when He is Lord of all?" But each soul earns only on its own account, nor does any laden soul bear the burden of another. Then unto your Lord is your return, and He will inform you concerning th
He it is who made you Vicegerents (Agents, Successors, Inheritors) of the earth, and raised some of you above others in degree (or rank, virtue, power, wealth, ability etc.), to try you by that which he has given you; Verily, your Lord is swift to punish
ALIF LAM MIM SAD
This is a Book revealed to you (O Muhammad) - so let there be no heaviness in your breast, that you may warn the erring thereby, and remind the believers
Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord, and follow not beside Him other patrons; little is it that you remember (of admonition)
Yet how many a town have We destroyed, and Our wrath came upon it by night, or while they slept at noon
And their cry, when Our wrath came upon them, was only to say, "Verily, we were unjust (wrongdoers)
But We will certainly question those to whom the Message was sent and those by whom We sent it
Then We will narrate to them with knowledge, for We were never absent
The balance on that day is true, and those whose scales are heavy, they are the successful
But those whose scales are light, they it is who lose their souls, for that they did act unjustly by Our Signs (revelations, creatures)
We have given you power (authority) in the earth, and provided for you therein the means of self-fulfilment (livelihood, opportunities, resources, faculties); little thanks give ye
It is We who created you, and then gave you Form (shape), then We said unto the angels, "Prostrate yourselves before Adam (do him obeisance)," and they fell prostrate, except Iblis, who was not of those who make prostration (or have humility)
He (Allah) said, "What hinders you from prostration when I command you?" He (Iblis) said, "I am better than he; you have created me from Fire, and him you have created out of Clay
Said He, "Then get you down from this (situation); what ails you that you should be arrogant here? Go forth! Verily, you are of the meanest (the degraded)
He (Iblis) said, "Respite me until the day when they shall be raised
He (Allah) said, "Verily, you are of those given respite
He (Iblis) said, "For that Thou hast led me into error, I will lie in wait for them (ambush them) in Thy Straight Way
Then I will surely come to them, from before them and from behind them; and most of them you shall not find thankful
He said, "Go forth here from, despised, expelled. Whoever follows you, I will surely fill hell with you all
But, O Adam, dwell you and your wife in Paradise and eat from whence you will, but draw not nigh unto this Tree or you will be of the unjust (transgressors)
Then Satan whispered to them (planted suggestions in their minds) to display to them what was kept back from them of their shame (they felt shame or guilt for the first time), and he said, "your Lord has only forbidden you this tree lest you should b
And he swore to them both, "Verily, I am unto you a sincere adviser
And so he beguiled them by deceit. And when the twain had tasted of the Tree, their shame was manifested unto them, and they began to sew upon themselves the leaves of the Garden (to hide their shame, nakedness. rebelliousness or sinfulness) And their Lor
They said, "O our Lord! We have wronged our own souls - and if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we shall surely be of those who are lost
He said, "Go you down, each one of you an enemy to the other. In the earth will be your abode, and a provision for a season
He said, "Therein shall you live and therein shall you die, from it shall you be brought forth at last
O children of Adam! We have revealed to you garments wherewith to cover your shame, and adornments (ornaments, embellishments, enhancements); but the garment of righteousness (restraint from evil), that is best. That is one of the Signs of Allah, per chan
O children of Adam! Let not Satan infatuate you as he drove your parents out of Paradise, stripping from them their garments, and exposing for them their shame; verily, he watches you, he and his tribe, from whence you cannot see them. Verily, We have mad
And when they commit an abomination (shameful things) they say, "We found our fathers at this, and Allah bade us do it." Say, " Nay, Allah bids you not to do abominations (shameful things); do you say against Allah that which you know not
Say, "My Lord commands only justice: - set your faces steadfastly at every place of worship and call upon Him, making religion (or your way of life) pure for Him only. As He brought you forth in the beginning, so shall you return unto Him
A section is led by His guidance, while error has just hold on another, for, verily, they did take the devils for their patrons instead of Allah, and deemed that they were guided
O children of Adam! Take your adornments (clothes, grooming, manners, etiquette etc.) to every place of worship and eat and drink, but do not be extravagant (wasteful), for He loves not the extravagant (wasteful)
Say, "Who has prohibited the beautiful adornments (gifts) of Allah which He brought forth for His servants, and the good things He has provided?" Say, "On the Day (of Resurrection and Judgment) they shall only be for those who believed when
Say, "My Lord has only forbidden abominable (shameful) deeds, the apparent and the concealed, and sin (errors), and greed for that which is not right (trespasses against truth and reason), and associating with Allah that for (or to) which He has give
Every nation (or community) has its appointed term, and when their appointed term is completed they cannot delay it an hour, nor can they advance it
O children of Adam! Verily, there will come to you Messengers from amongst you, narrating unto you My Signs; then whoever fears Allah (refrains from evil) and does what is right (makes amends), there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve
But those who reject Our Signs, and who are arrogant, these are the Fellows of the Fire, they shall dwell therein
Who is more unjust than he who devises a lie against Allah, and scorns His Signs (or revelations)? For such, their portion of the Book (of Destiny) shall reach them, until, when Our Messengers come to take their souls away, and say, "Where is now wha
He will say, "Enter you the Fire amongst the nations (communities) who have passed away before you - both of jinn and men." Whenever a nation (community) enters therein, it curses its sister (nation, community); until, when they have followed ea
Then the first will say to the last, "You have no preference (advantage) over us (or were no better than us), so taste you the penalty for that which you have earned
Verily, those who deny and scorn Our Signs in arrogance, for these the doors of heaven shall not be opened, nor shall they enter into the Garden, until a camel can pass through the eye of a needle. Such is Our reward for the guilty. (Compare with MatthewM)
For them is Hell, as a couch below them and coverings above them! Thus do We reward the unjust
But those who believe and do what is right - We will not oblige a soul with more than it´s capacity - they are the companions of the Garden; they shall dwell therein
We will strip away what rancour (ill feeling) is in their breasts. There shall flow beneath them Rivers, and they shall say, "Praise belongs to Allah who guided us to this! For we should not have been led aright had not Allah guided us! Verily, the M
And the Companions of the Garden will call out to the Companions of the Fire, "We have now found that what our Lord promised us is true; have you also found that what your Lord promised you is true?" They will say, "Yea!" And a crier f
Who turn (or hinder) from the way of Allah and crave to make it crooked, and disbelieved in the Last Day (or the Hereafter)
And betwixt the two (Hell and Paradise) there is a veil, and on the Heights are men (exalted or able men) who know each by their marks; and they greet the companions of the Garden, "Peace be upon you!" They enter it not though they hope (or desi)
But when their sight is turned towards the Companions of the Fire, they say, "Our Lord! Place us not with the unjust people
And the Companions of the Height will call out to the men whom they know by their marks, and say, "Of what profit to you were your hoarding (of wealth), and what you were so arrogant about
Behold, are these others not those of whom you swore, that Allah would not extend mercy? But it is said to them "Enter you Paradise; there is no fear for you, nor shall you be grieved
But the Companions of the Fire cry out to the Companions of the Garden, "Pour out upon us water, or something of what Allah has provided you with (for sustenance, benefit or comfort)." They will say, "Allah has forbidden them both to those
Such who took their religion for an amusement, sport and a pastime; who were beguiled by the life of the world." This day have We forget them as they forgot the meeting of this Day, and because they did deny Our Signs
Now We have brought them a Book explaining it with knowledge, a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe
Do they just wait now for its fulfilment (or interpretation)? On the day when its fulfilment shall come, those who forgot it before will say, "Indeed, there did come to us the Messenger of our Lord in truth. Have we no intercessors now to intercede f
Verily, your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days; then mounted He the Throne (of Authority and Power). He covers night with the day - it pursues it incessantly- and the sun and the moon and the stars are subject to His command
Call on your Lord humbly and secretly, verily, He loves not the aggressors (the arrogant, the transgressors)
Work not confusion (chaos, mischief or evil) in the earth after it has been rightly ordered, and call upon Him with fear and hope (longing and earnestness); for, verily, the mercy of Allah is nigh unto those who do well
He it is who sends forth the winds like tidings heralding His mercy; until when they lift the heavy cloud which We drive to a dead land, and send down thereon water, and, thereby, bring forth every kind of fruit; - Thus do We bring forth the dead; per cha
And the good land brings forth its vegetation by the permission of its Lord; and that which is vile brings forth naught but sparsity (bad with little good). Thus do We expound Our signs for a people who are grateful
We did send Noah unto his people, and he said, "O my people I serve Allah; you have no God but Him; verily, I fear for you the torment of the mighty (awful) Day
Said the chiefs of his people, "Verily, we do surely see you in obvious error
Said he, "O my people! There is no error in me; but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
I convey to you the messages of my Lord, and I give you sincere advice; and I know from Allah what you know not
Marvel you that there should come unto you a Reminder from your Lord by a man from amongst you, to warn you, that you may fear evil, and that per chance (or possibly) you may receive mercy
But they called him a liar, and We rescued him and those who were with him in the ark; and We drowned those who denied Our Signs. Verily, they were a blind people
And unto the people of Ad (we sent) their brother Hud, who said, "O my people! Serve Allah; you have no God save Him; What! Will you not then fear evil
The chiefs of his people, who disbelieved, said, "Verily, we see you in folly, and, verily, we certainly think you are of the liars
He said, "O my people! There is no folly in me; but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
I convey to you the messages of your Lord; and, verily, I am to you a faithful adviser
Marvel you then that there comes to you a Reminder from your Lord by a man from amongst you, to warn you? Remember when He made you vicegerents (or inheritors) after Noah´s people, and gave you growth of stature (prosperity, honour, excellence). Rem
They said, "Have you come to us that we may serve Allah alone, and forsake what our fathers used to worship? Then bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are truthful
He said, "Already have fallen upon you from your Lord terror and wrath; do you wrangle with me about names, which you and your fathers have named yourselves, for which Allah sent down no warrant. Then wait expectant, lo! I, too, am of those waiting w
But We rescued him and those with him, by Our Mercy, and We cut off the roots of those who rejected Our signs and did not believe
Unto the people of Thamud We sent Salih, one of their own brethren. He said, "O my people! Serve (or worship) Allah; you have no God but Him. There has come to you a manifest Sign from your Lord. This is Allah´s she-camel, a sign (or test) unto
And remember how he made you vicegerents (agents, inheritors) after Ad and established you in the earth so that you took for yourselves castles on its plains and hewed out mountains into houses. So remember the bounties of Allah, and waste not the land, d
The chiefs from amongst his people, those who were inflated with pride, said to those whom they despised, those amongst them who believed, "Know you that Salih is sent from his Lord?" They said, "We do believe in that with which he is sent
The arrogant scornfully said, "Verily, we disbelieve in what you believe
Then they did hamstring the she-camel, and rebelled against the commandment of their Lord and said, "O Salih! Bring upon us what you did threaten us with, if you are of those who are sent
Then the earthquake seized them, and in the morning they lay prone in their dwellings
And Salih turned away from them and said, "O my people! I did deliver unto you the message of my Lord, and I gave you good advice; but you love not sincere advisers
And (remember) Lot, when he said to his people, "Do you approach an abomination which no creature ever did before you
Verily, you approach men with lust instead of women. Nay, you are a people who far exceed the bounds
But his people´s answer was only to say, "Turn them out of your communities. Verily, they are a people who strive to purity
But We saved him and his people, except his wife, who was of those who lagged behind
And We rained down upon them a shower (of brimstone); - see then the nature of the consequences for sinners
And unto Median did We send their brother Shu´eyb (Jethro?), who said, "O my people! Serve Allah; you have no God save Him. There has come to you a manifest Sign from your Lord. So give good weight and full measure, and be not niggardly of your
And lurk not in every path, threatening (and corrupting) and hindering from the path of Allah those who believe in Him, craving to make it crooked. Remember when you were few (small or weak) and He multiplied (increased, strengthened) you; and see w
And if there be a party of you who believe in what I am sent with, and a party who believe not, then wait patiently until Allah judges between us, for He is the best of Judges
The chieftains of his people, inflated with arrogance said, "We will of a surety turn you out, O Shu´heyb, and those who believe with you, from our communities, unless you return unto our faith." Said he, "What! Even if we be averse t
We shall have devised a lie against Allah if we return unto your faith, after Allah has saved us from it; and what should ail us that we should return thereto, unless that Allah our Lord should please? Our Lord is All-comprehending in His knowledge
But the chiefs of those who disbelieved amongst his people said, "If you follow Shu´eyb, verily, you shall be the losers
So the earthquake seized them, and in the morning they lay prone in their dwellings
Those who denied Shu´eyb, became as though they had not dwelt there! - Those who had denied Shu´eyb, they were the losers
And he turned away from them and said, "O my people! I delivered unto you the messages of my Lord, and I gave you good advice; how should I be vexed for a people who disbelieve
We have not sent unto a community any prophet but We inflicted the people thereof with tribulation (suffering, distress) and adversity, that per chance (or possibly) they might humble themselves
And then did We exchanged good for evil (suffering for prosperity), until they grew (in strength and prosperity) and said, "Our fathers, too, were touched by both suffering and joy." Then We overtook them suddenly ere they realized their peril
Had the people of the town but believed and feared, We would have opened up for them blessings from the heavens and from the earth; but they said it was a lie, so We overcame them for that which they had earned
Were, then, the people of these cities secure that Our Wrath would not come on them by night, while they slept
Were the people of these cities secure that Our Wrath would not come on them in the morning whilst they played carefree
Were they secure from the Plan of Allah? None deems himself secure from the Plan of Allah except a people that are doomed to perish
Is it not a guidance (lesson) shown to those who inherit the earth after its (former) people, that, did We please, We would smite them in their sins, and would set a stamp upon their heart that they should not hear
Such were these cities. We do relate to you their stories. There came to them Our Messengers with manifest Signs; but they would not believe because of what they had rejected before. Thus does Allah seal up their heart of those who disbelieve
Nor did We find most of them true to their covenant; but We did find most of them workers of abomination
Then We raised up after them Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs; but they dealt unjustly with them. So see what was the consequence for these evildoers (corrupters, mischief-makers)
Moses said, "O Pharaoh! Verily, I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
One, for whom it is not right to speak against Allah aught but the truth. I have come to you with a manifest sign from my Lord. Send, then, the children of Israel with me
Said he (Pharaoh), "If you have come with a Sign, then bring it, if you are truthful
Then he (Moses) threw his rod down, and lo! It was a manifest serpent
And he drew out his hand, and lo! It was white to the beholders
Said the chiefs of Pharaoh´s people, "Verily, this is surely a knowing (expert) magician
He desires to turn you out of your land. What is it, then, your advise
They said, "Delay him and his brother, and send summoners into the cities
To bring unto you every knowing (expert) magician
And the magician came to Pharaoh and said, "Is there, indeed, a reward for us if we are victors
He answered, "Yea! And you shall be of those who are brought nigh unto me (given high posts, ranks or honour)
They said, "O Moses! Will you cast down (your rod) or shall we be (first) to throw
Said he, "Throw first". And when they threw down their rods, they bewitched (hypnotized) the people´s eyes, and struck terror into them, for they did a mighty magic
But We inspired Moses (saying), "Throw down your rod." and it swallowed up their lying show
And the truth stood fast, and vain was that which they had done
Thus were they vanquished there, and turned back humiliated
And the magicians threw themselves down in prostration
Said they, "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
Said Pharaoh, "Do you believe in him ere I give you permission? This is a plot which you have devised in the land, to drive its people hence. But soon shall you know (the consequences)
I will cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, then I will crucify you every one
They said, "Verily, we return unto our Lord
Do you take vengeance on us because we believe in the signs of our Lord, when they come to us. Our Lord! Pour out upon us patience and constancy, and take us to Thyself as men who have surrendered (become Muslims)
And the chiefs of Pharaoh´s people said, "(O King) Will you leave Moses and his people to do mischief in the land, and to flout you and your gods?" Said he, "We will have their sons slain and their women we will spare, for, verily, we
Moses said unto his people, "Seek help from Allah and have endurance. Verily, the earth is Allah´s! He gives it for an inheritance to whom He pleases of His servants, and the future is for those who fear (keep their duty and are righteous).&quo
They said, "We suffered before you did come to us, and also since you have come to us." Said he, "It may be that your Lord will destroy your foe, and will make you vicegerents (inheritors, successors) in the earth, that He may see how you b
We punished Pharaoh´s people with the years (of drought) and scarcity of fruit or crops), that per chance (or possibly) they might remember
But whenever good (times) came to them they said, "This is due to our effort." And if evil befell them, they ascribed it to the evil influences of Moses and those with him. Surely, the evil influence is only in the hands of Allah. But most of th
And they said, "Whatever Sign you bring to enchant us, we will not put faith in you
So We sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the vermin and the frogs and the blood, - a succession of clear Signs. But they were inflated with arrogance, a guilty people
And when there fell upon them the plague, they said, "O Moses! Call upon your Lord for us, as He has covenanted with you. Verily, if you do remove the plague from us, we will put our trust in you; and we will assuredly let the children of Israel go w
But when We removed the penalty from them, according to an appointed term which they had to fulfil, lo! then they broke their promise
But We took retribution from them, and We drowned them in the sea because they rejected Our Signs, and were careless thereof
And We gave unto a people, despised and weak, an inheritance, lands in both east and west, lands which We had blessed. And the good promise of your Lord was fulfiled on the children of Israel, because they were patient and constant. And We utterly destroy
And We passed the children of Israel safely across the sea. They came upon a people devoted to their idols, and said, "O Moses! Make for us a god as the gods they have." Said he, "Verily, you are ignorant people
Verily, these people- destroyed shall be their way, and vain is that which they are doing
He said, "Shall I seek for you a god other than Allah, when He has preferred you above all creatures
And (remember) when We saved you from Pharaoh´s people who wrought you evil woe, slaying your sons, and sparing your women. In that was a mighty trial from your Lord
And We appointed for Moses thirty nights (of solitude), and added ten (more), and he completed the time appointed by his Lord for forty nights. And Moses said unto his brother Aaron, "Act for me amongst my people, and do what is right, and follow not
And when Moses came to Our appointment, and his Lord spoke unto him, he said, "O my Lord! Show me Thyself, that I may look on Thee!" Allah said, "Thou canst not see Me; but look upon the mountain. If it remains steady in its place, you have
He said, "O Moses! Verily, I have chosen you over the people with My messages and My words. Take then what I have brought you, and be of the thankful
And We wrote for him upon Tablets, admonitions, commanding and explaining everything, and said, "Hold fast to them, and bid your people take the best course, made clear therein. I will show you the abode of those who work abominations
I will turn from My revelations those who wrongfully magnify themselves with pride in the earth; and though they see every Sign, they shall not believe therein, and if they see the path of rectitude they shall not take it for their path; but if they see t
But those who deny Our revelations (or Signs) and the meeting of the Hereafter, in vain are their works. Shall they be rewarded save for that which they have done
And the people of Moses, after he had left them, chose (for worship) an image of a lowing calf (or one that seemed to low) made out of their ornaments. Did they not see that it could not speak to them or guide them in the path? They chose it and became wr
But when they bit their hands (in realization and fear) and saw that they had gone astray, they said, "Verily, if our Lord have not compassion on us and forgive us we shall surely be of those who are lost
And when Moses returned unto his people angry and grieved, he said, "Evil is it that which you have done after I had gone! Would you hasten on the judgment of your Lord?". And he threw down the tablets and seized his brother by the (hair on his)
Moses prayed, "O Lord! Forgive my brother and me and let us enter into Thy mercy; for Thou art the most merciful of the merciful
Verily, those who have taken to themselves a calf, there shall reach them wrath from their Lord, and abasement in the life of this world; for thus do we reward those who forge a lie
But those who have done bad works, and then turn again after them and believe - verily, your Lord, thereafter, is Forgiving and Merciful
And when Moses´ wrath calmed down he took up the Tables, in the inscription of which was guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord
And Moses chose from his people seventy men for Our appointment; and when the earthquake took them he prayed, "O my Lord! Had you willed, you could have destroyed both them and me before this. Will Thou destroy us for what the fools amongst us have d
And ordain for us good in this world, and in the Hereafter too; verily, we are guided unto Thee." He said, "With My punishment, I fall on whom I will; but My mercy embraces everything; and I will ordain it for those who do right, and practice ch
Those who follow the Messenger - the unlettered Prophet - whom they find mentioned in their own Law and Gospel. (Deuteronomy18 and Johnbidding them what is just (reasonable) and forbidding them what is wrong (evil, unreasonable, stupid); and making lawful
Say, "O you people! Verily, I am the Messenger of Allah unto you all, of Him whose is the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, there is no God but He! He gives life and death. So believe in Allah and His Messenger, the unlettered (or not learned, un)
Amongst the people of Moses is a section who guide with truth, and thereby act justly
And We divided them into twelve tribes, nation; and We inspired Moses, when his people asked him for water, saying, "Strike the rock with your staff!" and there gushed forth from it twelve springs, so that each tribe knew their drinking place. A
And when it was said unto them, "Dwell in this city and eat there from (enjoy its facilities) as you will, and say "Repentance" and enter the gate prostrate (in humility); so will We forgive you your sins; We will increase (the portion or r)
But those amongst them who did wrong changed the words given them for another saying; and We sent upon them a wrath from heaven for that they were unjust (or transgressed)
Ask them, too, about the city which stood by the sea, how they broke the Sabbath; how on the Sabbath day the fish came straight up to them; but on the days when they kept not the Sabbath, they came not to them. Thus did We try them for the evil that they
And when a community from amongst them said, "Why do you warn a people whom Allah would destroy, or punish with severe torment?" they said, "In order to do our duty to our Lord, that per chance (or possibly) they may fear (evil)
But when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We saved those who forbade evil, and We overtook those who did wrong with grievous punishment because they transgressed
But when they rebelled against what they were forbidden, We said to them, "Become you as apes, despised and spurned
And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed that He would surely raise against them till the Day of Resurrection, those who would lay on them grievous torment. Verily, your Lord is quick in retribution, but verily, He is also Forgiving, Merciful
We broke them up into sections in the earth. Among them are some who are righteous, and among them are those who are the opposite. We have tried them with good things and with bad things, that per chance (or possibly) they may return (to Us)
But after them a generation succeeded them who inherited the Book (Scriptures)! They chose the vanities of this lower world, saying, "Everything will be forgiven us." But if similar vanities came to them again they would seize them too! Was ther
But those who hold fast by the Book and are steadfast in prayer - verily, We will not waste the wages of those who do right
And when We shook the mountain over them, as though it were a covering, and they thought it would fall upon them, We said, "Take you what We have given you with firmness, and remember what is therein; per chance (or possibly) you may fear Allah
And when your Lord drew forth from the children of Adam, out of their loins, their seed (or descendants), and made them testify about themselves, "Am I not your Lord?" They said, "Yea! We do bear witness" - lest you should say on the D
Or say, "Verily, our fathers associated others with Allah before us, and we were but their seed after them. Will you then destroy us for the futile deeds of the doers of futility (or vanities)
Thus do We explain the Signs that per chance (or possibly) they may return (or turn to Us)
Read to them the declaration of him to whom We brought our Signs, and who stepped away there from, and Satan followed him, and he became one of those who lead (tempt or are tempted to go) astray
Had We pleased We would have exalted him thereby (with Our Signs), but he clung to the earth and followed his own lust, and his likeness was as the likeness of a dog, whom if you should attack he hangs out his tongue, or if you should leave him, hangs out
Evil is the likeness of a people who deny Our revelations (or Signs) and wrong their own souls
He whom Allah leads, he indeed is led aright, while he whom Allah sends astray, they are indeed losers
We have created for hell many of the Jinn and of Mankind; they have heart and they discern not therewith; they have eyes and they see not therewith; they have ears and they hear not therewith; they are like cattle, nay, more misguided, for they are heedle
But Allah belong the most beautiful names; call on Him then thereby, and leave those who pervert (profane or blaspheme against) His names. They shall be rewarded for that which they have done
And of those whom We have created is a people who are guided with the truth and establish justice therewith
But they who deny Our revelations We will bring them down by degrees from whence they know not
I give them rein, for verily, my scheme is effective
Do they not then reflect that their companion is not possessed? He is but a perspicuous Warner
Do they not behold the kingdoms of the heavens and of the earth, and what things Allah has created, and (see that), it may well be that their term is already drawing to its end? In what after this then will they believe
He whom Allah leads astray there is no guide for him! He leaves them blindly wandering in their rebellion
They will ask you about the (final) Hour, for what time it is fixed? - Say, "The knowledge thereof is only with my Lord; none shall manifest it at its time but He. Heavy is its burden in the heavens and the earth. It will come to you suddenly and una
Say, "For myself I have no power to benefit, nor power to harm, save what Allah will. Had I knowledge of the Unseen I should surely have multiplied all that is good, and no adversity would touch me; I am but a Warner and a herald of good tidings unto
He it is who created you from a single soul, and made there from its mate to dwell with her (in comfort and love); and when he covered her she bore a light burden, and went about therewith (unnoticed); but when it grew heavy they cried unto Allah, their L
But when He gave them both a well-formed child, they joined partners with Him with respect to that which He had given them. But Allah is exalted above that which they associate with Him
Will they associate with Him those who cannot create aught, but are themselves created
And have no power to help them, nor can even help themselves
But if you call them unto guidance they follow you not. It is all the same to them if you call them or if you hold your tongue
Those whom you call on other than Allah are servants like yourselves. Call on them then, and let them answer you, if you are truthful
Have they feet to walk with? Or have they hands to hold with? Or have they eyes to see with? Or have they ears to hear with? Say, Call upon your (supposed) partners (of Allah); then plot against me, and spare me not
Verily, my patron (or protecting friend) is Allah, who reveals the Book, and He is the Friend of the righteous
But those whom you call on beside Him have no power to help you, nor can they help themselves
But if you call them unto the guidance, they hear not. You will see them looking at you, yet they see not
Hold to forgiveness, and command what is kind, and shun the ignorant
And if an incitement from the devil wound you, then seek refuge in Allah: verily, He is Hearer and Knower
Verily, those who fear Allah, if a temptation (suggestion, whisper) from the devil touches (assaults, troubles) them, they do but remember (or mention) Him, and lo! They see (realise)
And their brethren he shall increase in error, then they shall not desist
If you bring them not a verse (of revelation) they say, "Have you not yet made choice of one? Say, "I only follow what is inspired in me by my Lord. These are lights (perceptions, insights) from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy to a people
And when the Quran is read, then listen thereto with attention, and keep silence, that per chance (or possibly) you may obtain mercy
And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and with awe, below your breath, in the morning and in the evening; and be not of those who are neglectful (or unheedful)
Verily, they who are with your Lord are not too big with pride (arrogant) for His service, but they praise and bow before Him in adoration
They will ask you about the spoils of war. Say, "The spoils belong to Allah and the Messenger, so fear (keep your duty to) Allah and keep straight the relationship amongst yourselves; obey Allah and the Messenger if you do believe
Verily, the believers are those who, when Allah´s name is mentioned, their heart sinks with awe; and when His Signs (revelations) are recited to them they increase them in faith; and in their Lord do they trust
Who are steadfast in worship, and spend of what We have bestowed upon them
These are in truth believers. For them are degrees of honour with their Lord, and forgiveness, and a generous provision
Even as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with the Truth, a sect of the believers were averse to it
They disputed with you about the Truth after it was made plain, as though they were being driven on to visible death
And when Allah promised you that one of the two troops (the army or the caravan) should be your s, and you yearned to have the unarmed one (the caravan). Allah wished to justify Truth by His words, and to cut off the root of the unbelievers
That He might cause Truth to triumph and make Falsehood vain, despite the aversion of the guilty
Remember when you asked for succour from your Lord, and He answered you, "I will assist you with a thousand angels, in many ranks
Allah made it glad tidings only to reassure your heart therewith, for victory comes only from Allah! Verily, Allah is Mighty and Wise
Remember when drowsiness covered you as a reassurance from Him, and He sent down upon you rain from heaven to purify you, to remove from you the plague of Satan, and to make strong your heart and firm your footsteps
Remember when your Lord inspired the angels, saying, "Verily, I am with you; make you firm, then, those who believe; I will cast dread into the heart of the unbelievers; strike off their necks, and strike off their finger tip
This is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger; for he who goes into opposition against Allah and His Messenger, verily, Allah is strict in punishment
Thus (it will be said) "There, taste the punishment, for disbelievers is the torment of the Fire
O you who believe! When you meet the disbelievers in hostile swarms, turn not to them your backs
For he who turns his back that day, save as a stratagem of war, or to retreat to his own troop, brings down upon himself the wrath of Allah, and his resort is Hell, an evil refuge
It is not you who slew them, but it was Allah who slew them; nor was it you who threw (the dust to blind the enemy), but Allah who threw it to test the believers by goodly test from Himself; verily, Allah is Hearer, Knower
That and also because Allah weakens the stratagem of the disbelievers
(O unbelievers!) If you sought a judgment, a decision has now come to you. But if you desist, it will be better for you; but if you return to the attack, We, too will return. And your troop shall avail you nothing, however great in number it be, since All
O you who believe! Obey Allah and His Messenger, and turn not from Him when you hear him speak
Be not like those who say, "We hear," and yet they hear not
Verily, the worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are the deaf, the dumb who understand not
Had Allah known any good in them, He would have made them hear; but had He made them hear, they would have turned away, averse
O you who believe! Respond unto Allah and His Messenger when He calls you to that which quickens you; and know that Allah comes in between a man and his own heart; and that He it is unto Whom you shall be gathered
And fear temptation (or trial, chastisement, oppression, discord, chaos) which falls not exclusively on those of you who have done wrong; but know that Allah is severe in punishment
Remember when you were few in number and weak in the land, fearing lest people should despoil and snatch you away; then He sheltered you and strengthened you with His aid, and provided you with good things, that per chance (or possibly) you may give thank
O you who believe! Be not treacherous to Allah and His Messenger; nor knowingly betray your trusts (obligations, duties, responsibilities in respect of wealth, property, confidences, knowledge, talents, time, opportunities, circumstances, power, social po)
Know that your wealth and your children are but a test, and that with Allah is the highest wage
O you who believe! If you fear (does your duty to) Allah He will give you discrimination (or a Criterion) and will rid you of your evil thoughts and deeds, and will forgive you; for Allah is Lord of Infinite Bounty
And when those who disbelieved plotted against you to detain you in bonds, or slay you, or drive you forth - they plotted, but Allah also plotted, for Allah is best of Plotters
But when Our verses were recited to them they said, "We have already heard. If We pleased We could speak like this; verily, this is nothing but tales of ancient folk
When they said, "O Allah! If this be indeed truth from Thee, then rain down upon us stones from heaven or bring us grievous doom
But Allah would not torment them while you were amongst them; nor will He punish them while they seek forgiveness
But what plea have they that Allah should not punish them when they turn folk away from the Sacred Mosque (The Kaaba), though they are not its fitting guardians? Its fitting guardians are only the righteous (those who keep their duty to Allah), but most o
Their prayer at the House was naught but whistling and hand clapping! Therefore, (it is said to them) Taste of the doom because you disbelieved
Verily, those who disbelieve spend their wealth to turn folk away from the path of Allah; but they shall spend it, and then it shall become sighing (regret) for them, and then they shall be overcome. Those who disbelieve shall be gathered into hell
That Allah may separate the vile from the good, and may stack the vile on top of each others, and heap them together in hell! Such are the losers
Tell those who disbelieve, that if they desist they will be forgiven what is past; but if they return (to evil ways) then the example of men of former days has already gone before them
Fight them then until there be no more oppression, and that religion may be wholly Allah´s. But if they desist, then Allah is Seer of what they do
But if they turn their backs, then know that Allah is your patron, the Supreme Patron, the Supreme Helper
And know that whenever you seize anything as a spoil of war, to Allah belongs a fifth thereof, and to His Apostle, and to kindred and orphans, and the needy and the wayfarer; if you believe in Allah and what We have revealed unto Our servants on the Day o
When you were on the near side of the valley, and they were on the far side, and the camel caravan was below you, had you made an appointment then to meet, you would have failed to keep it. But it was otherwise, so that Allah might accomplish a thing that
Allah showed them unto you (Muhammad) in your dream as few in number. But had He shown them to you as many, you (Muslims) would have been timid (afraid), and you would have quarrelled about the matter. But Allah saved you from this. Verily, He knows well
And when He showed them to you (Muslims), when you encountered them, as few in your eyes; and made you seem weak (or contemptible) in their eyes, it was that Allah might accomplish a thing that must be done (or was fore-ordained); for unto Allah do all th
O you who believe! When you encounter a force, then stand firm and remember Allah much, that you may be successful (or may prosper)
And obey Allah and His Messenger, and dispute not with one another, lest you falter (or lose heart) and your strength (or powers or luck) depart, but be steadfast (patient and persevering), for verily, Allah is with the steadfast
And be not like those who went forth from their homes with insolence, and for appearance sake before men, and to turn away people from the way of Allah, for Allah surrounds all things
And when Satan made their works appear seemly to them, and said, "There is none amongst mankind to conquer you to-day, for, verily, I am near you." But when the two armies came in sight of each other, he turned upon his heels (took flight) and s
And when the hypocrites and those in whose heart is a disease said, "Their religion hath beguiled (hypnotized or deluded) these men." But he who puts his trust in Allah, verily, Allah is Mighty and Wise
If you could see how the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve, smiting them on their faces and hinder parts, saying, "Taste you the torment of burning
This is for what your hands have sent on before you; and know that Allah is no tyrant to his servants
Their deeds are like those of Pharaoh´s people and those before them! They rejected the Signs (revelations) of Allah, and Allah overtook them in their sins. Verily, Allah is strong and severe in punishment
That is because Allah is not one to change the favour He has bestowed on a people, until they first change what they have in themselves (in their own souls), and because Allah is Hearer and Knower
Their way is like those of Pharaoh´s people and those before them! They denied Our Signs (or revelations), and We destroyed them in their sins, and drowned Pharaoh´s people. All were evildoers
Verily, the worst of beasts in Allah´s eyes are those who are ungrateful and will not believe
Those with whom if you make a treaty, they break their treaty at each opportunity, for they fear not (or keep not their duty to) Allah
Should you come to war with them, then deal with them so as to strike fear into those who come after them (as an example), that per chance (or possibly) they may remember
And should you ever fear treachery from any people, then throw back to them their treaty in like manner (or in fairness); verily, Allah loves not the treacherous
Let not those who disbelieve deem that they can outstrip (believers or Allah´s purpose); verily, they cannot frustrate them (or escape)
Prepare you against them what strength of forces and horses you have to the utmost of your power, that thereby you may dismay the enemies of Allah, and your enemies, and others beside them whom you know not. You do not know them, but Allah knows them! Wha
But if they incline to peace, incline you to it also, and trust in Allah; verily, He is Hearer and Knower
But if they wish to betray (or deceive) you, then, verily, Allah is sufficient for you! He it is who supports you with His help and with the believers
And attunes (or reconciles) their heart! If you had spent all that is in the earth you could not have attuned their heart, but Allah reconciled them, verily, He is Mighty and Wise
O you Prophet! Sufficient unto you is Allah, and unto those of the believers who follow you
O you Prophet! Urge on the believers to fight. If there be of you twenty steadfast men, they shall overcome two hundred; if there be of you a hundred, they shall overcome a thousand of those who disbelieve, because they are a people without understanding
Now has Allah made light your burden, for He knows that there is a weakness in you: but if there be amongst you but a steadfast hundred, they will vanquish two hundred; and if there be of you a thousand, they will vanquish two thousand, by the permission
It has not been for any Prophet to take captives until he hath subdued the land! You desire the lure of this world, but Allah desires the Hereafter, for Allah is Mighty, Wise
Were it not for an ordinance from Allah that had gone before, there would have touched you a mighty punishment for that which you took (prisoners for ransom)
Eat (enjoy, utilize) of what spoils you have taken, what is lawful and good; and fear Allah, verily, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
O you Prophet! Say to such of the captives as are in your hands, "If Allah knows of any good in your heart, He will give you better than that which is taken from you, and will forgive you; for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
But if they desire to betray you - they have betrayed Allah before! - but He hath given you power over them; for Allah is Knower, Wise
Verily, those who believe and have fled into exile (left their homes), and fought strenuously with their wealth and lives in the cause of Allah, and those who have given them refuge and help, these shall be kin (or friends and protectors) to each other. B
And those who disbelieve, some of them are kin (or protectors) of one another - unless you act the same there will be confusion (or oppression) in the land, and great corruption (or mischief)
Those who believe and have left their homes and striven strenuously in the cause of Allah, and those who have given them a refuge and a help, these are the believers. For them is forgiveness and generous provision
Those who accept faith later and leave their homes and strive strenuously with you, these are of you. But blood relations are nearer to one another in the Book of Allah (also called the Eternal Decree, the Preserved Tablet or it can be called the Universa)
An immunity from Allah and His Messenger to those idolaters with whom you have made a treaty (or alliance)
Travel freely in the land for four months, but know that you cannot make Allah helpless, and that Allah will confound (or humiliate) the disbelievers
And a proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to the people on the day of the Greater Pilgrimage, that Allah is free of obligations to the idolaters, as is His Messenger! If then you repent it is better for you; but if you turn your backs, then know tha
Except to those of the idolaters with whom you have made a treaty, and who then have not failed you, and have not supported any one against you. Fulfil for them then your treaty until its full term. Verily, Allah loves those who fear (the righteous, those)
But when the sacred months are past, then fight and slay the idolaters (those who plot against you) wherever you may find them; and seize them, and besiege them, and ambush them in every manner; but if they repent, and are steadfast in prayer, and pra
And if any one of the idolaters ask you for protection (or asylum), then aid him, in order that he may hear the word of Allah; then let him reach his place of safety. That is because they are a folk who know not
How can there be for the idolaters a treaty with Allah and with His Messenger, save those with whom you have made a treaty at the Sacred Mosque! Then while they stand by you, stand you by them; verily, Allah loves the righteous (those who fear evil)
How (can there be any treaty)! - for if they prevail against you, they respect neither ties of blood nor of agreements. They please you with their mouths while their heart refuse; and most of them work abomination (or are wicked and rebellious)
They barter Allah´s signs (or revelations) for a little price and they turn folk away from His way; verily, evil is that which they are wont to do
They will not observe towards a believer ties of kindred nor ties of honour (or covenants); these are the transgressors
But if they repent and establish regular prayer and practice regular charity, then they are your brethren in religion. We detail Our revelations unto a people that have knowledge
But if they break faith with you after their treaty, and assail (taunt or attack) your religion, then fight the leaders of disbelief - verily, they have no faith - in order that they may desist
Will you not fight a people who broke their solemn pledges, and intended to expel the Messenger and attacked you first? What! Fear you them? Allah is more deserving that you should fear Him if you be believers
Fight them! Allah will chastise them by your hands, and disgrace them, and give you victory against them, and He will heal the breasts of a people who believe
And He will remove rage from their heart; for Allah relents unto whomsoever He will. Allah is Knower, Wise
Did you suppose that you would be left in peace, when Allah has not yet determined (tested) those of you who will strive, and who take none other than Allah and His Messenger, and the believers for protectors and friends? But Allah is well aware of what y
It is not for idolaters to tend the mosques of Allah, while bearing witness against the infidelity of their own souls; for such their works are vain, and in the Fire shall they dwell
Only he shall tend the mosques of Allah who believes in Allah and the Last Day, and is steadfast in prayer, and practices regular charity, and fears none but Allah. Only these can be expected to be among those who are rightly guided
Have you supposed that giving drink to the pilgrims and tending the Sacred Mosque are equal to believing in Allah and in the Last Day, and striving in the way of Allah? They are not equal in the sight of Allah, and Allah guides not a wrongdoing people
Those who believe and who have left their homes (migrated) and striven with their wealth and with their lives in the way of Allah, are highest in rank in the sight of Allah. These are the triumphant
Their Lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from Himself, and goodwill; and Gardens shall they have with enduring pleasure (or joy)
There they shall abide forever. Verily, Allah, with Him is mighty reward
O you who believe! Choose not your fathers, nor your brothers for patrons if they love disbelief rather than faith; for whoever amongst you takes them for patrons these are the wrong-doers
Say, "If your fathers, and your sons, and your brethren, and your wives, and your clansmen, and the wealth which you have gained, and the commerce in which you fear a decline, and the dwellings which you love, if all these are dearer to you than Alla
Allah has helped you in many fields, and on the day of Huneyn (where a Muslim army was ambushed) when you were pleased with your great numbers; but it availed you not at all, and the land grew too narrow for you where it had been broad; and you turned you
Then Allah sent down His shechina (inner calm, peace, tranquillity, security reassurance) upon His Messenger and upon the believers; and sent down hosts which you could not see, and punished those who disbelieved; for that is the reward of the disbeliever
Then Allah turns after that to whom He will, for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
O you who believe! It is only the idolaters who are unclean; they shall not then approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. But if you fear poverty (from the loss of trade with them) then (know that) Allah will enrich you from His grace if He will; veril
Fight those from amongst those to whom the Book has been brought, but who believe not in Allah and in the Last Day, and who forbid not what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, and who do not practice the Religion of Truth, until they are brought low a
The Jews say Ezra is the son of Allah; and the Christians say that Christ is the son of Allah; that is what they say with their mouths, imitating the sayings of those who disbelieved before. Allah (Himself) fights against them! How perverse are they
They take for lords rather than Allah their rabbis and their monks, and the Messiah the son of Mary; but they were bidden to worship only one Allah. There is no God but He. Be He glorified above all that they join with Him! (See Deuteronomy 5:7 and John)
They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah disdains all but that He should perfect His light, however averse to this the disbelievers may be
He it is who sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth, to make it prevail over every other religion, however averse to this the disbelievers may be
O you who believe! Verily, many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the (Christian) monks devour the wealth of mankind openly, and turn away folk from the way of Allah; but those who store up gold and silver and spend it not in the way of Allah, unto them give tid
On the day when it shall be heated in the fire of hell, and their brows and their sides and their backs shall be branded therewith. "This is what you stored up for yourselves, taste then what you used to store
Verily, the number of months with Allah is twelve months in Allah´s Book, ordained on the day when He created the heavens and the earth. Of these four are sacred. That is the right religion, so wrong not yourselves in them. But fight the idolaters o
Verily, postponement (of the sacred months) is but an addition of disbelief to lead astray therewith those who disbelieve. They make it lawful one year, but they make it unlawful in another, that they may make up the number of months which Allah has made
O you who believe! What ailed you when you were told to march forth in Allah´s way, that you were bowed down to the ground with heaviness? Were you content with the life of this world instead of the Hereafter? But the comforts of the life of this wo
Unless you march forth He will afflict you with grievous doom, and will choose instead of you a people different from you! You cannot harm Him at all, for Allah has Power to do all things
If you do not help him (Muhammad), Allah will. (Remember) Allah did help him when those who disbelieved drove him forth, along with another (Abu Bakr). When the two were in the cave, he said to his comrade, "Fear not, verily, Allah is with us
March you then, lightly or heavily equipped, and strive with your wealth and persons in the cause of Allah. That is best for you if you did but know
Had there been an immediate gain, and an easy journey, they would have followed you; but the distance was too far for them; yet they will swear by Allah, "If we could, we would have gone forth with you." They destroy their own souls, but Allah k
Allah forgives you (O Muhammad); why did you give them leave (to stay) until it was made manifest to you who spoke the truth, and you did know the liars
Those who believe in Allah and in the Last Day ask no leave of you from striving with their wealth and their lives; but Allah knows those who fear (do their duty)
It is only those who believe not in Allah and in the Last Day who beg leave from you, and those whose heart have doubts, and in their doubt do waver
Had they wished to go forth, they would certainly have prepared some equipment; but Allah was averse from their being sent forth, and held them back, and they were told "Sit you with the inactive (sedentary or passive)
Had they gone forth with you they would have made you naught but more trouble, and they would have hurried about amongst you creating a sedition; and amongst you are some who would have listened to them; but Allah knows those who are evil-workers
They used to crave sedition before and upset your affairs, until the Truth came, and Allah´s decree was made manifest, much to their aversion (disgust, consternation)
Of them are some who say, "Grant me exemption, and draw me not into trial (or temptation (of the beauty of the enemy women))" Have they not fallen into the trial already, but Hell surrounds the disbelievers
If good befall you it also afflicts (or grieves) them; but if a calamity befall you they say, "We took precautions." and they turn away well pleased (or rejoicing)
Say, "Naught befalls us save what Allah has written down for us; He is our Patron. In Allah let believers trust
Say, "Can you expect for us aught but one of the two best things (martyrdom or victory)? We too expect that Allah will afflict on you with doom from Himself or by our hands. Wait then, and verily, we are waiting with you
Say, "Spend (for the Cause), willingly or unwillingly, it shall not be accepted from you; for verily, you are a people who are rebellious and wicked
But naught hinders their contributions from being accepted save that they disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger, and perform not prayer save lazily (unmindfully), and spend not in charity save reluctantly
Let not their wealth nor their children please you. Allah only wishes to punish them therewith in the life of this world, and that their souls may pass away while still they disbelieve
They swear by Allah that, in truth, they are of you; but they are not of you, and they are a people who do stand aside in fear
Could they but have found a refuge, or some caves, or a hiding place in which to creep, thither would they have rushed (jamaha = hastened with uncontrollable urgency, madly, obstinately)
Of them are some who defame you, with respect to (the distribution of) charity; though if they are given a part thereof, they are content; and if they are not given a part thereof, then are they enraged
Would that they were content with what Allah and His Messenger had brought them, and would say, "Allah is sufficient for us! Allah will bring us of His Bounty, and so will His Messenger; verily, in Allah is our hope (or desire)
Alms are only for the poor and needy, and those who work for them, and those whose heart are to be reconciled (to be converted to Islam), and those in captivity, and those in debt, and those who are on Allah´s path, and for the wayfarer. This is an
And of them are some who are at the ears of the prophet (they molest him), and say, "He is all ears (he listens to every one´s plea)." Say, "He is an ear (or Hearer) of what is good for you, who believes in Allah, has faith in (or is)
They swear by Allah to please you (Muslims); but Allah and His Messenger are more worthy for them to please (or it is more fitting to please them or they have more right to it) if they be believers
Know they not that whoever sets himself against Allah and His Messenger, for him is the Fire of Hell, to dwell therein? That is the mighty shame
The hypocrites fear lest there be revealed against them a verse, exposing what is in their heart. Say, "Mock ye! Verily, Allah is disclosing what you fear
But if you should ask them, they will say, "We did but talk and jest." Say, "Was it at Allah and His revelations, and His Messenger, that you mocked
Make no excuse! You have disbelieved after your (confession of) faith; if We forgive one party of you, We will punish another party because they were guilty
The hypocrites, men and women, are of each other (influence, and agree with, each other, are tied together), bidding what is wrong and forbidding what is right, and they clench their hands (in anger to withhold charity, assistance, or power in the cause o)
Allah has promised unto the hypocrites, men and women, and unto the disbelievers, hell-fire to dwell therein. It is enough for them! Allah shall curse them, and theirs shall be an enduring woe
You are like those who were before you. They were stronger than you and more abundant in wealth and children. They enjoyed their portion awhile, and you will enjoy your portion awhile just as they enjoyed their portion before you. And you indulge in idle
Did there not come to them the story of those who were before them? Of the people of Noah and A´ad and Thamud, and of the people of Abraham, and the people of Midian? And of their overthrown cities? Their messengers came to them with manifest signs
And the believers, men and women, are patrons one of the others; they bid what is right, and forbid what is wrong, and are steadfast in worship, and give in charity, and they obey Allah and His Messenger. On these will Allah have mercy; verily, Allah is M
Allah has promised to believers, men and women, Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein; and goodly places in the Gardens of Bliss (Eden), But the greatest bliss is the good pleasure (or acceptance) of Allah. That is the Supreme Triumph
O you Prophet! Strive strenuously against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern against them; for their ultimate resort is hell, an evil destination indeed
They swear by Allah they did not speak wrong, but they did speak the word of disbelief (blasphemy); and they disbelieved after their Surrender (embracing Islam). And they plotted what they could not attain; and they only sought revenge after Allah through
And of them are some who make a treaty with Allah, saying, "If He give us of His bounty, we will give alms and become of the righteous
But when He gave them of His grace they hoarded it, and turned away, averse
So He caused hypocrisy to pursue them in their heart unto the day when they shall meet Him, for they did break their promises to Allah and because they lied
Do they not know that Allah knows their secrets and their whisperings, and that Allah knows the Unseen
Those who defame such of the believers as willingly give their alms, and such as can find nothing to give but their exertions and who mock at them - Allah Himself mocks them. Theirs is a grievous woe
Ask forgiveness for them or ask not forgiveness for them; if they should ask forgiveness for them seventy times, yet would not Allah forgive them; that is because they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and Allah guides not a people who work abominat
Those who were left behind rejoiced in staying behind the Messenger of Allah, and were averse to striving with their wealth and their persons in the way of Allah, and said, "March not forth in the heat." Say, "The fire of hell is hotter sti
Let them then laugh a little, they will weep much, as a recompense for that which they have earned
But if Allah brings you back (from a campaign) to a party of them, and they ask you then for permission to come out with you, say, "You shall by no means ever come out with me, nor shall you ever fight a foe with me! Verily, you were content to sit a
Pray not ever for any one of them who dies, and stand not by his grave; verily, they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger and died workers of perverse rebellion
Let not their wealth and their children please you. Allah only wishes to punish them therewith in this world, and that their souls may pass away while they disbelieve
Whenever a verse is sent down to them, saying "Believe you in Allah, and strive along with His Messenger," the men of wealth will ask you for leave to stay at home and say, "Let us be amongst those who stay behind
They are content to be with those who are useless, and a seal is set upon their heart that they understand not
But the Messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and with their lives. Such are they who shall have good things. Such are they who are successful (or prosper)
Allah has prepared for them Gardens beneath which river flow, to dwell therein; that is the supreme triumph
There were among the desert Arabs some who had excuses and came to claim exemption, and those who lied to Allah and His Messenger sat at home inactive. There shall befall those of them who disbelieved, a mighty woe
For the weak, and the sick, and those who cannot find wherewith to spend in alms, no blame is there for them, so long as they be sincere towards Allah and His Messenger. There is no blame against those who do good; for Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
Nor against those to whom, when they came to you that you should provide mount for them, you did say, "I cannot find whereon to mount you." They turned their backs while their eyes poured forth with tears, for grief that they could not find the
There is blame only against those who ask you for leave to stay at home while they are rich; content to be with the useless. Allah has sealed their heart so that they know not
They make excuses to you when you return to them. Say, "Make no excuse, we believe you not; Allah has informed us concerning you. Allah sees your works and so does His Messenger. Then shall you be brought back unto Him who knows the invisible (hidden)
They will swear by Allah unto you when you have returned to them, that you may leave them alone. Let them be, for verily, they are polluted (unclean), and their resort is hell, a recompense for that which they have earned
They will swear unto you that you may accept them; but if you accept them, Allah, verily accepts not a people who work abomination
The wandering Arabs of the desert are keener in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that Allah has revealed unto His Messenger. Allah is Knower and Wise
And of the wandering Arabs of the desert are some who take what they spend (in the cause of Allah) to be a loss (or a fine, punishment), and they wait for a turn of fortune against you; but the turn of evil fortune shall be against them. Allah is Hearer a
And of the wandering Arabs of the desert are some who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and who take what they spends to be a means of bringing them nearer to Allah and obtaining the Messenger´s prayers. Verily it is an acceptable offering for them
As for the Foremost in the way, the first of the Muhajirin (those who migrated into exile from Mecca to Medina), and the Ansar (those in Medina who helped them), and those who followed them in their kindness, Allah is well pleased with them, and they are
And of those of the wandering Arabs of the desert who are round about you, some are hypocrites, and some of the people of Medina persist in hypocrisy; you do not know them. We know them, and We will chastise them twice; then shall they be sent off into mi
And there are others who have acknowledged their sins. They have mixed a righteous action with another that was evil. It may be that Allah will relent towards them. Verily, Allah is Relenting and Merciful
Take alms from their wealth, so that you may purify them and make them grow thereby; and pray for them; verily, your prayer is a source of security for them. Allah is Hearer and Knower
Know they not that Allah is He who accepts repentance from His servants and takes the alms; and that Allah is He who is easily Relenting and Merciful
And say, "Act! Allah will see your action, and so will His Messenger and the believers, and you will be brought back to Him who knows the seen and the unseen (or the visible and invisible), and He shall inform you of that which you used to do
And there are others who are in hopes of Allah´s decree; whether He will punish them, or whether He will forgive them. Allah is Knower, Wise
And there are those who have chosen a place of worship (or mosque) for mischief and infidelity, in order to cause dissent amongst the believers, and for an outpost for those who made war against Allah and His Messenger in the past; they surely swear, &quo
Never stand up (to pray) therein. The place of worship (or mosque) founded on piety (or duty to Allah) from the first day, is more worthy that you should stand (to pray) therein, wherein are men who love to purify themselves. Allah does love those who pur
Is he who has laid his foundation upon the fear of (duty to) Allah and of His good pleasure better, or he who has laid his foundation upon a crumbling undermined sand cliff, which crumbles away with him into the fire of hell? Allah guides not a people who
The building which they have built will not cease to be a source of doubt in their heart until their heart are cut asunder; but Allah is Knowing, Wise
Verily, Allah hath bought of the believers their lives and their wealth, because the Garden will be theirs; they shall fight in the way of Allah, and they shall slay and be slain, a promised binding on Him in Truth, in the Torah and the Gospel and the Qur
Triumphant are those who repent, those who serve Him, those who praise, those who fast, those who bow down, those who fall down prostrate (in awe or surrender), those who bid what is right and forbid what is wrong, and those who keep the limits (ordained)
It is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the idolaters, even though they are their kindred, after it has been made manifest to them that they are the fellows of hell
Nor was Abraham´s asking pardon for his father aught else but through a promise he had promised him; but when it was made manifest to him that he was an enemy to Allah, he cleansed himself of him (dissociated himself); verily, Abraham was soft of he
Nor will Allah lead astray a people after He has guided them until that is made clear to them that which they have to fear (avoid). Verily, Allah is aware of all things
Verily, Allah, To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth! He quickens and He slays. And you have beside Allah no protecting friend or helper
Allah has now turned in mercy towards the Prophet and to the Muhajirin (those who migrated with him into exile), and towards the Ansar (helpers) who followed him in the hour of difficulty. After the heart of a party of them had well-nigh swerved aside, th
And also unto the three who were left behind. When the earth, vast as it is, seemed too small for them, and their souls were constricted for them until they perceived that there was no refuge for them from Allah save towards Him (they felt imprisoned in t)
O you who believe! Fear (do your duty to) Allah and be with those who are True (in word, thought, motivation and deed)
It was not fitting for the people of Medina and for those around them of the wandering Arabs of the desert, to stay behind the Messenger of Allah and prefer their lives to his. That is because neither thirst, nor toil, nor heat, nor hunger befell them on
Nor do they spend in alms a small or great amount, nor do they cross a valley, but it is recorded for them, that Allah may repay them with better than that which they have done
The believers should not march forth altogether. If a section from every troop remain behind, then they could devote themselves to gaining sound knowledge of their religion and teach their people when they return to them, that per chance (or possibly) the
O you who believe! Fight those disbelievers who are near to you, and let them find in you sternness; and know that Allah is with those who fear (do their duty)
And whenever a verse is sent down, there are some of them who say (sarcastically), "Which of you has thus increased in faith?" But as for those who believe, it does increase their faith, and they shall rejoice
But as for those in whose heart is a disease, it only adds wickedness to their wickedness, and they die disbelievers
Do they not see that they are tried once or twice in every year? Yet they do not turn in repentance, nor do they heed
And whenever a surah (verse) is sent down, some of them look at the others, (as if to say), "Does any one see you?" (i.e. furtively to make sure their guilt is not observed) Then they turn away! Allah has turned their heart, for that they are a
There has come to you a Messenger from amongst yourselves; hard for him to bear is it that you should perish (from iniquity); full of concern for you, for believers full of compassion, merciful
But if they turn their backs, then say, "Allah is sufficient for me! There is no Allah but He! In Him do I trust. He is Lord of the Supreme Throne
ALIF LAM RA. These are the Ayats (signs or verses) of the Book of Wisdom (or Wise Scripture)
Is it a wonder for mankind that We inspired a man from amongst themselves, saying "Warn you mankind; and give glad tidings to those who believe, that for them there are lofty ranks with their Lord?" The disbelievers say, "Verily, this is an
Verily, your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in six Days (or Periods, Ages, Cycles); then He established (or ascended) Himself firmly on the Throne (of Authority), to govern (direct, regulate) all things; there is no intercessor, exce
Unto Him is your return, all of you. It is the promise of Allah in truth. Verily, He produces creation, then He reproduces it, that He may recompense with justice those who believe and do what is right; but those who disbelieve, for them is a drink of boi
He it is who made the sun a glorious brightness (splendour), and the moon for a light, and decreed for it measured stages, that you may know the number of the years and the reckoning. Allah created not all this but in truth. He details the signs (or revel)
Verily, in the alternation of night and day, and in all that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, are signs unto a people who fear Him (are in awe or ward off evil)
Verily, those who expect not for the meeting with Us, and are content with the life of this world, and are comforted (or secure) therein, and those who are neglectful of our Signs (or revelations)
Their resort is the Fire because of that which they have earned
Verily, those who believe and act righteously, their Lord guides them by their faith; beneath them shall rivers flow in the Gardens of Delight
Their cry therein shall be, "Glory be to Thee, O Allah!" and their salutation therein shall be, "Peace!" and the end of their cry shall be, "Praise be to Allah, the Lord (Cherisher and Sustainer) of the Worlds
And if Allah should hasten for men the evil they earn, as they would fain hasten on the good, their respite would surely have expired. But We suffer those who look not for (or expect not) the meeting with Us to wander blindly on in their rebellion
When misfortune touches man, he calls Us, whether reclining, sitting or standing; but when We have removed from him his distress, he passes on as though he had not called on Us because of the misfortune that touched him. Thus unto the extravagant is made
We have already destroyed generations before you when they did wrong, and there came to them their Messengers with manifest signs, but they would not believe. Thus do We reward the guilty people
Then We made you Vicegerents (or their successors) in the earth after them, that We may see how you will act
But when Our evident Signs (revelations) are recited to them, those who expect not the meeting with Us say, "Bring a Lecture (Quran) other than this; or change it." Say, "It is not for me to, change it of my own accord; I do not follow augh
Say, "Had Allah willed, I should not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I dwelt amongst you a lifetime before it came to me; have you not then any sense
Who does greater wrong than he who forges a lie concerning Allah, or denies His revelations? Verily, the guilty are never successful
They worship beside Allah what can neither harm them nor profit them, and they say, "These are our intercessors with Allah!" Say, "Will you inform Allah of something that He knows not in the heavens or the earth?" Praised be He, and ex
Mankind were but one nation once, then they disagreed; and had it not been for a Word (decree) from your Lord which had already gone out, their differences would have been settled between them already
They say, "If only a sign had been sent down upon him from his Lord?" Say, "The unseen belongs only to Allah; but wait you for a while. Verily, I, too, am waiting with you
When We have let men taste of mercy after some adversity which has afflicted them, behold! They use a plot against Our revelations! Say, "Allah is quicker at plotting. Verily, Our Messengers (angels) write down that which you plot
He it is who makes you travel in the land and sea, until when you are in the ships, and these carry them afloat with a favourable wind, and they rejoice therein, there comes to them a violent wind, and there comes to them a wave from every side, and they
But when He has delivered them, behold! They are rebellious in the earth unjustly; - O mankind! Your rebelliousness is only against yourselves. You have but a brief provision in the life of this world, then unto Us is your return, and We will inform you o
Verily, the likeness of the life of this world is like water which We send down from the sky, and the plants of the earth, from which men and cattle eat, are mingled therewith, until when the earth puts on its ornament and is adorned, and her people think
Allah calls unto the abode of peace, and guides whom He will into the Straight Way (i.e. True Religion or The Surrender, Islam)
To those who do what is good, (is granted) goodness and increase! Neither does darkness nor abasement cover their faces! Such are Companions of the Garden (Paradise); they will dwell therein
But, as for those who have earned ill, the reward of evil is the like thereof; abasement (ignominy) shall cover them - They shall have none to protect them against Allah - as though their faces were veiled with the deep darkness of the night. Such are the
And on the day when We gather them all together, then We will say to those who associated other gods (with Us), "To your places, you and your associates!" and We will separate them; and their associates will say, "It was not us you worshipp
But Allah is witness enough between us and you, that we were unaware of your worship
There shall every soul experience what it did (or has sent on) before; and they shall be returned unto Allah, their rightful Lord, and that which they used to invent shall fail them
Say, "Who provides you from the heaven and the earth? Who has power over hearing and sight? And who brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living? And who governs all affairs (or regulates, directs the course of eve)
Such, then, is Allah, your true Lord! What is there after the truth but error? How then can you turn away
Thus is the Word of your Lord justified against those who commit abomination (or rebel) - verily, they believe not
Say, "Is there any of your associates who can originate a creation and then reproduce it?" Say, "Allah produces creation, then reproduces it. How then are you misled (deluded)
Say, "Is there any of your associates who guides unto the truth?" Say, "Allah guides unto the truth." Is then He who guides unto the truth more worthy to be followed, or he that guides not except he is himself guided? What ails you the
But most of them follow naught but conjecture (suspicion, fancy, guesswork, speculation); verily, conjecture can by no means take the place of (or avail against) truth. Verily, Allah is Aware of what they do
This Quran could not have been devised by any beside (or in opposition to) Allah; but it is a confirmation (or verification) of that which came before it, and a fuller explanation of the Book (Scriptures, or that which was decreed for mankind) - there is
Do they say, "He hath devised it"? Say then, "Bring a surah (chapter) like it, and call, if you can, on other than Allah, if you are truthful
Yet they call that a lie the knowledge of which they cannot compass, even before its Taawil (interpretation, elucidation, explanation, fulfilment, effects) has reached them. Thus did those before them make charges of falsehood. But see what was the conseq
Of them are some who believe therein; and of them are some who do not believe therein; but your Lord is best aware of the corrupters
But if they deny you, say, "I have my work, and you have your work; you are innocent of what I work, and I am innocent of what you work
There are some of them who listen to you. But can you make the deaf to hear, when they have no understanding (or sense)
And of them are some who look at you. But can you guide the blind, though they cannot see
Verily, Allah wrongs not man in aught, but men do wrong themselves
And on the day when We will gather them together, it will be as though they had not stayed save an hour of the day. They shall know each other. Lost will be those who denied the meeting with Allah, and were not guided
Whether We show you something of that which We promised them, or whether We will take you to Ourself, still unto Us is their return; and Allah is also a witness to what they do
To every people was sent a Messenger; and when their Messenger comes to them (on the Day of Judgment), it will be judged between them fairly, and they will not be wronged
But they say, "When will this promise come to pass, if you tell the truth
Say, "I have no power to harm or profit myself (or I have no power myself to harm or profit), save what Allah wills. Every nation has its appointed time; when their appointed time comes to them they cannot delay it for an hour or hasten it
Say, "Have you considered, when His punishment comes to you, by night or day, which portion thereof will the sinners wish to hasten
And when it has fallen on you, will you believe in it. What! Believe now, when you wished to hasten it through unbelief
Then shall it be said to those who have done wrong, "Taste you the torment of Eternity! Are you recompensed except for that which you have earned
They will ask you to inform them whether it be true. Say, "Yea, by my Lord! Verily, it is the truth, nor can you escape
Every soul that has done wrong, if it had whatever is in the earth, would seek to ransom itself therewith. They will utter their repentance when they see the torment; but it shall be decided between them with justice, nor shall they be wronged
Is it not the case that to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth? Is it not the case that the promise of Allah is certainly true? But most of them understand not
Is it He Who gives life and He Who takes it, and unto Him shall you all be returned
O mankind! There has come to you a direction (guidance, exhortation) from your Lord, and a healing for the disease in your breasts, and a guidance and a mercy for believers
Say, "In the grace of Allah and in His mercy let them rejoice!" It is better than that (wealth) which they hoard
Say, "See you what Allah has sent down to you for sustenance? Yet you have made some unlawful and some lawful. Say, "Has Allah permitted you, or do you invent lies concerning Allah
What will those who invent lies concerning Allah think on the Day of Resurrection? Verily, Allah is truly Bountiful towards mankind, but most of them give no thanks
Thee (Muhammad) are not occupied with any business, nor recite you a lecture from this Scripture, and you (mankind) perform no act, but We are Witness when you are engaged therein: nor does the weight of an atom escape your Lord in the earth or in heaven
Behold! Verily, the friends of Allah are those on whom fear comes not, nor shall they grieve
They who believe and who fear (do their duty to Allah)
For them are good tidings in the life of this world, and in the Hereafter - There is no changing the words of Allah! - That is the Supreme Triumph
Let not their speech grieve you; verily, power belongs wholly to Allah. He is the Hearer and Knower
Lo! Is it not unto Allah that belongs whoever is in the heavens and whoever is in the earth? What then do they follow who call on associates other than Allah? Verily, they follow nothing but fantasy, and verily, they do naught but lie (or guess)
He it is who made for you the night, that you might rest therein, and the day to see therein; in that, verily, are signs unto a people who heed
They say, "Allah has taken to Himself a son." Glorified be He! He is Self-sufficient! His is whatever is in the heavens, and whatever is in the earth. You have no warrant for this! Do you say about Allah, that which you know not
Say, "Verily, those who invent a lie concerning Allah will not succeed
A brief provision in this world, then unto Us is their return! Then will We make them taste a dreadful doom because they disbelieved
Recite to them the story of Noah, when he said to his people, "O my people! If my stay with you and my reminding you of the signs of Allah, be offensive to you, yet in Allah do I put my trust. So decide on your course of action, you and your associat
But if you turn your backs, (remember) I asked you not for wages; my wages are only due from Allah, and I am bidden to be of those who Surrender (i.e. accept Islam)
But they called him a liar; and We saved him, and those with him, in the ark; and We made them Vicegerents (successors, agents, inheritors), and drowned those who had denied Our revelations. See then the nature of the consequences for those who had been w
Then We raised up after him messengers unto their people, and they also came to them with manifest signs; but they would not believe in what they had called a lie before. Thus do We set a stamp upon the heart of the transgressors
Then after them We sent Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our Signs; but they were too inflated with pride, and were a guilty people
And when the truth came to them from Us they said, "This is mere magic
Moses said, "Speak you thus about the Truth when it comes to you? Is this magic? But magicians thrive not
They said, "Have you come to turn us away from the faith in which we found our fathers, that there may be for you twain grandeur in the land? We will not believe you
And Pharaoh said, "Bring me every expert sorcerer
And when the sorcerers came, Moses said to them, "Cast the spells you have to cast
And when they had cast, Moses said, "What you have brought is certainly sorcery. Verily, Allah will make it vain; Verily, Allah upholds not the work of mischief makers
But Allah verifies (or proves and establishes) the Truth by His Words, however much the guilty are averse
But none believed in Moses, save a section of his own people, through fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, lest he should afflict them. Verily, Pharaoh was a tyrant in the land, and verily, he was wanton
And Moses said, "O my people! If you did believe in Allah, then on Him rely, if you have, indeed, surrendered (unto Him - become Muslims)
They said, "In Allah do we put our trust. O our Lord! Make us not a cause of fitnat (trial, temptation, punishment, oppression, discord, conflict), for a people who oppress
But deliver us by Thy mercy from the people who disbelieve
And We inspired Moses and his brother thus, "Establish, you twain, houses for your people in Egypt; and make you your houses a qiblah (the centre of worship); and be you steadfast in prayer, and give Glad Tidings to those who believe
Moses said, "O our Lord! Verily, Thou hast brought to Pharaoh and his chiefs ornaments and wealth in the life of this world; Our Lord! They lead men astray from Thy way thereby! Our Lord! Confound their wealth (make it loathsome or turn it into a sou)
He said, "Your prayer is answered; be upright then (follow the Straight Way), you two, and follow not the path of those who have no knowledge (the ignorant)
And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea; and Pharaoh and his hosts pursued them with spite and hostility until when drowning overtook him, he exclaimed, "I believe that there is no Allah but He in whom the children of Israel believe, and
What! Now! But a little while before were you in rebellion, and were of those who do evil
But this day shall We save you in your body, that you may be a Sign to those who come after you; but verily, many of mankind are heedless of Our Signs
And We established the Children of Israel in a secure abode, and We provided them with good things; and they disagreed not until knowledge had come unto them. Verily, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that whereon the
And if you are in doubt of that which We have revealed unto you, ask those who read the Book before you; verily, the truth has come to you from your Lord. So be not you of those who doubt
And be not of those who reject the Signs of Allah, for then you will be of the losers
Verily, those against whom the word of your Lord has been pronounced will not believe
Even though there come to them every sign, until they see the grievous doom
If only there were a community that had believed and profited from its faith. But none did except the people of Jonah. When they believed We removed from them the Torment of Disgrace in this world, and We gave them provision for a while
But had your Lord willed, all who are in the earth would have believed together. Would you force men to become believers
It is not for any soul to believe save by the permission of Allah; He sets uncleanness on those who have no sense
Say, "Behold what is in the heavens and in the earth! But Signs and Warners avail not a people who do not believe
What expect they but the like of the days of those who passed away before them? Say, "Wait you then! Verily, I, too, will wait with you
Then will We save Our Messengers and those who believe, as is fitting to Us, in like manner as before
Say, "O mankind! If you are in doubt concerning my religion, (know that) I will not worship those you worship other than Allah; but I worship Allah, who takes you to Himself, and I have been commanded to be of the believers
And, set your purpose resolutely for religion as a "Hanif" (a man upright by nature); and be not of the idolaters
And call not besides Allah on what can neither profit you nor harm you; for if you do, verily, you are then of the wrong-doers (or unjust)
And should Allah touch you with harm, there is none to remove it save He; and if He wish you well, there is none to repel His grace; He makes it fall on whom He will of His servants; for He is Forgiving and Merciful
Say, "O mankind! There has come to you the Truth from your Lord, and he who is guided by it, his guidance is only for his own soul; and he who errs, errs only against it; and I am not a warder over you
Follow what is inspired in you, and be patient until Allah judges, for He is the best of judges
ALIF LAM RA. This is a Book whose signs (verses) are perfected (confirmed, fundamental and well-established) and then expounded (explained in detail), from the Wise One, the Aware
(Saying,) " Serve (or worship) none other than Allah. Verily, I am unto you from Him a Warner and a herald of Glad Tidings
Seek pardon from your Lord, then turn to Him repentant. He will cause you to enjoy a good provision until an appointed time. He gives of His Bounty (or Grace) to every one deserving it. But if you turn your backs, I fear for you the retribution of a
Unto Allah is your return, and He has power over all things
Do they not, verily, fold up their breasts, that they may hide (their thoughts) from Him? But when they cover themselves with their garments, does He not know what they conceal and what they display? Verily, He knows the nature of men´s heart
There is no creature that walks upon the earth but its provision is from Allah. He knows its permanent settlement and its temporary resting-place. All is in the Perspicuous Book (or in a Clear Record)
He it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His Throne (or authority, control) was (first) upon the Water that He might try you, which of you is best in conduct. But should you say, "You will be raised up after death," those
And if We delay from them the doom to a stated time, they will surely say, "What hinders it?" Verily, on the day it comes to them there is no averting it from them and that which they mocked shall close in on them
And if We make man taste of mercy from Us and then strip it off from him, verily, he is despairing, ungrateful
And if We make him taste of comfort after distress has touched him, he will surely say, "All evils have departed from me." Verily, then he is exultant and boastful
Save those who are patient and do right; these, for them is pardon and a mighty reward
Perchance you forsake part of what is revealed to you, and your breast is straitened thereby, lest they should say, "Why is not a treasure sent down to him? Or why did not an angel come with him?". But you are only a Warner. It is Allah who is i
Or they say, "He hath invented it." Say, "Bring ten surahs (chapters) like it, invented; and call upon all whom you can beside Allah, if you are truthful
And if they (false gods, Muses) do not answer, then know that it is revealed by the knowledge of Allah, and that there is no God but He. Do you then Surrender (unto Allah and accept Islam)
Whoever shall desire the life of this world and its pomp (or ornaments), We will pay them their works therein, and they shall not be cheated
These are those for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter save the Fire; and vain is that they made therein, and fruitless what they were doing
Is he (like them) who relies upon a manifest Sign from his Lord and a witness from Him recites it, and of which the book of Moses came as a model and a mercy before it? These believe in it; and whoever of the tribes disbelieves in it, the Fire is his prom
Who is more unjust than he who invents a lie concerning Allah? Such shall be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses shall say, "These it is who lied about their Lord." Now the curse of Allah is upon the wrongdoers
Who turn men away from the path of Allah, and crave to make it crooked, and disbelieve in the Hereafter
Such will not escape in the earth, nor have they patrons other than Allah. Doubled for them is the torment. They could not bear to hear, nor did they see
These it is who have lost their souls, and that which they used to devise has failed them
No doubt in the Hereafter these are the greatest losers
Verily, those who believe and do what is right, and humble themselves before their Lord, they are the Fellows of the Garden; they shall dwell therein
The similitude of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf (on the one hand), and the seeing and the hearing (on the other); are they equal in similitude? Will you not then take heed
We did send Noah unto his people, saying, "Verily, I am to you a plain Warner
That you should not worship any save Allah. Verily, I fear for you the torment of the grievous Day
But the chiefs of those who disbelieved amongst his people said, "We only see in you a mortal like ourselves; nor do we see that any follow you except the most abject (or meanest, most ignorant or most deficient) amongst us by a rash (or immature) ju
Noah said, "O my people! Bethink you, if I rely upon a manifest Sign from my Lord, and there come to me mercy from Him, and you are blind to it (or it has been made obscure to you); can we compel you to accept it while you are averse to it
O my people! I do not ask you for wealth in return for it; my hire (or wage, reward) is only from Allah. Nor will I repulse (drive away) those who believe. Verily, they shall meet their Lord. But I see you as a people who are ignorant
O my people! Who will help me against Allah, were I to repel them? Do you not then reflect
I say not unto you that I have the treasures of Allah; nor do I know the unseen; nor do I say: verily, I am an angel; nor do I say of those whom your eyes despise: Allah will never give them any good - Allah knows best what is in their souls, verily
They said, "O Noah! You have wrangled with us, and have multiplied disputation among us. Now bring upon us what you have threatened us with, if you are of the truthful
Said he, "Allah will only bring it on you when He pleases, nor can you make Him helpless (frustrate Him)
Nor will my advice profit you were I minded to advise you, if Allah wills to keep you astray. He is your Lord, and unto Him shall you return
Do they say, "He has invented it?" Say, "If I have devised it, then on me be my crime, but I am clear (innocent) of all that you commit
And Noah was inspired (in these words), "None shall surely believe amongst your people but those who have believed already; take it not then ill that which they do
And make the Ark under Our eyes (supervision, purposes), and at Our inspiration (instructions); and plead not with Me for those who have done wrong. Verily, they shall be drowned
So he made the Ark; and every time the chiefs of his people passed by him they mocked at him. Said he, "If you mock at us, verily, we shall mock at you even as you are mocking
And you shall surely soon know who it is to whom the punishment that confounds and shames shall come, and upon whom shall fall the lasting doom
Then when Our commandment came to pass, and the geysers gushed forth water, We said, "Load therein two of every kind, a pair (male and female), and your family, save him on whom the sentence has already been passed, and those who believe." But t
And he said, "Ride you therein. In the name of Allah is its course, and its mooring. Verily, my Lord is Forgiving and Merciful
And it sailed with them amid waves like mountains; and Noah cried to his son who had gone aside (stood aloof or separated himself), "O my boy! Ride with us and be not with the disbelievers
The son replied, "I will betake me to some mountain that shall save me from the water (I will find another solution)." Said Noah, "There is none this day that can save from the command of Allah, except for him on whom He may have mercy.&quo
And it was said, "O earth! Swallow down your water! And, O heaven! Withhold you rain!" And the water abated; and the matter was decided, and the Ark settled on Mount Judi, and the word went forth, "Removed are the evildoing people
And Noah called unto his Lord saying, "My Lord, verily, my son is of my family (people), and, surely Thy promise is true, and Thou art the most just of judges
He said, "O Noah! He is not of your family (people); verily, because his conduct is unrighteous. Therefore ask Me not for that of which you have no knowledge. Verily, I give you counsel lest you should be among the ignorant
He said, "My Lord, verily, I seek refuge in Thee (from wrong) lest I ask Thee that whereof I have no knowledge. Unless Thou dost forgive me and have mercy on me, I shall be of those who are lost
The word came, "O Noah! Descend (from the Ark) in peace from Us, and blessings upon you and upon some of the communities who will descend from you; but other communities We shall grant enjoyment for a time and then there shall touch, them, from Us gr
These are some of the stories of the Unseen that We reveal unto you. You did not know them before this, you and your people. So persevere patiently; verily, the sequel is for those who fear (are righteous)
And unto the tribe of A´ad (We sent) their brother Hud. He said, "O my people! Serve Allah; you have no God but Him. You do but invent lies (superstitions, fantasies, self-deception)
O my people! I do not ask you for hire (wages, rewards) in return (for the message); Lo, my hire is only from Him who created me: have you then no sense (or understanding)
O my people! Ask pardon of your Lord; then turn to Him in repentance; He will send the skies (rain, spiritual, social and material bounties) down on you in torrents; and He will add strength to your strength: turn not away, guilty
They said, "O Hud! You have not come to us with a manifest sign (or clear proof); nor will we leave our gods at your word; nor will we believe in you
We say nothing but that, perhaps, some of our gods have possessed you with madness." Said he, "Verily, I call Allah to witness, and do you bear witness too, that I am free from ascribing to (or associating with) Him
Other gods as partners. Plot then against me together (as much as you like), and give me no respite
Verily, I trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. There is no beast that walks but He grasps it by its forelock (has complete power over it). Verily, my Lord is on the Straight Way
But if you turn your backs, then I have conveyed to you that wherewith I was sent to you; and my Lord will replace you with another people. You cannot harm (frustrate) Him at all; verily, my Lord is Guardian over all things
And when Our commandment came We saved Hud, and those who believed with him, by mercy from Us; We saved them from a harsh torment
Such were (the tribe of) A´ad. They denied the signs of their Lord, and rebelled against His Messengers, and followed the bidding of every headstrong tyrant
They were followed in this world by a curse, and on the Day of Resurrection. Behold! A´ad disbelieved in their Lord! Aye! Removed were A´ad the people of Hud
And unto Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. Said he, "O my people! Serve Allah; you have no God but Him. He it is that produced you from the earth, and made you live therein! So ask pardon of Him; then turn to Him in repentance. Verily, my Lord is
They said, "O Salih! You were, before this, amongst us one we hoped in. Do you forbid us to worship what our fathers worshipped? Verily, we are in grave doubt as to that to which you call us
He said, "O my people! Bethink you, if I stand upon a manifest sign (clear proof) from my Lord, and there come from Him mercy, who will help me against Allah if I rebel against Him? You will add to me naught but perdition
O my people! This she-camel of Allah is a test (symbol, token) for you; leave her, then, to feed in Allah´s earth, and touch her not with harm, lest a near torment seize you
But they did hamstring her, and he said, "Enjoy yourselves in your houses for three days; this is the promise that shall not be belied
And when Our commandment came to pass, We saved Salih, and those who believed with him, by Our mercy, from the ignominy of that day. Verily, your Lord He is Powerful and Mighty
And a mighty noise caught those who had done wrong; and on the morrow they were lying corpses in their houses
As though they had never dwelt therein. Behold, Thamud indeed disbelieved in their Lord. Aye! Removed were the Thamud
Our messengers came unto Abraham with Glad Tidings. They said, "Peace!" He answered, "Peace be it!" and did not delay to bring the roasted calf
But when he saw that their hands reached not to it, he felt mistrust, and conceived a fear of them. They said, "Fear not. Verily, we are sent unto the people of Lot
And his wife was standing by, laughing; and We gave her the glad tidings of Isaac, and of Jacob after Isaac
Said she, "Alas for me! Shall I bear a son when I am an old woman, and this husband of mine an old man? Verily, this is a strange thing
They said, "Do you wonder at the commandment of Allah? The Mercy of Allah and His blessings upon you, O you people of the house! Verily, He is worthy of all Praise, worthy of all Glory
And when his terror left Abraham, and the glad tidings reached him, he pleaded with Us on behalf of the people of Lot
Verily, Abraham was relenting (tolerant), compassionate, and Allah-relying
(It was said,) "O Abraham! Forsake this (pleading). Verily, the commandment of your Lord has gone forth, and verily, there comes to them a torment that cannot be repelled
And when Our messengers (angels) came to Lot, he was grieved for them (the people), and his arm was powerless to aid them. He said, "This is a distressful day
And his people came unto him, rushing, for they were long used to committing abomination (homosexuality). He said, "O my people! Here are my daughters (or young women), they are purer for you. Fear Allah, and do not disgrace me through my guests. Is
They said, "You know that we have no need of your daughters; verily, you well know what we want
He said, "Would that I had strength to resist you or could betake myself of some powerful support
(The messengers) said, "O Lot! Verily, we are the messengers of your Lord. They shall certainly not reach you; now travel with your people in the darkness of the night, and let none of you look round. But your wife (will do so), and there shall befal
And when Our commandment came, We overthrew (their town), making their high parts into low parts (turned them upside down). And We rained down upon them stones and baked clay one after another
Marked with fire from your Lord, and these are never far from the wrongdoers
And unto Midian (we sent) their brother Shu´eyb. He said, "O my people! Serve Allah; you have no God but Him, and give not short measure and weight. Verily, I see you well off; but, verily, I fear for you the torments of an encompassing Day
O my people! Give measure and weight fairly, and defraud not men of their due; and wreak not wrong in the earth, corrupting it
That which Allah leaves for you is better for you if you be believers. But I am not a guardian (or keeper) over you
They said, "O Shu´eyb! Do your prayers bid you that we should forsake what our fathers served, or that we should not do as we please with our own property? You are, forsooth, the clement and straight-forward one (or simpleton)
He said, "O my people! Bethink you, if I stand upon a manifest sign (clear proof) from my Lord, and He provides me from Himself with a goodly provision, how can I concede aught to you. I desire not to do behind your backs that which I forbid you. I d
O my people! Let not a breach with me cause you to so sin that there befall you the like of that which befell the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of Salih, nor are the people of Lot far off from you
So ask pardon from your Lord, then turn to Him repentant; verily, my Lord is Merciful, Loving
They said, "O Shu´eyb! We do not understand much of what you say, and we see that you are weak (powerless) amongst us; and were it not for your family we would stone you, nor could you have power over us
He said, "O my people! Are my family more esteemed by you than Allah? Or have you taken Him as something to cast behind your backs? Verily, my Lord, surrounds all you do
O my people! Act according to your power; verily, I too will act, and you soon will know on whom comes a doom that will abase them, and him who is a liar. Watch then; verily, I am watching with you
And when Our commandment came, We saved Shu´eyb, and those who believed with him, by Our Mercy; and the great noise seized those who had done wrong, and on the morrow they were found prostrate in their houses
As though they had not dwelt therein. Behold! Removed was Midian! As was removed Thamud
And We sent Moses with our signs (revelations) and with obvious (clear) power
Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs; but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and the command of Pharaoh was no right (or true, straight) guidance
He shall approach his people on the Day of Resurrection, and take them to the Fire (as cattle are led to the watering-place) - ah, a woeful watering-place is that wither they are led
A curse follows them in this world and on the Day of Resurrection - ah, woeful is the gift that will be given them
That is one of the stories of the communities that We recite to you - Some of them are standing now and some already mown down
We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves. Their gods on whom they called instead of Allah availed them naught when once the command of your Lord had come; they add to them naught save ruin
Even thus is your Lord´s grasp when He overtakes the communities that have done wrong; verily, His grasp is grievous, strong
Verily, in this is a sign to him who fears the torment of the Hereafter - that is a Day unto which mankind shall be gathered, and that is a Day of Witness (a Day pointed to by events, a Day when testimony is given about the deeds of men, a Day which will)
We will delay it not, save unto an appointed time, already numbered
The Day when it comes, no soul shall speak save by His permission, and some shall be wretched and some glad
And as for those who are wretched, they will be in the Fire; sighing and wailing will be their lot
Abiding therein for so long as the heavens and the earth endure; save for what your Lord wills. Verily, your Lord is Accomplisher of what He wills (or plans)
And as for those who are glad, they will be in the Garden, abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure; save what your Lord wills, a gift unfailing
Be not then in doubt concerning what these men serve (or worship); they only serve as their fathers served before; and We will give them their portion undiminished
When We gave Moses the Book before, they disagreed (or disputed) concerning it. Had it not been for a Word that had already gone forth from your Lord, the matter would have been decided between them; but, verily, they are still in hesitating doubt concern
But, verily, every one will your Lord surely recompense for their works; verily, He is well Informed of what they do
So stand you firm in the Straight Path, as you are commanded - you and those who turn unto Allah with you, and transgress you not. Verily, He is Seer of what you do
Lean not unto those who do wrong, lest the Fire touches you, for you have no patrons but Allah; nor shall you be helped
And be you steadfast in prayer at the two ends of the day, and the (three) watches of the night. Verily, good things annul evil things. This is a reminder for the mindful
And be you patient, for Allah wastes not the wages of those who do good
If only there had been, among the generations before you, men endowed with a remnant of virtue (balance, sobriety, righteousness, good sense) forbidding (warning, preventing) men from corruption in the earth, as did the few whom We saved from them. But th
In truth your Lord did not destroy the communities unjustly while they were doing right. (Or for a few or minor wrong-doings, or while there were few wrong-doers, or while they had the potentiality to mend)
Had your Lord pleased, He could have made men one nation; but they will not cease to dispute
Save those on whom your Lord has had mercy. For this did He create them. And the Word of your Lord is fulfiled, "Verily, I will surely fill hell with Jinns and Mankind altogether
And all that We relate to you of the stories of the Messengers in order that thereby We might make firm your heart. And herein has the truth come to you, an admonition and a reminder to the believers
Say to those who believe not, "Act according to your power, verily, we are acting too
And wait ye, verily, we are waiting too
Allah´s are the unseen things of the heavens and of the earth; and unto Him do all affairs return. So serve (worship) Him and put your trust in Him; for your Lord is not heedless of what you do
ALIF LAM RA. These are the verses (or symbols) of the Perspicuous (or clarifying) Book
Verily, We have revealed it as a Lecture (a Quran) in Arabic; per chance (or possibly) you may understand
We tell you the best (the most beautiful, appealing, enlightening) of narratives in that We inspired in you this Quran, though you were before it among the heedless
When Joseph said to his father, "O my father! Verily, I saw (in my dream) eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon - I saw them prostrating themselves unto me
He said, "O my boy! Tell not your vision to your brethren, for they will plot against you. Verily, Satan is to man an open foe
Thus your Lord will prefer you, and teach you the interpretation of events, and fulfil His favour upon you, and upon the family of Jacob, as He fulfiled it upon your two forefathers, Abraham and Isaac, before you. Verily, your Lord is Knowing, Wise
In Joseph and his brethren were signs to those who inquire (or seek Truth)
When they said, "Surely, Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are, though we are many. Verily, our father is in obvious aberration (wandering in mind)
Slay Joseph, or cast him out to some (far or unknown) land; that your father´s face (favour) may be free for you, and you may afterwards be a righteous folk
One from amongst them said, "Slay not Joseph, but, if you must act, throw him into the bottom of a pit; some caravan of travellers may pick him up
Said they, "O our father! What ails you that you will not trust us with Joseph seeing we are unto him sincere (well wishers)
Send him with us to-morrow to revel and to play, and, verily, we will take good care of him
Said he, "Verily, it grieves me that you should take him with you, for I fear lest the wolf devour him while you take no heed
Said they, "Why, if the wolf should devour him while we are so (strong) a band, verily, then we should ourselves have perished first
And when they had gone off with him and agreed to put him in the depths of a pit, We inspired him, "Thou shall surely remind them of this affair of theirs when they know you not
And they came to their father in the evening weeping
And they said, "O our father! Verily, we went forth to race and left Joseph by our things, and the wolf devoured him, but you will not believe us though we speak the truth
And they brought his shirt with false blood upon it. Said he, "Nay, but your souls have beguiled you into some deed; but patience is more fitting for me. And Allah alone is He whose aid is to be sought against that which you describe
And a caravan of travellers came and sent their water-drawer. He let down his bucket into the pit. Said he, "What good luck! Here is a youth." So they concealed him, as a treasure, and Allah was Aware of what they did
And they sold him for a mean price, a few dirham counted out- in such low estimation did they hold him
And the man from Egypt who had bought him said to his wife, "Make his stay with us honourable; it may be he will be of use to us, or we may adopt him as a son." Thus did We establish Joseph in the land that We might teach him the interpretation
And when he had reached maturity We gave him judgment (or wisdom or power) and knowledge, for thus do We reward those who do good and right
And she, in whose house he was, desired to seduce him for his person (or body, or away from his true self); and she locked the doors and said, "Come you (to me)!" Said he, "I seek refuge in Allah (Allah forbid)! Verily, he (your husband) is
And she desired (lusted after) him, and he would have desired her, had it not been that he saw the argument (or evidence) of his Lord; thus did We ordain that We might turn away evil and lewdness from him; for verily, he was one of our servants, sincere a
And they raced to the door and she rent his shirt from behind; and they met her lord (husband) at the door. Said she, "What else is the recompense for him who wishes evil for your family, but prison or a grievous doom
Said he (Joseph), "She it was who sought to seduce me for my person (or from my true self)." And one from among her family saw this and bore witness thus "If his shirt be rent from in front, then she speaks the truth and he is of the liars
But if his shirt be rent from behind, then she lies and he is of the truthful
And when he saw his shirt rent from behind he (her husband) said, "This is one of the guiles (or tricks) of you women; verily, your tricks are great
O Joseph! Turn aside from this (pass it over). And do you, woman, ask pardon for your fault; for truly, you are of the sinful
And some women in the city said, "The wife of the King´s Minister seeks to seduce her slave for his person; truly, he has infatuated (smitten) her with lust: verily, we see her in manifest error
And when she heard of their malicious talk, she sent for them, and prepared for them a banquet, and gave each of them a knife; and she said (to Joseph), "Come forth to them!" And when they saw him they exalted (admired) him and cut their hands e
Said she, "There before you is he about whom you blamed me. I did seek to seduce him for his person, but he did save himself firmly, guiltless. But now if he does not what I bid him he shall surely be cast into prison and shall surely be among those
Said he, "O My Lord! Prison is dearer to me than what they call on me to do; and unless you turn from me their wiles I shall incline unto them and shall be among the foolish
And his Lord answered him and turned from him their wiles; verily, He is Hearer, Knower
Then it appeared good to them, even after they had seen the signs (of his innocence), to imprison him for a time
And two young men went to prison with him. Said one of them, "Verily, I dreamt that I was pressing wine." And the other said, "Verily, I dreamt that I was bearing on my head loaves from which the birds did eat." "Tell us" (th)
He said, "I shall tell you both of its interpretation before your daily meal is brought to you. That is (some) of what my Lord has taught me; verily, I have forsaken the faith of a people who believe not in Allah, and disbelieve in the Hereafter
And I have followed the faith of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. It never was for us to associate aught as partners with Allah. This is of the Bounty (or Grace) from Allah upon us and upon mankind: but most men give not thanks
O you two fellow-prisoners! Are manifold lords better, or Allah, the One, the Almighty
What you worship beside Him are naught but names which you have named, you and your fathers, for which Allah has sent down no authority. Judgment rests with Allah only, who commands you to worship none but Him. That is the right religion, but most men kno
O you two fellow-prisoners! As for one of you, he shall pour out wine for his lord to drink: and as for the other, he shall be crucified, and the birds shall eat from his head. Thus is the matter decreed whereof you did inquire
And he said to him of the two whom he knew would escape, "Remember me with your Lord!" But Satan made him forget to mention him to his lord, so he (Joseph) lingered in prison for a few more years
And the king said, "Verily, I saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven lean kine devoured; and seven green ears of corn and (seven) others dry. O you chiefs! Explain to me my vision, if dreams you can interpret
Said they, "Confused dreams! And naught know we of the interpretation of such dreams
Then he of the twain who had escaped, remembered after a while, and said, "Verily, I will inform you of the interpretation thereof, so send me forth
(When he came to Joseph, he said) "Joseph! O you truthful one! Explain to us the seven fat kine which seven lean ones devoured; and the seven green ears of corn and others dry that I may return to the people, per chance (or possibly) they then may kn
He said, "You shall sow for seven years, as is your wont; but what you reap, leave it in the ear, except a little whereof you eat
Then there shall come after that seven severe years which shall devour what you have put by before for them, save a little which you shall preserve
Then there will come after that a year in which the people shall have abundant rain and in which they shall press (wine and oil)
Then the king (after he had been told) said, "Bring him (Joseph) unto me." And when the messenger came unto him, Joseph said, "Return to your Lord, and ask him, what is the state of mind of the women who cut their hands? Verily, my lord kno
He (the king sent for the women and) said, "What happened when you sought to seduce Joseph?" They said, "Allah preserve us! We know no evil of him." Said the wife of the Minister, "Now is the truth exposed! It was I who sought to
(The wife said) "This, I asked that he (my lord) might know that I did not betray him in his absence, and that Allah guides not the guile of the betrayers
Yet I do not absolve myself, for the human soul is prone to evil, save that on which my Lord has mercy; verily, my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful
And the king said, "Bring him (Joseph) to me. I will give him a special position with myself." And when he had spoken with him he said, "Verily, to-day you are with us in a well established place of trust
He said, "Place me over the store-house of the land; verily, I will be an expert custodian. (one who is skilled and knows what is required)
Thus did We establish Joseph in the land that he might possess (settle or control) what part (in the manner, time and place) he pleases. We reach with Our mercy whom We will. We waste not the wages of those who do right
Surely the reward of the Hereafter is better for those who believe and fears (ward off evil or are constant in righteousness)
And his brethren came to Joseph, and they presented themselves unto him and he knew them, but they recognised him not
And when he had given them their provisions he said, "Bring me your brother that you have from your father (but different mothers). Do you not see that I give good measure, and that I am the best of hosts
But if you bring him not to me, no measure shall you have with me, nor shall you come nigh me
They said, "We will beg him from our father, and we will surely do it
Then he said to his servants, "Put their merchandise (they brought in payment) back into their packs, so that they may discover it only when they have returned to their family; per chance (or possibly) they may return
And when they returned to their father, they said, "O our father! A measure is withheld from us; so send with us our brother that we may obtain the measure, and, verily, we will guard him well
He said, "Shall I entrust you with him with results other than when I entrusted you with his brother before him? But Allah is the best of keepers, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful
And when they opened their packs they found their merchandise restored to them. Said they, "O our father! What more can we crave? Here are our goods restored to us. We shall get provisions for our folk, and we shall guard our brother, and shall have
He said, "I will by no means send him with you until you give me a solemn oath - In the name of Allah that you will surely bring him back to me, unless you are yourselves besieged (made powerless)." So when they had sworn their oaths he said, &q
And he said further, "O my sons! Enter not by one gate, but enter by several gates. Not that I can avail you aught against Allah. Lo! Judgment (decision, command) rests only with Allah. In Him do I put my trust, and on Him do the trusting rely
And when they had entered as their father bade them, it availed them nothing against (the plan of) Allah. It fulfiled but a want in Jacob´s soul; for, verily, he was possessed of knowledge that We had taught him; but most of mankind know not
And when they entered into the presence of Joseph, he took his brother to stay with him, and said, "Verily, I, even I, am your brother, so sorrow not for their doings (past, present and future)
And when he had given them their provisions, he placed the drinking cup in his brother´s pack; then a crier shouted out, "O you in the caravan! Verily, you are thieves
They said, turning to them, "What is it that you miss
Said they, "We miss the goblet of the king, and whoever brings it shall have a camel-load, and I will be bound by it (the promise)
They said, "By Allah! You knew we came not to do evil in the land, and that we were not thieves
They said, "And what shall be the penalty thereof if you prove to be liars
They said, "The recompense thereof is he in whose pack it is found - he shall be the recompense (atonement) thereof (as a bondsman); thus do we recompense the unjust
And he began (searching) their sacks before the sacks of his brother; then he drew it forth from his brother´s sack. Thus did We devise a stratagem for Joseph. He could not take his brother by the king´s law unless Allah willed. We raise by de
They said, "If he has stolen, a brother of his has stolen before him." But Joseph kept it secret in his soul and disclosed it not to them, but said within himself, "You are in a worse situation (than you think), and Allah knows best the tru
They said, "O exalted one (ruler, minister)! Verily, he has a father, aged and venerable (who will grieve). Take then one of us instead of him; verily, we can see that you are of those who do good
Said he, "I seek refuge in Allah from taking any save him with whom we found our property; verily, we should then be certainly unjust
And when they despaired of (moving) him they retired to consult privately. Said the eldest of them, "Remember you not how your father took an oath from you. In the name of Allah? And how before this you failed in your duty with Joseph? I will surely
Return you to your father and say, ´O our father! Verily, your son has committed theft, and we bore testimony to naught but what we knew. We could not guard against the unseen (the unforeseen, the unknown or the hidden)
Ask then in the city where we were, and of the caravan in which we travelled there, for, verily, we tell the truth
He (their father when had heard this) said, "Nay, your souls have beguiled (tempted, diverted, deceived) you to something (that serves you). But patience is fitter for me. It may be that Allah will bring them all to me. Verily, He is Knower, Wise.&qu
And he turned away from them and said, "Alas great is my grief for Joseph!" and his eyes grew white with the sorrow he repressed
They said, "By Allah! You will not cease to remember Joseph till your health is ruined or you are of those who perish
Said he, "I complain of (or expose) my distress and anguish only to Allah, for I know from Allah that which you know not
O my sons! Go and inquire concerning Joseph and his brother, and despair not of Allah´s comfort (soothing mercy); for, verily, none despairs of the Mercy of Allah save a faithless people
And when they returned into his (Joseph´s) presence they said, "O exalted one! Misfortune has touched both us, and our families, and we have brought scanty capital. So give us full measure and treat it as charity; verily, Allah rewards the char
He said, "Do you know what you did with Joseph and his brother in your ignorance
They said, "Are you then indeed Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and this is my brother; Allah has been gracious towards us. Verily, whoever fears Allah (repulses evil or is righteous) and is patient (endures) - verily, Allah wastes not the
They said, "By Allah! Allah has chosen (or preferred) you over us; and we indeed were guilty
He said, "No reproach against you this day! Allah will pardon you, for He is the most Merciful of the merciful
Take this my shirt, and lay it over the face of my father, he will become able to see; and come to me with all your family
And when the caravan left (Egypt), their father said, "Verily, I smell the presence of Joseph; nay, think me not a dotard
Those around him said, "By Allah! You are in your old meandering mind
And when the herald of glad tidings (Judah) came he threw it on his face, and he was restored to clear sight (became a seer). Said he, "Did I not tell you that I know from Allah that of which you know not
They said, "O our father! Ask pardon for us of our sins; verily, we were sinners
He said, "I will ask pardon for you from my Lord; verily, He is the Forgiving, Merciful
And when they came before Joseph, he took his parents to stay with him, and said, "Enter you into Egypt, in safety if it please Allah
And he raised his parents upon the throne (of dignity), and they fell down before him prostrate. And he said, "O my sire! This is the fulfilment of my vision of old; my Lord has made it come true, and He has shown me kindness in bringing me forth out
O my Lord! Thou hast given me some dominion (power, sovereignty), and have taught me something of the interpretation of dreams and events (and sayings, stories etc.); O Thou Originator of the heavens and the earth! Thou art my patron (protector, pro)
That is one of the stories of the unseen that We inspire in you (Muhammad). You were not with them when they agreed in their affair when they were scheming
And though you ardently desires it, most of mankind will not believe (or have faith)
You do not ask them a fee for it; it is naught else but a reminder unto the creatures
How many a sign is there in the heavens and the earth which they pass by with face averted
And most of them believe not in Allah without associating partners with Him
Think they themselves secure, then, from overwhelming punishment coming on them from Allah, or from the Hour coming upon them suddenly while they are unaware
Say, "This is my Way; I call now unto Allah with sure knowledge (or clear proof), I and those who follow me - Glory be to Allah - for I am not of the idolaters
We never sent before you any, save men whom We inspired, from among the people of the townships (or communities). Have they not journeyed in the earth and beheld the consequences for those who were before them? Verily, the abode of Hereafter is surely bet
Until when the Messenger despaired and they thought that they were proved liars, then came Our help unto them, and whoever We pleased was saved; but Our wrath is not averted from the guilty
In their histories, surely, there are lessons for people endowed with understanding. It is not an invented tale, but a confirmation of the scriptures before it, and a detailed explanation of everything, and a guide and a mercy to a people who believe
ALIF LAM MIM RA. These are the signs (or verses) of the Book; that which is sent down to you from your Lord is the truth; but most people believe not
Allah it is who has raised the heavens without supporting columns that you can see; then He established Himself firmly on the throne (of authority and control), and subjected the sun and the moon (to His Law or service). Each one runs on its course for an
And He it is who has stretched out the earth and placed therein firm mountains and flowing rivers, and of every fruit has He placed therein in pairs. He makes the night cover the day. Lo! Herein are signs unto a people who reflect
And on the earth are diverse but neighbouring tracts, gardens of vines and ploughed fields of corn, and palms growing together (from one root) alike or not; they are watered with the same water, yet We distinguish one over the other as food; verily, in th
And if you should wonder (at their lack of faith), wondrous are their words, "When we have become dust (or are actually dust), shall we then be created anew?" These are they who disbelieve in their Lord, and these are they with fetters (yokes of)
They ask you to hasten on the evil rather than the good; yet examples come to pass before them: but your Lord is rich in forgiveness unto mankind despite their wrongdoing; but, verily, your Lord is also strict in punishment
Those who disbelieve say, "Why is no special Sign sent down upon him from his Lord." But you are only a Warner, and for every people a guide
Allah knows what each female (womb) bears, by how much the wombs fall short of or exceed (in time or number); for everything with Him is measured (calculated or in proportion)
He is the Knower of the Invisible (or unseen or hidden) and the Visible (or obvious or apparent); He is the Great, the Most High (or the Most Exalted)
Alike among you is he who keeps secret his speech and he who broadcasts it; and he who hides by night and he who stalks abroad by day
Each of them has a succession (of angels) before him and behind him, to keep guard over him at the command of Allah; verily, Allah changes not the condition of a people until they change that which is in their heart (or in their souls or change it for the)
He it is who shows you the lightning, a fear and hope; and He brings up the clouds heavy (with quickening, life-giving, fertilizing) rain
And the thunder hymns His praise, and the angels too for awe of Him; and He sends the thunderclap and smites therewith whom He will while they dispute about Allah; but He is strong and All-mighty
True prayer is only a call to Allah; and those who call on others besides Him shall not be answered at all, except as one who stretches out his hand to the water that it may reach his mouth, but it reaches it not! The call of the disbelievers is futile
And unto Allah do prostrate whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the morning and the evening
Say, "Who is Lord (and Sustainer) of the heavens and the earth?" Say, "Allah" Say, "Do ye, then, take beside Allah patrons who have no control over benefit or harm to themselves?" Say, "Shall the blind and the seeing be
He sends down from the sky water, and the channels flow according to their measure, and the torrent bears away the foam that mounts to the surface. Even so from that which they heat in the fire (metal ore etc.), craving to make ornaments or utensils, come
For those who respond to their Lord are all good things; but those who respond not to Him, had they all that is in the earth, and as much more, in vain would they offer it for ransom; for these there is a terrible reckoning, and their resort is hell - wha
Is he who knows that what is revealed unto you from your Lord is the Truth like him who is blind? But only men of understanding heed
Those who fulfil the Covenant of Allah and break not the pact
And those who join (attain) what Allah has commanded to be joined (attained), and dread their Lord and fear the woeful reckoning
And those who patiently persevere, craving their Lord´s Countenance, and are steadfast in prayer, and spend, secretly and openly, in charity from what We have bestowed upon them, and overcome evil with good - these shall have the sequel of the final
Gardens of perpetual bliss, into which they shall enter with the righteous amongst their fathers and their wives and their seed; and the angels shall enter unto them from every gate
(With the salutation) "Peace be upon you! For that you persevered in patience; and excellent is the sequel of final home
And those who break the Covenant of Allah after ratifying it, and who sever what Allah hath commanded to be joined, and who do mischief in the earth - upon these is the curse of Allah, and for them is an ill abode
Allah expands his bounty freely to whomsoever He will, or He restricts its measure; and they rejoice in the life of this world, but the life of this world is naught but a temporary comfort compared with the Hereafter
Those who disbelieve say, "Unless a sign is sent down upon him from his Lord....". Say, "Truly, Allah leads whom He will astray, but guides unto Him those who turn in repentance
Those who believe and whose heart have rest in Zikr (remembering or mention) of Allah. Verily, in Zikr (remembering or mention) of Allah do hearts find rest (comfort, satisfaction, fulfilment)
Those who believe and do what is right; Joy is for them and an excellent journey´s end
Thus have We sent you to a nation before which other nations have passed away, to recite unto them that which We have inspired in you, while they are disbelievers in the Beneficent. Say, "He is my Lord; there is no God but He; On Him do I rely, and u
And if there were a Quran by which the mountains were moved, or by which the earth was torn asunder, or the dead made to speak (this would be the one, but what would be the point) - Nay, Allah´s is the whole command! Did not those who believe know t
And already were [other] messengers ridiculed before you, and I extended the time of those who disbelieved; then I seized them, and how [terrible] was My penalty
Is He who stands over every soul, aware of what it has earned (like others)? And yet they join partners with Allah! Say, "Name (describe) them; can you inform Him of what He does not know in the earth? Or is it for their name´s sake only (that)
For them is torment in the life of this world; but surely the torment of the Hereafter is more wretched still, nor have they against Allah a defender
A similitude of the Garden which is promised unto those who fear Allah, beneath it rivers flow, its food is enduring, and likewise its shade (shelter, security)! That is the reward of those who fear (keep their duty); but the reward of disbelievers is the
And those to whom We brought the Book rejoice in that which We have sent down to you; but among the clans (sects, parties, sections) are some who deny a part thereof. Say, "I am only bidden to serve Allah and not to associate partners with Him; Unto
Thus have We revealed it, a decisive judgment in Arabic, but had you followed their lusts (prejudices, fantasies, superstitions), after the knowledge that has come to you, then truly, would you have against Allah no protecting friend nor defender
And verily, We sent Messengers before you, and We appointed for them wives and offsprings; and it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a sign save by Allah´s permission. For every period there is a Book revealed (or Law decreed or Dec)
Allah blots out what He will, or He establishes (what He wills); and with Him is the Mother of the Book (or Source of Ordinances)
Whether We will let you see a part of what We have promised them, or take you to Ourself (before this), your duty is only to deliver the message, Ours is the reckoning
See they not how We visit the land and reduce its borders (through conquest)? Allah judges (or commands), and there is none to reverse His judgment (or command), and He is swift at reckoning
And those who were before them plotted; but all plotting is Allah´s! He knows what every soul earns; and the disbelievers shall come to know who comes Home in the end
And those who disbelieve say, "You ar no Messenger!" Say, "Allah is witness enough between me and you; and so is he who has the knowledge of the Book (any revealed Scripture)
ALIF LAM MIM. A book which We have revealed unto you , to bring men forth from darkness into light, - by permission of their Lord - unto the Way of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
Allah is He unto Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. Alas for the disbelievers, for a terrible doom
Those who love the life of this world better than the Hereafter, and turn folks from the path of Allah, and crave to make it crooked; these are far astray
We never sent a Messenger save with the language of his people, that he might clarify the message to them. Then Allah leads whom He will astray, and guides whom He will; and He is the Mighty, the Wise
We did send Moses with our signs, saying, "Bring forth your people from the darkness into the light, and remind them of the Days of Allah!" Verily, in that are signs to every patient, grateful one
Remember when Moses said to his people, "Remember the favours of Allah towards you, when He saved you from Pharaoh´s people, who afflicted you with dreadful torment, slaughtering your sons and letting your women live;" in that was a great
When your Lord proclaimed, "If you give thanks I will surely give you increase; but if you are thankless, verily, my torment is severe
And Moses said, "If you are thankless, you and all on the earth, then - verily, Allah is self-sufficient and Praiseworthy
Has not the history come to you of those who were before you, of the people of Noah, and A´ad, and Thamud, and those who came after them? None knows them save Allah. Their Messengers came unto them with manifest signs; but they thrust their hands in
Their Messengers said, "Is there doubt about Allah, the originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you to pardon you for your sins, and to reprieve you unto an appointed term." They said, "You are but mortals like ourselves; you wish
Their Messengers said unto them, "We are only mortals like yourselves; but Allah gives grace unto whomsoever He will of His servants, and it is not for us to bring you an authority, save by His permission. In Allah let believers rely
What ails us that we should not put our trust in Allah when He has guided us in our paths? We will surely endure the hurt you do us. In Allah let the trusting put their trust
And those who disbelieved said to their Messengers, "We will drive you forth from our land; or else you shall return to our faith!" Then their Lord inspired them, saying "We will surely destroy the unjust
And We will make you to dwell in the land after them. That is for him who fears (keeps in mind) My Time (of Judgment or Majesty) and fears (keeps in mind) My punishment (or threat)
Then they sought to force a decision (to settle the matter in their favour); and disappointed was every rebel tyrant
Behind such a one is hell, and he is given to drink boiling fetid liquid (unwholesome products of disease like pus)
Which he sips but cannot swallow; and death comes upon him from every side, and yet he can not die; and before him is unrelenting woe
This is the likeness (parable, similitude) of those who disbelieve in their Lord - their works are as ashes whereon the wind blows fiercely on a stormy day. They have no control of aught that they have earned - That is the extreme failure (or far straying)
Do not you see that Allah created the heavens and the earth in Truth? If He please He can remove you (take you off) and bring (replace you with) a new creation
That is for Allah no great matter
They will all come forth unto their Lord; and the despised (or weak) say to those who were scornful (or inflated with pride), "We were but followers of your s, can you now avail us aught against Allah´s torment?" They say, "If Allah h
And Satan says, when the affair is decided, "Verily, Allah promised you a promise of truth; I, too, promised and failed you. I had no authority over you, except to call you, and you did hearken unto me; then blame me not, but blame yourselves; I cann
But those who believe and do right will enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever by the permission of their Lord; their salutation therein is "Peace! (tranquillity, security, harmony)
Do you not see how Allah strikes out a parable? A goodly Saying is like a goodly tree whose root is set firm, and whose branches reach into the heavens
It gives its fruit at every season by the permission of its Lord - Allah strikes out parables for men that per chance (or possibly) they may reflect (or be mindful)
And the similitude of a bad saying is as a bad tree, which is felled from above the earth, possessing no stability
Allah answers (confirms, establishes) those who believe with the firm (sure) word in the life of this world and in the Hereafter; but Allah leads the wrong-doers astray; for Allah does what He will
Do not you see those who have exchanged Allah´s favours for disbelief, and have led their people to the House of Perdition
Into Hell? They shall broil therein - an ill resting-place
And they made peers for Allah, to lead men astray from His path. Say, "Enjoy yourselves, for, verily, your destination is the Fire
Say to my servants who believe, that they be steadfast in prayer and expend in charity of what We have bestowed upon them, in secret and in public, before there comes the Day when there shall be no bargaining (buying and selling, barter) and no befriendin
Allah it is who created the heavens and the earth; and sent down water from the sky, and brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for you; and subjected to you the ships, to float therein upon the sea at His bidding; and made of service for you the r
And makes the sun and the moon constant in their course, to be of service to you; and made of service for you the night and the day
And He gives you of everything you asked of Him: and if you try to number Allah´s favours, you cannot count them; - verily, man is persistently unjust and ungrateful
And when Abraham said, "My Lord, make this land safe, and turn me and my sons away from serving idols
My Lord, verily, they have led many men astray; but he who follows me, verily, he is of me; but he who rebels against me - still you are Forgiving, Merciful
O our Lord! Verily, I have settled some of my seed (posterity) in a valley without corn (uncultivable), near Thy Sacred House (the valley of Mecca). O our Lord! That they may establish proper worship, so make the heart of men yearn towards them, and
O my Lord! Verily, Thou knowest what we hide and what we proclaim; for naught is hid from Allah in the earth or in the heavens
Praise be to Allah Who hath bestowed on me in my old age, Ishmael and Isaac! - Verily, my Lord is Hearer of Prayer
O my Lord! Make me steadfast in proper worship and of my seed likewise! O our Lord! And accept my prayer
O our Lord! Cover us with Thy Forgiveness, me and my parents and all believers on the Day when the reckoning is established
So think not Allah careless of what the unjust do; He only respites them until the day on which all eyes shall stare in horror
Running on, necks outstretched, heads uplifted, their gaze returned to them, and their heart void
And warn mankind of the Day when the Wrath shall reach them: then those who have done wrong shall say, "O our Lord! Respite us for a short term longer, and we will respond to Thy call, and follow the Messengers!" - "What! Did you not used t
And you dwelt in the dwellings of those who had wronged their own souls; and it was made plain to you how We dealt with them; and We struck out many parables for you
But they plotted mighty stratagems, but their stratagem were within Allah´s sight, although their stratagem were mountain-shaking
So think not that Allah fails in his promise to His Messengers. Verily, Allah is Mighty, the Lord of Retribution
On the day when the earth shall be changed for another earth, and the heavens too; and all shall come forth unto Allah, the One, the Almighty
You shall see the guilty on that day bound together in chains
With garments of pitch, and fire covering their faces
That Allah may reward each soul according to what it has earned. Verily, Allah is swift at reckoning
This is a clear message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned thereby, and that they may know that only He is Allah, the One, and that men of understanding may take heed
ALIF LAM RA. Those are the ayats (signs or verses) of Revelation and of a clear Reading (Quran) (or that clarifies)
Many a time will those who disbelieve wish they had surrendered (obeyed or been Muslims)
Leave them to eat and enjoy the good things of life and let hope beguile them, but they shall come to know
We never did destroy a community but there was a fixed term decreed for it
No nation can hasten on its appointed time, nor put it off
But they say, "O you to whom the Reminder (the Quran) has been sent down! Verily, you are possessed
Why do you not bring us the angels if you do tell the truth
We sent not down the angels save as a Fact (for a just or right cause, effect or reason); but then (if We did) they would have no respite
Verily, We have revealed (sent down) the Reminder, and, verily, We are its Guardian
We, verily, sent Messengers before you among the sects of men in past ages
But there never came a messenger to them but they did mock him
Even so do We let it traverse the heart of the guilty
They will not believe therein, though the example of those of past times is before them
But had We opened to them a Gate of Heaven and they had continued to ascend through it
They would only say, "Our eye-sight is only intoxicated; nay, we have been bewitched by sorcery (or hypnotized)
And We have placed in the sky the Signs of the Zodiac (or mansions or constellations of stars), and have made them beautiful to the beholders
And We have guarded them from every accursed (rejected, pelted) devil (or evil spirit)
But any that steal a hearing, there follows him a bright flaming fire (or shooting star)
And the earth have We spread out and placed on it firm mountains, and have caused to grow upon it of everything in balanced measure
And We have made for you means of livelihood therein, and for those for whom you provide not (or for whom you are not responsible)
Nor is there aught but the treasuries (storehouses) of it are with Us, and We do not send it down save in a noted quantity (ascertainable measure)
And We send forth the impregnating (fertilizing, invigorating, fecundating) winds, and We send down water from the sky, and We give it to you to drink. It is not you who hold the store thereof
And We, verily, We quicken and kill; and We are of all things the Inheritor
And We already know the foremost of you, and We know the laggards
And, verily, it is your Lord who will gather you; verily, He is Wise, Aware
And We did create man from potter´s (or sound emitting) clay of black mud wrought into form
And the jinn We created before of smokeless fire (or scorched wind)
When your Lord said to the angels, "Verily, I am creating a mortal from (sound-emitting) clay of black mud wrought into shape
So when I have fashioned it, and breathed into it of My Spirit, then fall you down before him, prostrating yourselves before him (in obeisance)
So the angels fell prostrate in obeisance, all of them together
Save Iblis, who refused to be among the prostrate
He said, "O Iblis! What ails you that you are not among the prostrate
Said he, "Why should I prostrate myself before a mortal whom you have created from potter´s (sound emitting) clay of black mud wrought into form
He said, "Then get you forth from hence, for verily, you are an outcast (rejected, accursed, pelted)
And, verily, the curse shall be upon you until the Day of Judgment
Said he, "O my Lord! Reprieve me until the day when they shall be raised
He said, "Then, verily, you are of the reprieved
Until the Day of the Appointed Time
He said, "O my Lord! Because you have put me in the wrong I will surely make wrong seemly for them on earth, and I will put them all in the wrong
Save such of your servants as are sincere and purified
Said He, "This is a Straight Way which leads to Me (or is incumbent upon Me)
Verily, over My servants you have no authority, save such of the misguided (or rebellious) as follow you
And, verily, hell is promised to them all
It has seven gates (entrances); to each gate (entrance) is assigned a certain class (or portion)
Verily, those who fear Allah shall dwell amidst gardens and springs
(It will be said to them) "Enter you therein in peace and safety
And We will strip off whatever ill-feeling is in their breasts; as brethren they rest on couches face to face
No toil shall touch them therein, nor shall they be expelled there from
Inform my servants that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful
And that My doom is a grievous doom
And inform them concerning Abraham´s guests
When they came unto him and said, "Peace!", he said, "Verily, we are afraid of you
They said, "Be not afraid! Verily, we bring you glad tidings of a boy possessing wisdom
He said, "Do you bring me this glad tidings when old age has overtaken me? Of what then do you bring good tidings
They said, "We bring you glad tidings in truth, then be not of those who despair
He said, "Who would despair of the mercy of his Lord save those who err
He said, "What then is your business, O you messengers
They said, "Verily, we are sent unto a people deeply in guilt
Save only the household (family or adherents) of Lot, all of them we are certainly charged to save
Except his wife, of whom we have ascertained that she shall be of those who stay behind
And when the messengers came unto the adherents of Lot
He said, "Verily, you are a people whom I recognize not (or of uncommon appearance)
They said, "Yea, we have come to you to accomplish that whereof they keep disputing
And we bring you the truth (or the inevitable), and, verily, we are truth-tellers
Travel then with your household in the deep darkness of the night, and follow you their rear; and let not any one of you turn round to look back; but go on to where you are commanded
And We made plain for him the decree that the uttermost one of these people should be cut off on the morrow
Then the people of the city came, glad at the tidings (of the arrival of the young men)
Said Lot, "Verily, these are my guests, therefore disgrace me not
But fear Allah, and put me not to shame
They said, "Have we not forbidden you to speak for all in the world
He said, "Here are my daughters, if do it you must
By your life (O Muhammad)! In their frenzy of intoxication (passion) they went blindly (distractedly) to and fro
And the mighty blast caught them at dawn
And We turned their cities upside down, and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay
Behold! In this is a sign to those who by tokens understand (or can read the signs)
And, verily, the cities were on a high road that still remains
Verily, in this is a sign for those who believe
And the companions of the Wood (Midian), too, were unjust
And We took vengeance on them, and, verily, they were both on an open highway, plain to see
And the companions of Al-Hijr (the Rocky Tract) also rejected the messengers
And We brought them Our revelations, but they did turn away there from
And they used to hew out dwellings from the mountain to dwell in safety
But the mighty blast seized them in the morning
And that which they counted as gain availed them naught
We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them both, save with truth. And, verily, the Hour is surely coming; then do you forgive with a gracious forgiveness
Verily, your Lord He is the Master Creator, the All-knowing
We have already given you the Seven Oft-Repeated (the verses of the first chapter of the Quran), and the mighty Quran
Let not your eyes strain after what We have allowed certain classes among them to enjoy, nor grieve for them; but lower your wing (in tenderness) to the believers
And say, "Verily, I, even I, am a plain Warner
Such as We sent down for those who make divisions
Those who break the Quran into separate parts
Them, by your Lord! We shall question, one and all
About what they used to do
Therefore, proclaim what you are commanded, and withdraw from the idolaters
Verily, We are enough defence for you against the scoffers
Who place other gods along with Allah; but they at length shall come to know
And well know We that your breast was at times oppressed by what they say
But hymn the praises of your Lord, and be you of those who make prostrations (or obeisance)
And serve your Lord until there comes unto you the Hour that is certain (death)
The Command of Allah will inevitably come to pass; seek not then to hasten it. Glorified and Exalted is He above all that which they join with Him
He sends down the angels with the Spirit at His command upon whom He will of His servants, saying, "Give warning that there is no God but Me; therefore, fear (do your duty to) Me
He created the heavens and the earth with truth! Exalted is He above all that which they join with Him
He created man from a drop (of sperm); and yet, behold, he is an open opponent
The cattle too have We created for you; in them is warmth (clothing) and profit (benefits, uses) and from them do you eat
In them there is beauty for you when you drive them home to rest, and when you drive them forth to pasture
And they bear your heavy burdens to lands which you could not otherwise reach, except with souls distressed; - verily, your Lord is Kind and Merciful
And horses too, and mules, and asses, for you to ride upon and for an ornament. He has creates also that which you know not
(Unto or For Allah) is the direction of the Straight Way; from it some turn aside (or are not straight): but had He pleased He would have led you all straight
He it is who sends down water from the sky, whence you have drink, and whence the trees grow whereby you feed your flocks
He makes the corn to grow, and the olives, and the palms, and the grapes, and all kinds of other fruit; - verily, herein is indeed a sign for a people who reflect
And He subjected to you the night and the day, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars are subjected to His command. Verily, in these are signs to a people who have sense (sensibility or wisdom)
And what He has produced for you in the earth varying in hue (colours and qualities), verily, in that is a sign for a people who are mindful (aware. remembering, grateful)
He it is who has subjected the sea, that you may eat fresh flesh there from; and you bring forth from it ornaments which you wear,- and you may see the ships cleaving through it, and that you may search after His Bounty, and per chance (or possibly) you m
And He has cast firm mountains on the earth lest it shake with you; and rivers and roads; per chance (or possibly) you may be guided
And landmarks; and by the stars too are they guided
Is He who creates like him who creates not? Will you then not remember (be mindful, aware)
But if you would number the favours of Allah, you cannot count them. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah knows what you keep secret (or hidden), and what you disclose (or proclaim)
And those on whom you call beside Allah cannot create anything, for they are themselves created
Dead, not living, nor can they know when they shall be raised
Your God is one God, and those who believe not in the Hereafter their heart are given to denial, and they are inflated with pride
Without a doubt Allah knows what you keep secret and what you disclose. Verily, He loves not those inflated with pride
And when it is said to them, "What is it that your Lord has revealed (sent down)?" they say, "Old folks´ tales
Let them bear the burden of their sins in full on the Day of Resurrection, and also some of the burdens of those whom they led astray without knowledge. Alas! How grievous is the burden they shall bear
Those who were before them plotted, but Allah struck at the foundations of their building, and the roof fell on them from above, and the torment came to them, from whence they could not perceive
Then on the Day of Resurrection He will put them to shame, and say, "Where are My associates about whom you were divided into parties?" Those endowed with knowledge will say, "Verily, to-day disgrace, and evil cover the disbelievers
Those whom the angels take away while they are wronging their own souls." Then will they offer peace and surrender, saying "We have done no evil (knowingly)." (The reply will be) "Nay! Surely Allah knows what you used to do
So enter you the doors of hell, to dwell therein; ill, indeed, is the resort of the arrogant
And it will be said to those who fear Allah (the righteous), "What is it that your Lord has revealed (sent down)?" They will say, "All that is good." For those who do good, there is good in this world; but certainly the abode of the He
Gardens of Eternity which they shall enter, beneath which rivers flow; therein shall they have what they please; - thus does Allah reward those who fear Him (or repel evil)
To those whom the angels take away in a goodly state (those who die righteous) they shall say, "Peace be upon you! Enter you into the Garden (Paradise) for that which you have done
Do they expect other than that the angels should come to take them away, or that your Lord´s command should come to pass? Even so did those before them; Allah did not wrong them; but it was themselves they wronged
So that the evil which they had done smote them, and that which they mocked surrounded (imprisoned, restricted, hemmed them in)
And the idolaters (those who associated others with Allah) said, "Had Allah pleased we had not served aught beside Him, neither we nor our fathers; nor had we forbidden aught without His permission". Even so did those before them. Are the messen
Verily, We have sent to every nation a Messenger, proclaiming, "Serve you Allah, and avoid Taghut (false gods)." And amongst them are some whom Allah has guided, and amongst them are some for whom error has become established. So travel through
If you are eager for their guidance, verily, Allah guides not those who go astray (or mislead), nor have they any helpers
They swear by their strongest oath, "Allah will not raise up him who dies."- Nay! But it is a promise binding on Him in truth. But most know not
(It is) To explain to them that which they disputed about, and that those who disbelieved may know that they are liars
We only say unto a thing We intend, the Word, "BE," and it is
But those who fled their homes for Allah´s sake, after they were wronged (oppressed), We will surely establish them in this world with good things; but truly the reward of the Hereafter is greater, if you did but know
Those who are patient, and put their trust (or reliance) upon their Lord
And We have not sent before you any but men, whom We inspired - Ask you those who possess the Reminder (or the Message), if you know not yourselves
With Manifest (clear) Signs and with Books of Prophecy; and We have sent down the Reminder to you too, that you may explain to men clearly what has been sent down to them, and that they may reflect
Are those, who devise evil plots, secure that Allah will not cause the earth to swallow them up, or that His Wrath will not seize them from whence they cannot perceive
Or that He may not call them to account in the midst of their going to and fro, without the possibility of frustrating Him
Or that He should seize them with a gradual wasting? Verily, your Lord is indeed Kind, Merciful
Do they not look at Allah´s creations, even among (inanimate things) - how their shadows turn to the right or the left, in prostration (obeisance or submission) to Allah and they are humble (or shrinking)
And unto Allah does prostration (obeisance) whatever is in the heavens and in the earth, whether living creature or angel; nor are they arrogant (inflated with pride)
They fear their Lord above them, and they do what they are commanded
And Allah says, "Take not two gods; He is only one God; then fear Me, and Me alone
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and in the earth, and to Him is duty (obedience) due unceasingly (or religion is for Him fundamentally and forever). Will you then fear other than Allah
And whatever favours you enjoy, they are from Allah; then, whenever distress touches you, unto Him you turn for succour
Yet, when He removes the distress from you, lo! A party of you join partners with their Lord
That they may deny that which We have given them. Then enjoy life while you may, for at length you shall come to know the truth
And they set aside a portion of what We have bestowed upon them for what they know not. By Allah! You shall certainly be questioned concerning that which you have devised
They assign for Allah daughters - Glory be to Him - and for themselves they desire them not (or desire sons)
When any one of them receives tidings of a female child, his face is over clouded and black, and he is filled with inner wrath
He skulks away from the people, for the evil tidings he has heard; - is he to keep it with its disgrace, or to bury it in the dust? - Ah! How evil is their judgment (or choice)
For those who believe not in the Hereafter is there is an evil similitude: but Allah´s is the Sublime Similitude; for He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
If Allah were to punish men for their wrong-doing He would not leave upon the earth a single living creature; but He reprieves them until an appointed time; and when their time comes they cannot put it off an hour, nor can they advance it
They assign to Allah what they abhor themselves; and their tongues expound the lie that all good is to be theirs." Without a doubt theirs is the Fire, for, verily, they shall be abandoned therein
By Allah! We verily sent messengers unto the nations before you, but Satan made their works fair-seeming unto them. So he is their patron this day, and for them is grievous doom
We have revealed the Book unto you only that you may explain unto them that wherein they differ, and as a guidance and a mercy to a people who have faith
And Allah sends down water from the sky, and quickens therewith the earth after its death; verily, in that is a sign to a people who can hear
Verily, you have in cattle a lesson; We give you to drink from that which is in their belly, betwixt excretions and blood, pure milk, agreeable for drinkers
And of the fruit of the palms and the grapes you derive drinks and goodly nourishment; verily, in that is a sign to a people who have sense
And your Lord inspired the bee, "Take to habitations in the mountains and in the trees, and in the habitations of men
Then eat from every fruit, and walk in the beaten paths of your Lord". There comes forth from her body a draught varying in hue, in which is a healing for mankind. Verily, herein are, indeed, signs unto a people who reflect
Allah created you; then He will take you to Himself; but amongst you are some whom He will thrust into the most decrepit stage of life, so that he may not know aught that once he knew. Verily, Allah is Knower, Powerful
And Allah has bestowed his gifts of provisions more freely on some of you over others; but those who have been preferred will not restore their provision to those whom their right hands possess that they may share equally therein: - is it Allah´s favours they deny
And Allah has made for you mates of your own nature, and has made for you from them sons and daughters and grandchildren; and has provided you with sustenance of the best things; - is it, then in vanity that they believe, while for Allah´s favour th
And they serve beside Allah what cannot control for them any provision from the heavens or the earth, nor have they any power
Do not then coin similitudes for Allah! Verily, Allah knows, but you know not
Allah coins a similitude (or parable); (On the one hand) a slave owned by another, having control over nothing, and (on the other hand) one on whom We have bestowed a goodly favours from Us, and who spends there from freely secretly and openly - shall the
And Allah coins another similitude (parable): two men, one of them dumb, able to do nothing, a burden to his lord; wherever he directs him he brings no success; is he to be held equal with him who bids what is just and who is on the Straight Way
To Allah belongs the Mystery of the heavens and the earth. And the Decision of the Hour (of Judgment) is but as the twinkling of an eye, or even quicker. Verily, Allah has power over all things
Allah brings you forth out of the wombs of your mothers knowing naught; and He gives you hearing, and sight, and heart, that you may give thanks
Do they not see the birds subservient in the vault of the sky? None holds them in but Allah: verily, in that is a sign unto a people who believe
Allah made for you habitations, homes of repose; and made for you, of the skins of cattle, dwellings (tents), that you may find them light on the day you move your quarters and the day when you abide; and from their wool and from their fur, and from their
And Allah has made for you, out what He has created, shade; and has made for you shelters in the mountains; and He has made for you garments to protect you from the heat, and coats of mail to keep you from each other´s violence: - thus does He fulfi
But if they turn their backs, your duty is only to convey the Clear Message
They recognize the favours of Allah, and then they deny them, for most men are ungrateful
On the Day We shall raise from all peoples a witness; then shall no excuse be accepted from disbelievers, and they shall receive no favours (or be allowed to make amends)
And when those who did wrong see the Penalty, it will not be mitigated, nor will they receive respite
And when those who join partners with Allah behold those partners, they will say, "Our Lord! These are your partners on whom we used to invoke beside Thee." And they shall throw back the words at them, "Verily, you are liars
And they shall proffer unto Allah surrender that day; and all that which they had devised shall stray away from them
Those who disbelieve and turn folks from the path of Allah, We will add doom to their doom, for that they worked corruption
And on the day when We will raise up in every nation a witness against them from among themselves, and We will bring you (Muhammad) as a witness against these (your people or the other witnesses); for We have revealed (sent down) to you a Book (Scripture)
Verily, Allah commands justice, the doing of good (kindness, benevolence), and liberality to kindred, and He forbids all shameful deeds (lewdness, abomination, perversity) and wickedness (wrong, injustice, oppression, rebellion); He exhorts you that per c
Fulfil the Covenant of Allah when you have entered into it, and break not your oaths after confirming them, for you thereby make Allah your surety; verily, Allah knows what you do
And be not like her who unravels her yarn, fraying it out after she hath spun it close, by taking your oaths for mutual intrigue, because one nation is more numerous than another; Allah only tries you therewith, but He will make manifest to you on the Day
But had Allah pleased He would have made you one nation; but He leads astray whom He will, and guides whom He will; - but you shall be questioned as to that which you used to do
Take not therefore your oaths for mutual deceit, lest a foot slip after being planted firmly, and you taste of evil in that you turned folks off the path of Allah, and your s should be a mighty doom
And sell not the Covenant of Allah for a little price; Verily, with Allah alone is that which is better for you, if you did but know
What you have is spent (wastes away), but what Allah has endures; and verily, We will recompense the patient (steadfast) in proportion to the best of what they used to do
Whoever acts aright, male or female, and is a believer, We will quicken with a goodly life; and We will recompense them in proportion to the best of what they used to do
When you do read the Quran ask refuge with Allah from Satan the outcast (the rejected or pelted one)
Verily, he has no power over those who believe and who upon their Lord rely (trust)
His power is only over those who take him for a patron, and over the idolaters
And whenever We change one revelation for another - Allah knows best what He reveals (sends down) - They say, "You are but inventing!"- Nay, most of them know not
Say, "The Holy Spirit brought it down from your Lord in truth, that it may confirm (the faith of) those who believe, and for a guidance and glad tidings to those who have Surrendered unto Allah (Muslims)
We know well that they say, "It is only some mortal who teaches him." But the tongue of him they point to (Muhammad) is outlandish, while this (Quran) is Arabic, pure and clear
Verily, those who believe not in Allah´s signs, Allah will not guide them, and for them is grievous woe
Only they are the inventors who believe not in Allah´s signs; and these, they are the liars
Whoever disbelieves in Allah after having believed - unless it be one who is forced and whose heart is still content in the faith - but whoever expands his breast to (easing) disbelieve - on them is wrath from Allah, and theirs is a mighty doom
That is because they preferred the love of the life of this world to the Hereafter, and because Allah guides not unbelieving people
These are they whose heart, and hearing, and sight, Allah has sealed, and these, they are the heedless
Assuredly, in the Hereafter they will be the losers
Then, verily, your Lord - to those who fled after they had been tried, and then fought strenuously and were patient, - verily, your Lord after that will be Forgiving and Merciful
On the Day when every soul will come to plead for itself, every soul shall be paid what it has earned, and they shall not be wronged
Allah coins a similitude (parable): a city which was safe and content, its provision came to it in plenty from every place, and then it denied (was ungrateful for) Allah´s favours, and Allah made it feel the garb of dearth and fear, because of that
And there came to them a messenger from amongst themselves, but they called him a liar, so the torment seized them, while yet they were unjust
Eat, then, from what Allah has provided you, things lawful and good, and give thanks for the favours of Allah, if it be Him you serve
He has only forbidden you carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is devoted to other than Allah; but he who is driven thereto (forced by necessity), neither craving nor transgressing due limits, then verily, Allah is Forgiving and Merc
And say not of what your own tongues pronounce, the lie "This is lawful, and this is unlawful," inventing against Allah a lie; verily, those who invent against Allah a lie shall not prosper
A brief enjoyment for them - then a grievous woe
For those who are Jews We have forbidden what We have already narrated to you. We wronged them not, but they were wont to wrong themselves
Then, verily, your Lord - for those who do evil in ignorance and afterwards repent and amend - verily, your Lord is indeed Forgiving and Merciful
Verily, Abraham was indeed, a model, devoutly obedient to Allah, by nature upright, and he was not of the idolaters
Thankful for His favours; He chose him and He guided him unto the Straight Way
And We gave him in this world good things; and, verily, in the Hereafter he is among the righteous
Then We inspired you (Muhammad) saying, "Follow the religion of Abraham, as one by nature upright. He was not of the idolaters
The Sabbath was only made (strict) for those who dispute thereon; but, verily, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment concerning that whereon they do dispute
Call unto the way of your Lord with wisdom and goodly exhortation, and reason with them in the best (kindest, most gracious, elegant, persuasive) way; verily, your Lord He knows best who has erred from His way, and He is best aware of those who receive gu
But if you punish (or catch them out), punish (or catch them out) only with the like of that with which you were afflicted; but if you endure patiently, verily it is better for the patient
Endure you patiently. Your endurance is only by the help of Allah. Grieve not about them; and be not distressed because of that which they devise
Verily, Allah is with those who fear (do their duty to) Him, and with those who do good
Glorified be He Who carried His servant on a journey by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Remote Mosque, the neighbourhood of which We have blessed, to show him of Our Signs. Verily, He is the Hearer and the Seer
And We gave Moses the Book (Scripture) and made it a guidance to the Children of Israel, saying: "Take you no guardian besides Me
(They were) The seed of those We carried with Noah (in the ark). Verily, he was a thankful servant
And We clearly warned the Children of Israel in the Book, "You shall verily do evil in the earth twice, and you shall become great tyrants (or elated with pride)
And when the first of the two came, We sent against you Our servants given to great violence. They entered the inner most parts of your homes; and it was a fulfiled warning
Then We rallied you once more against them, and aided you with resources and sons, and made you a numerous band
If you do well, you do well to your own souls; and if you do evil, you do it against your own souls. And when the second warning came, We permitted your enemies to disfigure your faces and to enter your Temple as they had entered it the first time, and to
It may be that your Lord will yet have mercy on you. But if you revert to wrongdoing We will revert to punishment, and We have made Hell a prison for the faithless
Verily, this Quran does guide to the Straight Way, and gives glad tidings to the believers who do work righteousness, that for them is a great reward
And that for those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have prepared a mighty doom
Man prays for evil as (or when) he prays for good (or he makes his prayer evil or prays for evil when it should be for good); for man was ever hasty (or impatient or superficial)
We made the night and the day two signs; and We make dark the sign of the night and make the sign of the day sight-giving, that you may seek the bounty of your Lord, and that you may calculate the years and the reckoning; and We have expounded everything
And every man´s augury (fate) have We fastened on his own neck; and We will bring forth for him on the Day of Judgment a book offered to him wide open
(It will be said to him) "Read your book. Your soul suffices as reckoner against you this day
He who accepts guidance (or does right), accepts it only for his own soul: and he who errs, errs only against it; nor shall one burdened soul bear the burden of another. Nor would We punish until we had sent a Messenger (with warnings)
And when We desire to destroy a people We send commands to the opulent ones thereof who yet work abomination therein; and then due sentence is pronounced; and We destroyed it utterly
How many generations have We destroyed after Noah. Your Lord is sufficient as Knower and Beholder of the sins of his servant
Whoever is desirous of this life that soon passes away, We will hasten on for him therein what We please for whom We please. Then We will make hell for him to broil in - despised and outcast (or condemned, disgraced and rejected)
But whoever desires the Hereafter, and strives for it with the necessary effort, for such, their striving shall find favour
To each do We supply, both these and those (the just and the unjust), from the bounty of your Lord; for the bounty of your Lord are not restricted
See how We have preferred some of them over others, and verily, the Hereafter will be greater in degree and greater in preference
Set not up with Allah other gods, or you will sit despised and forsaken
Your Lord has decreed that you serve none other than Him; and that you show kindness to parents. If one or both of them reach old age with you, say not unto them, "Fie!", nor repulse them, but speak to them graciously and kindly
And lower to them the wing of humility out of compassion, and say, "O Lord! Have compassion on them both for they did take care of me when I was little
Your Lord is best aware of what is in your souls. If you be righteous, lo! He was ever Forgiving unto those who turn back penitent
And give your kinsman his due and the needy and the son of the road (wayfarer); and squander (waste) not your wealth in wantonness
Lo! The squanderers were ever brothers of the devil; and the devil is ever ungrateful to his Lord
But if you do turn away from them to seek after mercy from your Lord, which you hope for, then speak to them in easy words (kindly and reasonably)
Let not your hand be fettered to your neck (i.e. selfish and tight fisted), nor yet spread it out quite open, lest you should have to sit down blamed and destitute
Verily, your Lord spreads out provision to whomsoever He will or He restricts it. Verily, He is ever Knower and Seer of his servants
And slay not your children for fear of poverty; We will provide for them and for you. Beware! For to slay them is ever a Great Sin
And draw not near to adultery (and fornication); verily, it is ever an abomination, and evil is the way thereof (it opens the way to other evils)
And slay not the soul that Allah has forbidden you (or made sacred), except for just cause; for he who is slain unjustly We have given authority to his heirs (or kin), yet let him not commit excess in slaying; verily, he will be helped
And draw not near to the wealth of the orphan, save to improve it, until he reaches the age of puberty, and fulfil your covenants (or agreements, contracts etc.). Verily, every covenant will be inquired into (on the Day of Judgment)
And give full measure when you measure out, and weigh with a right balance; that is better and fairer in the final determination
And follow (or pursue) not that of which you have no knowledge; verily, the hearing, the sight, and the heart, of all of these it shall be asked (to give an account)
And walk not on the earth proudly (insolently); verily, you can not rend the earth asunder, nor can you stretch to the height of the mountains
All this evil is abhorrent in the sight of your Lord
These are among the things of wisdom which your Lord has inspired you with. Take not then with Allah other gods (objects of worship), lest you should be thrown into Hell reproached and outcast (rejected)
What! Has your Lord preferred for you sons, and taken for Himself daughters from among the angels? Truly, you are uttering a dreadful saying
Now have We explained in various ways in this Quran in order that they may receive admonition, but it only increases them in naught but aversion (or flight from truth)
Say, "Were there with Him other gods, as you say, then would they seek a way against (or to) the Lord of the Throne
Glory to Him! High is He, far exalted above all they say
The seven heavens and the earth, and all that is therein praises Him (declares His Glory), and there is naught but hymns (celebrates, expresses) His praise: but you understand not their praise. Verily, He is Clement and Forgiving
And when you read the Quran We place between you and those who believe not in the Hereafter an invisible veil (or hidden barrier)
And We place covers upon their heart, lest they should understand it, and deafness in their ears. And when you do mention your Lord alone in the Quran they turn their backs in aversion
We know best what they listen for when they give ear to you; and when they whisper apart (or meet in secret or private discussions or conferences) when the wrong-doers say, "You only follow a man bewitched
Behold, what similitudes they strike out for you, but they err (or have gone astray), and cannot find the way
They say, "What! When we have become bones and dust are we to be raised up a new creature
Say, "Be you stones, or iron
Or a created thing which, in your mind, is greater (or harder to reproduce) yet you shall be raised" Then they shall say, "Who is to restore us?" Say, "He who originated you at first;" Then they will wag their heads and say
The day when He shall call on you and you shall answer with praise to Him, they will think that they have tarried but a little while
And tell My servants to speak only that which is best (kindly, reasonably, truthfully, beautifully, usefully to enemy, friend and relative). Truly, Satan does sow dissension (or ill will) among them, for Satan is ever unto man an open foe
Your Lord is best aware; if He please He will have mercy upon you, or if He please He will punish you. We have not sent you to take charge of them
And your Lord is best aware of all who are in the heavens and the earth. We preferred (or bestowed on) some of the prophets more (and different gifts) than on others, and to David did We give the Psalms
Say, "Call on those other than Allah whom you assume to be gods." But they have no power to remove distress from you, nor to change it
Those on whom they call, themselves seek for a means of approaching to their Lord, to see which of them is nearest: and they hope for His mercy and they fear His doom; verily, the doom of your Lord is to be shunned
There is no community but We will destroy it before the Day of Judgment, or punish it with dire penalty. That is inscribed in the Eternal Book
Naught hindered us from sending you with signs, save that those of yore denied them; so We gave Thamud the visible she-camel, but they treated her wrongfully (or ignorantly) and We send not (or any one with) signs save to warn
And when We said to you, "Verily, your Lord encompasses mankind!" and We granted the Vision which We showed you only as a trial unto men - and also the Cursed Tree (mentioned) in the Quran (See 44:43-49, 37:62-65); for We put warning (or fright)
And when We said to the angels, "Bow down before Adam;" and they bowed, save Iblis, who said, "Am I to bow before one whom Thou hast created out of clay (rigid and inert)
Said he, "Do you see this one whom Thou hast honoured above me? Verily, if Thou should reprieve me until the Day of Resurrection (or Judgment), I will of a surety utterly destroy his seed except a few
He (Allah) said, "Be gone and whoever of them follows you. Verily, hell is your recompense, an ample recompense
Entice away whomever of them you can with your voice; and urge your horse and your foot against them; and share with them in their wealth and their children; and make them promises. But Satan promises them naught but deceit
Verily, over My servants, you have no authority, and your Lord is guardian enough over them
It is your Lord who drives the ships for you upon the sea that you may seek of His bounty. Verily, He is ever Merciful towards you
And when distress touches you in the sea, all those whom you call on fail you, except Him, but when He has brought you safe to shore, you turn away; for man is ever ungrateful
Are ye, then sure (do you feel secure) that He will not cause a slope of the land to swallow you, or set upon you a heavy sand-storm, and then you will find no protector
Or are you sure that He will not send you back therein another time, and send against you a violent wind, and drown you for your thanklessness, and then you will find no helper against Us therein
But We have been gracious to the children of Adam, and We have borne them by land and sea, and have provided them with good things, and have preferred them over many that We have created
On the Day when We will summon all men by their record (or leaders or scriptures); and he whose book (of records) is given in his right hand shall read it (with joy), nor shall they be wronged a straw
But he who in this life is blind shall be blind in the Hereafter, and err farther from the way
They strove hard to beguile you from what We inspired you with, that you should invent against Us something else, and then they would have taken you for a friend
And had it not been that We made you firm, you would have almost inclined towards them a little (made concessions, compromises)
Then would We have made you taste of punishment of both of life and death, and you would not have found a helper against Us
And they wished to scare you away from the land, to drive you forth there from; but then they would not have stayed after you except a little while
(This is) The way of those of Our prophets whom We have sent before you; and you shall find no change in Our way
Be you steadfast in prayer from the declining of the sun until the dark of the night, and the recital of the Quran at dawn; verily, the recital of the dawn is especially witnessed (or effective)
And for some part of the night, watch you therein as an extra service (or for spiritual profit). It may be that your Lord will raise you to a praised (or glorious) station
And say, "O my Lord! Make my entry be by the Gate of Truth and Honour; and make my exit be likewise by the Gate of Truth and Honour; and grant me from Thee an authority to aid me
And say, "Truth has come, and falsehood has vanished! Verily, falsehood is ever bound to vanish
And We will send down of the Quran that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers, though it only increases the wrong-doers in ruin
And when We favour man he turns away and is averse, but when evil touches him he is in despair
Say, "Every one acts after his own manner, but your Lord is best aware of who is most guided on the way
They will ask you about the Spirit. Say, "The Spirit is (or comes) by the command of my Lord, and you are given but a little knowledge (or control) thereof
If We had wished We would have taken away that with which We have inspired you; then you would have found no guardian against us
Unless by a mercy from your Lord, verily, His grace towards you is great
Say, "If mankind and jinn united together to bring the like of this Quran, they could not produce its like, though they should help each other
We have displayed for mankind in this Quran all kinds of similitudes; but most of mankind refuse anything but disbelief
And they say, "We will by no means believe in you, until you cause to gush forth for us a fountain from the earth
Or there be made for you a garden of palms and grapes, and rivers come gushing out amidst them
Or you make the sky to fall down upon us in pieces, as you have warned; or you bring us Allah and the angels before us face to face
Or there be made for you a house of gold; or you climb up into the heaven; and even then We will not believe in your climbing there, until you send down on us a book that we may read!" Say, "Glory to my Lord! Am I aught but a mortal, a Messenge
Naught prevents men from believing when the guidance came to them, save their saying, "Has Allah sent a mortal for a messenger
Say, "Had there been on the earth settled angels walking about, then We would surely have sent them an angel as a messenger
Say, "Allah is sufficient witness between me and you; verily, He is Knower, Seer of His servants
He whom Allah guides, he is indeed guided; and he whom Allah leads astray, you shall never find patrons for them beside Him; and We will assemble them on the Day of Resurrection upon their faces, blind, and dumb, and deaf; their resort is Hell; whenever i
That is their reward for that they disbelieved in Our revelations, and said, "What! When we are bones and dust, shall we then be raised up a new creation
Could they not see that Allah who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them, and to set for them an appointed time; there is no doubt therein? Yet the wrong-doers refuse to accept it, save ungratefully
Say, "If you did control the treasuries of the mercy of my Lord, then you would hold them back for fear of spending; for man is ever niggardly
And We did bring Moses nine manifest signs; but ask the children of Israel how he came to them, and Pharaoh said to him, "Verily, I think, O Moses! You are bewitched
He said, "In truth you know well that none sent down these signs save the Lord of the heavens and the earth as proofs; and, verily, O Pharaoh! I think you are doomed to ruin
And he desired to drive them out of the land; but We drowned him and those with him, one and all
And after him We said to the children of Israel, "Dwell you secure in the land (of promise)"; but when the promise of the Hereafter (or the second warning) comes to pass, We will bring you back as a crowd gathered out of various nations
With truth have We sent it (the Quran) down, and with truth has it descended; and We have not sent you as ought but a herald of glad tidings and a Warner
And it is a Quran which We have divided, that you may read it to mankind at intervals, and We have revealed it by successive revelations
Say, "Believe you therein, or believe not; verily, those who were given the knowledge before it, when it is read to them fall down prostrate upon their faces, adoring
Saying, "Glory to our Lord! Verily, the promise of our Lord is ever fulfiled
They fall down upon their faces weeping, and it increases their humility
Say, "Call unto Allah, or call on Rahman (the Beneficent), unto whichever you call it is the same; for His are the most beautiful names." And do not say your prayers loud-voiced, nor yet silently, but seek a way between these
And say, "Praise belongs to Allah, who has not taken to Himself a son, and He has no partner in the Sovereignty (or Dominion), nor needs He a patron to protect Him from such abasement (or from humiliation)." And magnify Him for His greatness and
Praise be to Allah, who sent down to His servant the Book, and allowed no crookedness therein
(He made it) Straight, to give warning of stern punishment from Him; and to give the glad tidings to the believers, who do what is right, that for them is a goodly reward
Wherein they shall abide forever
And to give warning to those who say, "Allah has begotten a son
That they have no knowledge thereof, nor had their fathers. Dreadful is the word that comes forth from their mouths. Verily, they speak naught but a lie
Yet it may be that you (Muhammad) will torment your soul with grief (or fret thyself to death) if they believe not in this new revelation
Verily, We have placed all that which is on the earth as an ornament thereof, that We may try them, which of them is best in conduct
But, verily, We shall make all that which is thereon a barren mound
Have you considered that the Fellows of the Cave and of the Inscription are a wonder amongst Our Signs
When the youths fled for refuge to the cave and said, "Our Lord! Bestow on us mercy from Thee, and dispose of our affair rightly (or lead us to conduct ourselves rightly)
And We struck their ears (with deafness) in the cave for a number of years
Then We raised them up again, that We might know which of the two parties could best calculate the time of their tarrying
We narrate to you their story in truth. Verily, they were youths who believed in their Lord, and We added to their guidance
And We strengthened their heart, when they stood up and said, "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, never will we call upon any god beside Him, for then we should have said an extravagant thing
These people of ours have taken to other gods beside Him. Though they do not bring any manifest authority for them. And who is more unjust than he who invents against Allah falsehoods
So when you have gone apart from them and what they serve other than Allah, then resort you to the cave. Our Lord will unfold His mercy to you, and will dispose for you your affair advantageously
And you might have seen the sun, when it rose, decline from their cave towards the right hand, and when it set leave them on the left hand, while they were in the spacious part thereof. That is one of the Signs of Allah. Whom Allah guides he is guided ind
You would have deemed them waking though they were asleep, as We turned them towards the right and towards the left; and their dog spreading out his fore-paws on the threshold. Had you come suddenly upon them you would surely have turned and fled away fr
Thus did We raise them up that they might question each other. A speaker from amongst them said, "How long have you tarried?" They said, "We have tarried perhaps a day or part of a day." Others said, "Allah knows best how long you
For should they perceive you, they would stone you, or would force you back again unto their faith, and you would never prosper (or succeed)
Thus did We make their people acquainted with their story, that they might know that Allah´s promise is true; and that the Hour, there is no doubt concerning it. When they (the people of the city) disputed amongst themselves concerning their affair
Some say, "They were three, and the fourth of them was their dog:" and some say, "Five, and the sixth of them was their dog:" guessing at the unseen: and some say, "Seven, and the eighth of them was their dog." Say, "My
And never say of anything, "Verily, I am going to do that to-morrow
Except (by adding) "If Allah please;" and remember your Lord when you have forgotten, and say, "It may be that my Lord will guide me to what is nearer than this to the right way
So they stayed in their cave three hundred years and (some add) nine more
Say, "Allah knows best how long they stayed. His are the unseen things of the heavens and the earth. How clear of Sight is He, and how keen of Hearing!" They have no patron beside Him, nor does He let any one share in His Sovereignty (or Command)
So, recite that which has been revealed (or inspired) unto you of the Book from your Lord. There is no changing (or none can change) His words; nor shall you ever find a refuge beside Him
Restrain thyself with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, desiring His countenance (or nearness and intimacy), and let not your eyes be turned from them, desiring the adornment (and pomp) of the life of this world; and obey not him whose h
But say, "The truth is from your Lord, so let him who will, believe; and let him who will, disbelieve." Verily, We have prepared for the evildoers a Fire, sheets of which shall encompass them; and if they cry for help, they shall be helped with
Verily, those who believe and act righteously - verily, We suffer not the reward of him whose work is goodly to be wasted
For such are gardens of Eden; beneath them rivers flow; they shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and shall wear green robes of finest silk, and of gold brocade; reclining therein on thrones - blessed is the reward, and goodly the couch
Strike out for them a Similitude: Two men, unto one of whom We have assigned two gardens of grapes, and surrounded them both with date-palms, and put corn-fields (or tilled fields) between the two
Each of the two gardens brought forth its fruit and withheld naught thereof. And We caused a river to gush forth therein
And he had abundant fruit, and he said unto his neighbour (or companion) in the course of mutual discussion (or argument), "I am much wealthier than you, and mightier in men (with more honour and power)
And he went in unto his garden, having thus wronged himself: said he, "I do not think that all this will ever perish
And I think not that the Hour (of Judgment) will ever come; and even if I be sent back unto my Lord, I shall surely find something even better in exchange
His neighbour, while he disputed with him, exclaimed, "Disbelieve you in Him who created you from dust, and then from a drop, then fashioned you into a man
But He is Allah, my Lord; and I associate no partner with my Lord
Why could you not have said when you did enter into your garden, ´As Allah pleases! (Or It is Allah´s will or Allah´s will always comes to pass). There is no power save in Allah!´. Though you see me as less than you in wealth
It may be that my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and will send upon it a bolt from heaven, and it shall be but bare slippery mud on the morrow
Or some morning the water thereof will be deeply sunk in the earth so that you can not get thereat
And his fruits were beset (with ruin). Then began he to wring his hands for all that he had spent thereon, for now it had crumbled down to its foundations. And he said, "Would that I had ascribed no partner with my Lord
And he had no troop of men to help him against Allah, nor could he save himself
In such a case the patronage is Allah´s alone, the True; He is best at rewarding and best for consequences (or success)
Strike out for them, also, a similitude of the life of this world; like water, which We send down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth absorbs it; but on the morrow (or soon) it is dried up, and the winds scatter it; for Allah is powerful over al
Wealth and children are an ornament of the life of this world; but good works which endure are better with your Lord, for recompense, and better for hope
And (think about) the Day when We will remove the mountains, and you shall see the whole earth emerging (or laid level); and We will gather them all, leaving out none
Then shall they be presented to your Lord in ranks - Now have you come to Us (bare) as We created you at first! Aye, but you thought that We would never fulfil Our appointment (with you)
And the Book (of Deeds) shall be placed, and you shall see the sinners in fear of what is recorded therein; and they will say, "Alas, for us! What a Book is this, it leaves out neither small nor great things, without numbering them?" And they sh
And (remember) when We said to the angels, "Fall prostrate in obeisance before Adam," they fell prostrate in obeisance, save only Iblis, who was of the Jinn, and who revolted against the command of his Lord. What! Will you then take him and his
I made them not witnesses of the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor of the creation of themselves, nor did I take for My helpers those who lead astray
(Be mindful) Of the day when He shall say, "Call you upon My pretend partners" and they shall call on them, but they shall not answer them; and We will set the vale of perdition between them
And the guilty shall see the Fire, and shall know that they are about to fall therein, and shall find no escape there from
Verily, We have displayed in this Quran for men all kinds of similitudes (parables); but man is ever contentious
Naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them, or from asking pardon of their Lord, except the coming on them of the judgment of the people of olden days, or the coming of the doom before their own eyes
We sent not prophets save as heralds of glad tidings and as Warners; but those who disbelieve wrangle with vain speech to make void the truth therewith; and they take My revelations and warnings as a jest
Who is more unjust than he who, being reminded of the revelations of his Lord, turns away there from, and forgets what his hands have sent forward? Verily, We have placed veils upon their heart lest they should understand, and deafness in their ears! And
But your Lord is Forgiving, endowed with Mercy; were He to punish them for what they have earned He would have hastened for them the doom. Nay rather, they have their appointed term from which they have no escape
Such were the populations; We destroyed them when they were unjust (iniquitous); and for their destruction We set an appointed time
And when Moses said to his servant, "I will not cease until I reach the confluence of the two seas, though I go on for years
But when they reached the confluence of the two they forgot their Fish, and it took its way in the sea with a free course
And when they had gone further, he said to his servant, "Bring us our breakfast, for we have suffered much fatigue on this journey
Said he, "What think you? When we resorted to the rock, then, verily, I forgot the fish, but it was only Satan, who made me forget it, and I forgot to tell you; and it took its way in the sea in a marvellous way
Moses said, "This is what we were searching for." So they retraced their steps again
Then they found a servant of Ours, to whom We had given mercy from Ourselves, and had taught him knowledge from Our Presence
Said Moses to him, "May I follow you, so that you may teach me of the (Higher) Truth which you have been taught
Said he, "Verily, you can never bear it
How can you be patient about what you can compass no knowledge (you cannot understand)
He said, "Allah willing, you will find me patient; nor will I rebel against your bidding
He said, "Well then, if you follow me, ask me not about anything until I myself begin to mention it
So they set out until when they were in the boat, he made a hole therein and scuttled it. (Moses) Said, "Have you made a hole therein to drown the people therein? You have done a dreadful thing
Said he, "Did I not tell you, truly, you can never bear with me
Moses said (pleaded), "Rebuke me not for forgetting, and be not hard on me
So they set out until they met a boy, and he killed him. Moses said, "What! Have you killed an innocent soul who has killed no one? Verily, you have done a foul (evil) deed
He answered, "Did I not tell you, truly, you can not bear with me
Said Moses, "If ever I ask you about anything after this, keep me not in your company. Now have you received a promise from me
So they set out until when they came to the people of a city; and they asked the people thereof for food; but they refused to entertain them. And they found therein a wall which was about to fall into ruins, and he repaired it. Said Moses, "Had you p
Said he, "This is the parting between me and you. I will give you the interpretation of that with which you could not bear with me
As for the boat, it belonged to poor people, who toiled on the sea (or river), and I wished to damage it, for behind it was a king who seized on every boat by force
And as for the youth, his parents were believers, and we feared lest he should oppress them with rebellion and disbelief
So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange a better one than him in purity, and nearer in filial affection
And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan youths in the city, and beneath it was a treasure belonging to them both, and their father was a righteous man, and their Lord desired that they should reach maturity, and then take out their treasure as a me
And they will ask you about Zul´qarneyn (The Two-horned one, perhaps an ancient Persian Emperor). Say, "I will recite to you a remembrance of him
Verily, We established him firmly in the land, and We gave him a way to everything
And he followed a way
Until when he reached the setting of the sun (furthest West), he found it setting in a black muddy spring and he found thereat a people. We said, "O Zul´qarneyn! You have authority either to torment these people, or treat them kindly
Said he, "As for him who does wrong, I will punish him, then shall he be sent back to his Lord, and He will punish him with an unheard-of torment
But as for him who believes and acts aright, for him is an excellent reward, and we will give him our easy command
Then he followed another way
Until when he reached the rising of the sun (furthest East), he found it rising upon a people to whom We had given no shelter there from
He left them as they were. And We comprehended fully the forces before him
Then he followed still another way
Until when he reached the point between the two mountains, he found below them a people who could scarcely under-stand speech
They said, "O Zul´qarneyn! Verily, Yagug and Magug (Gog and Magog) are doing great evil in the land. Shall we then pay you tribute, that you set between us and them a barrier
He said, "The power my Lord hath established me in is better than tribute; help me, therefore, with strength (labour), and I will set a barrier between you and them
Bring me blocks of iron. When they had filled up the space between the two mountain-sides, he said, "Blow (with your bellows)". When he had made it red with fire, he said, "Bring me, that I may pour over it, molten lead
Thus were they made powerless to scale it, and to tunnel through it
Said he, "This is a mercy from my Lord; but when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will make it as dust, for the promise of my Lord is true
And on that Day We shall leave them to surge like waves over one another; and the trumpet will be blown, and We will gather them all together
And We will set forth Hell on that day before the disbelievers
Whose eyes were veiled from My Remembrance, and who were unable to hear
What! Did those who disbelieve reckon that they could take My servants for patrons beside Me? Verily, We have prepared Hell for the disbelievers for their entertainment
Say, "Shall we inform you of those who lose most by their works
Those who erred in their endeavours in the life of this world, and who thought they were acquiring good by their deeds
They are those who disbelieve in the signs of their Lord and in their meeting Him; vain are their works; and We will not give them any weight on the Day of Judgment
That is their reward - Hell! Because that they disbelieved and took My revelations and My Messengers as a jest
Verily, those who believe and act righteously, for them are Gardens of Paradise
Wherein they shall dwell, and they shall crave no change there from
Say, "Were the oceans ink for the Words of my Lord, the ocean would surely fail before the Words of my Lord fail; aye, though We brought as much ink again
Say, "I am only a mortal like yourselves; I am inspired that your God is only one God. Then let him who hopes to meet his Lord work righteous acts, and join none with Him in the service of his Lord
KAF HA YA AIN SAD
A mention of your Lord´s mercy to His servant Zachariah
When he called on his Lord in secret
Praying, "My Lord! Verily, my bones are weak, and my head shines with grey hair; but I never was unfortunate in my prayers to Thee, my Lord
But I fear my kinsfolk after me, since my wife is barren; then grant me from Thy presence a successor
To be my heir (or true representative) and the heir (or true representative) of the family of Jacob, and make him, my Lord, one with whom you are well-pleased
(The answer came), "O Zachariah! Verily, We give you glad tidings of a son, whose name shall be John. None by that name have We distinguished before
Said he, "My Lord! How can I have a son, when my wife is barren, and I have become decrepit through old age
He said, "Thus it will be. Your Lord says, ´It is easy for Me, for I created you at first when yet you were nothing.´
Said he, "O my Lord! Give me a sign." He said, "Your sign is that you shall not speak to any man for three nights, though you are sound
Then he went forth unto his people from the chamber, and he made signs to them, "Glorify your Lord at break of day and fall of night
(And it was said to his son) " O John! Hold fast the Book", and We gave him Wisdom even as a boy
And compassion from Our Presence, and purity; and he was devout (pious, righteous)
And kind to his parents, and was not arrogant and rebellious
So peace upon him the day he was born, and the day he died, and the day he shall be raised up to life again
And mention Mary in the Book; when she retired from her family into an eastern chamber
And she took a veil (to screen herself) from them; and We sent unto her Our Angel (or spirit); and he assumed for her the semblance of a perfect man
Said she, "Verily, I take refuge in the Merciful One from you, if you are god-fearing
Said he, "I am only a messenger of your Lord to bestow on you a pure son
Said she, "How can I have a boy when no mortal has touched me, and when I am no harlot
He said, "Thus says your Lord, ´It is easy for Me! And We will make him a revelation unto mankind, and a mercy from Us; for it is a thing ordained (or decreed)
So she conceived him, and she retired with him into a remote place
And the labour pains came upon her at the trunk of a palm tree, and she said, "O that I had died before this, and become a thing of naught, forgotten
Then one called to her from beneath her "Grieve not, for your Lord has placed a stream beneath your feet
And shake towards you the trunk of the palm tree, it will drop upon you fresh ripe dates
So eat, and drink, and be consoled; and if you should see any mortal say, "Verily, I have vowed to the Beneficent One a fast, and I will not speak to-day to any mortal
Then she brought him (her son) to her people, carrying it. Said they, "O Mary! You have done an amazing (abominable) thing
O sister of Aaron! Your father was not a bad man, nor was your mother a harlot
Then she pointed to him, and they said, "How are we to speak with one who is a baby in the cradle
He (the baby) said, "Verily, I am a servant of Allah; He has brought me the Book (revelation), and He has made me a prophet
And He has made me blessed wherever I am; and He has required of me prayer and charity as long as I live
And has made me kind towards my mother, and not arrogant (tyrannical) and miserable
And peace upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I shall be raised up alive
Such was Jesus, the son of Mary. This is the statement of truth concerning which they doubt (or dispute)
It befits not the Majesty of Allah that he should beget a son. Glory be to Him! When He decrees a matter He only says to it, "BE," and it is
And, lo! Allah is my Lord and your Lord (see John 20:17), so worship Him; this is the Straight Way
And the sects among them disagree, but woe to those who disbelieve from the meeting of the mighty Day
How plainly will they see and hear on the day when they shall come to Us; but today the evildoers are in manifest error
And warn them of the Day of Sighs (Anguish, Regret, Distress) when the matter is determined. Now they are heedless, and believe not
Verily, We will inherit the earth and all who are upon it, and unto Us shall they return
And mention Abraham in the Book; verily, he was a saint (a man of truth, a true witness), a prophet
When he said to his father, "O my sire! Why do you worship what can neither hear nor see nor avail you aught
O my Sire! Verily, to me has come knowledge which has not come to you; so follow me, and I will guide you to a Straight and Level Way
O my Sire! Serve not Satan; verily, Satan is ever a rebel against the Beneficent One
O my Sire! Verily, I fear that there may afflict you punishment from the Beneficent One, and that you may be a comrade (or client) of Satan
Said he, "What! Do you reject (or hate) my gods, O Abraham? Verily, if you do not desist I will certainly stone you; but get you gone from me for a long time
Said he, "Peace be upon you! I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord. Verily, He is to me most gracious
I will part from you and what you call on beside Allah, and will pray unto my Lord. It may be that in my prayer unto my Lord, I shall not be unblest
And when he had parted from them and what they served beside Allah, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and each of them We made a prophet
And We bestowed on them of Our Mercy, and We granted them lofty honour on (or from) the tongue of truth
And mention Moses in the Book; verily, he was chosen, and was a Messenger, a prophet
We called him from the right side of the Mount (Sinai); and We made him draw nigh unto Us to commune with him
And We granted him out of Our Mercy, his brother Aaron also a prophet
And mention Ishmael in the Book; verily, he was true to his promise, and was a messenger and a prophet
He used to enjoin on his people prayers and charity, and was most acceptable (sacrifice) in the sight of his Lord
And mention, in the Book, Idris (Enoch?); verily, he was a saint and a prophet
And We raised him to a lofty place
These are those to whom Allah has been gracious, of the prophets of the seed of Adam, and of those whom We carried with Noah, and of the seed of Abraham and Israel, and of those We guided and elected. When the revelations of the Beneficent were recited un
But there succeeded after them a later generation who have ruined worship and have followed lusts (prejudices, fantasies, greed, self-interest, superstition), but they shall at length face deception (or failure, destruction)
Save such as repent and believe and act right; for these shall enter the Garden and shall not be wronged in aught
Gardens of Eden, which the Beneficent has promised to His servants in the Unseen; verily, His promise ever comes to pass
They shall hear no empty (vain) talk therein, but only Peace; and there they shall have their provision morning and evening
Such is the Garden which We will give for an inheritance to those of our servants who are devout
(The angels say), "We descend not save at the command of your Lord; His is what is before us, and what is behind us, and what is between these; for your Lord is never forgetful
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and of what is between the two; so serve (worship) Him and persevere in His service. Do you know of any worthy of His Name
Man will say, "What! When I have died shall I then come forth alive
But then does not man remember that We created him before when he was naught
And by your Lord! We will, without doubt, gather them together, and the devils (or evil ones) too; then will We surely bring them forth on their knees round about Hell
Then shall We certainly drag, out from every sect, whichever of them has been most obstinately rebellious against the Beneficent
And surely We are best aware of those who are most deserving to be broiled therein
There is not one of you who will not go down to it (the Fire), that is a fixed Decree of your Lord
Then We will save those who fear Us; but We will leave the evildoers therein on their knees
And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "Which of the two parties (your s or mine) is best placed and in the best company
And how many generations before them have We destroyed who were better off in property and outward appearance
Say, "Whoever is in error, the Beneficent will extend to him until they see what they are threatened with, whether it be the torment in this world or whether it be the Hour (of Doom in the Hereafter), then they shall know who is worse placed and weak
And those who seek guidance, Allah will increase their guidance. And enduring good works are best with your Lord for a reward, and best for restoration (or eventual returns)
Have you seen him who disbelieves in Our signs, and says, "I shall surely be given wealth and children
Has he become acquainted with the Unseen, or has he made a pact with the Beneficent
Not so! We will write down what he says, and We will extend for him a span of torment
And We will make him inherit that whereof he spoke, and he shall come to Us alone
They take other gods besides Allah to be their source of power
Not so! They shall deny their worship of them, and shall become their opponents
Do you not see that We have sent the devils against the disbelievers, to confound them with confusion
So be not you hasty with them. Verily, We do but number them a sum (of days)
On the Day when We will gather the righteous unto the Beneficent, honoured as a goodly company
We will drive the guilty into hell, like thirsty herds to water
They shall have no power of intercession, save him who has taken a covenant with his Lord
They say, "The Beneficent has taken to Himself a son
Assuredly, you have brought a monstrous thing
Whereby the heavens are almost torn asunder, and the earth is riven, and the mountains fall in ruin
That you attribute to the Beneficent a son
When it is not becoming to the majesty of the Beneficent that he take to Himself a son
There is none in the heavens or the earth but comes to the Beneficent as a servant
Verily, He knows them and numbers them exactly
And each one of them come unto Him on the Day of Resurrection, alone
Verily, those who believe and act aright, on them the Beneficent bestows love
We have made the Scripture easy on your tongue, only that you may thereby give glad tidings unto those who ward of evil, and warn thereby a contentious people
How many a generation before them have We destroyed? Can you find any one of them, or hear a whisper of them
TA HA
We have not sent down this Quran to you that you should be distressed
But only as a reminder to him who fears (or is in awe of Allah or fears doing wrong)
Descending (as a revelation) from Him who created the earth and the high heavens
The most Beneficent is firmly settled on the Throne (of Authority)
To Him belongs what is in the heavens, and what is in the earth, and all that which is between the two, and all that which is beneath the ground
And if you pronounce the words loudly (or publicly), yet, verily, he knows the secret and the even more hidden
Allah! There is no God but He! To Him belong the Most Beautiful Names
Has the story of Moses come to you
Behold, he saw a fire: and said to his folk, "Tarry ye; verily, I perceive a fire far off. Perhaps I may bring you there from a brand, or may find some guidance (news, information) by the fire
And when he came to it he was addressed, "O Moses
Verily, I am your Lord, so take off your sandals; verily, you are in the holy valley Tuwa
And I have chosen you. So listen to what is inspired in you
Verily, I am Allah; there is no God but Me! So serve Me, and be steadfast in prayer to remember Me
Verily, the hour is coming, but I will to keep it hidden (but make it known), that every soul may be recompensed for its efforts
Let not then him who believes not therein and follows his lusts (prejudices, fantasies, superstitions) ever turn you away there from, lest you be ruined
What is that in your right hand, O Moses
Said he, "It is my staff on which I lean, and wherewith I beat down leaves for my flocks, and for which I have other uses
Allah said, "Throw it down, O Moses
And he threw it down, and behold! It was a snake, moving (alive)
He said, "Take hold of it and fear not; We will restore it to its former state
But press your hand to your side, it shall come forth white without harm, as another sign
To show you of Our greater signs
Go unto Pharaoh. Verily, he is outrageous (he has transgressed beyond bounds)
Said he, "My Lord! Expand for me my breast (relieve my mind from tension)
And ease my task for me
And loosen the knot from my tongue
That they may understand my saying
Appoint for me a minister from my people
Aaron, my brother
Gird up my loins through him
And let him share my task
That we may glorify Thee much
And much remember Thee
Verily, Thou art He who is ever Seeing of us
He said, "You are granted your request, O Moses
And We have already shown favours unto you at another time
When We inspired your mother with the message
´Put him into the ark, and put it into the river. The river shall cast him on the shore, and an enemy of Mine and of his shall take him.´ And on you have I cast love from Me, that you may be trained according to My will
When your sister walked on and said, "Shall I guide you to one who will nurse him? And We restored you to your mother, that her eye might be cheered and that she should not grieve. And you did slay a man and We saved you from the resulting trouble, a
And I have prepared you for Myself
Go, you and your brother, with my Signs (revelations), and be not remiss in remembering Me
Go you both to Pharaoh. Verily, he is outrageous (transgresses beyond bounds)
And speak to him a gentle speech, that per chance (or possibly) he may be mindful or fear
They two said, "Our Lord! Verily, we fear that he may be beforehand with us (hasty in arrogance before we can accomplish our mission), or that he may be outrageous (transgressing all bounds or tyrannous)
He said, "Fear not. Verily, I am with you twain, Hearing and Seeing
So go you to him and say, ´Verily, we are the messengers of your Lord; Let the children of Israel go with us, and torment them not. We bring you a sign from your Lord, and peace will be upon him who follows the right guidance
´Verily, it has been revealed unto us that the torment will surely come upon him who denies us and turns away.´
Pharaoh said, "And who is your Lord, O Moses
He said, "Our Lord is He who gave everything its form, nature and existence, then guided it right
Said he (Pharaoh), "And what of the former generations
He said, "The knowledge of them is with my Lord in a Book (or Record); my Lord neither errs nor forgets
Who made for you the earth a bed; and has traced for you paths therein; and has sent down from the sky water." We have brought forth thereby divers classes of vegetation
Eat and pasture your cattle there from. Verily, in this are signs to those endowed with intelligence (minds or understanding)
From it have We created you and into it will We return you, and from it will We bring you forth again
We did show him Our signs, all of them, but he called them lies and refused
Said he, "Have you come to us, to turn us out of our land with your magic, O Moses
Then we will bring you magic like it; and we will make between us and you an appointment which we shall not fail to keep - neither we nor you - at a fair place (convenient to both or one where both have an equal chance)
Moses said, "Let your appointment be for the day of the festival, and let the people assemble when the sun is high (noon)
Then Pharaoh gathered his strength (being disconcerted), and returned (having formed a plot)
Said Moses to him, "Woe to you! Forge you not against Allah a lie; lest He destroy you by punishment. The forger must ever suffer disappointment (or failure)
And they argued the matter among themselves, but they kept their counsel secret
Said they, "These two are certainly two expert magicians, who wish to turn you out of (authority in) the land by their magic, and to remove your most cherished (or exemplary) traditions (doctrines, institutions)
Collect, therefore, your tricks (or lay your plans), and then form a row (or battle line); for he who has the upper-hand this day will be successful indeed
Said they, "O Moses! Either you must throw first, or let us throw first
He said, "Nay, you throw first!" And lo! Their ropes and their staves appeared to move along
And Moses felt a secret fear within his soul
Said We, "Fear not! You shall have the upper hand
Throw what is in your right hand; and it shall devour what they have made. Verily, that which they have made is but a magician´s trick; and no magician shall prosper whatever skill he has
And then the magicians were cast down in prostration (obeisance), saying, "We believe in the Lord of Aaron and of Moses
Said he (Pharaoh), "Do you believe in Him before I give you leave? Verily, he is your master who taught you magic! Therefore will I surely cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides, and I will surely crucify you on the trunks of palm trees; and
Said they, "We will never prefer you to what has come to us as Manifest Signs, and to Him who originated us. Decree then whatever you desire to decree; for you can only decree about the life of this world
Verily, we believe in our Lord. May He pardon us our sins, and the magic you have forced us to use; and Allah is better and more lasting
Verily, he who comes to his Lord guilty, verily, for him is hell; he shall therein neither die nor live
But he who comes to Him a believer who has done right, for them are the highest ranks
Gardens of Eden beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever. That is the reward for him who grows (or purifies himself)
And We inspired Moses, saying, "Journey by night with my servants, and strike out for them a dry road in the sea. Fear not pursuit, nor be afraid
Then Pharaoh followed them with his armies, and the sea overwhelmed them and covered them up completely
Pharaoh had led his people astray instead of guiding them right
O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy; and We made a covenant with you on the side of the mount; and We sent down upon you the manna and the quails
Saying, "Eat of the good things We have provided you with, but do not commit excesses therein, lest My wrath justly descend upon you; for on whomsoever My wrath descends they perish indeed
Yet am I also He who forgives unto him who repents and believes and does right, and then is guided
But what has hastened you on away from your people, O Moses
Moses said, "They are here close behind, and I hastened to Thee, my Lord, to please Thee
Said He, "Verily, We have tested your people in your absence, and As-Samiri has led them astray
And Moses returned to his people, wrathful, grieving! Said he, "O my people! Did not your Lord make you a goodly promise? Has the time seemed too long for you, or do you desire that wrath should descend on you from your Lord, and so you have broken y
They said, "We have not broken our promise to you of our own accord. But we were made to carry the load of the ornaments of the people, and we hurled them (into the fire). That was what As-Samiri bid us
Then he brought forth for the people (out of the fire) a corporeal (a statue of a) calf. It seemed to low, and they said, "This is your god and the god of Moses, but he has forgotten
What! Do they not see that it does not answer them in speech, and cannot control for them harm or profit
Aaron had already, before this, said to them, "O my people! You are only being tried (or seduced) thereby; and, verily, your Lord is the Beneficent, so follow me and obey my bidding
They said, "We will not cease to pay devotion to it until Moses return to us
Said he (Moses), "O Aaron! What prevented you, when you did see them go astray
From following me? Have you then rebelled against my bidding
Said he, "O son of my mother! Seize me not by my beard, or my head! Verily, I feared lest you should say, ´You have made a division amongst the children of Israel, and have not waited for my word.´
(Moses) said, "What was your design, O Samiri
Said he, "I beheld what they beheld not, and I grasped a handful of dust from the footprint of the messenger and cast it; for thus my soul induced me
Said he, "Then get you gone; verily, it shall be yours in life to say, "Touch me not!" and, verily, for you there is a tryst which you shall surely never break. But look at your god to which you were just now a devout worshipper. We will su
Your God is only Allah besides Whom there is no other God. He embraces all things in His knowledge
Thus do We narrate to you the history of what has gone before, and We have brought you from Our Presence a reminder
Whoever turns there from, verily, he shall bear a great burden on the Day of Resurrection
Abiding under it, an evil burden to bear on the Day of Resurrection
On the day when the Trumpet shall be blown, and We will gather the guilty on that day white-eyed (with terror)
They shall whisper to each other, "You have only tarried ten days
We know best what they say, when their leaders, best in conduct say, "You have only tarried a day
They will ask you about the mountains; say, "My Lord will break them into scattered dust
And He will leave them a level plain
Wherein you will see no curve or ruggedness (crookedness or unevenness)
On that day they shall follow the Caller who deceives not; and the voices shall be hushed before the Beneficent, and you shall hear naught but a shuffling (or tramp of marching feet)
On that day shall no intercession be of any avail, save from such as the Beneficent permits, and who is acceptable to Him
He knows what is before them and what is behind them, but they comprehend not His knowledge
All faces shall be humbled before the Living, the Self-subsisting, Eternal; Hopeless will be indeed the man that carries iniquity on his back
But he who does righteous acts and has faith, he shall fear neither wrong nor diminution
Thus have We revealed it in an Arabic Lecture (Quran); and have displayed in it certain threats, that per chance (or possibly) they may fear evil, or it may cause them to take heed
Exalted then be Allah, the King, the Truth (or the True King)! Hasten not the Quran before its inspiration is completed for you; but say, "O Lord! increase me in knowledge
We did make a covenant with Adam of yore, but he forgot it, and We found no firm purpose in him
And when We said to the angels, "Prostrate yourselves before Adam," they prostrated themselves, save Iblis, who refused
And We said, "O Adam! Verily, this is a foe to you and to your wife; never then let him drive you twain forth from the garden or you will be wretched
Verily, you have not to be hungry there, nor naked
And, verily, you shall not thirst therein, nor suffer from the sun´s heat
But Satan whispered to him, saying. "O Adam! shall I guide you to the Tree of Immortality, and a kingdom that wastes not away
And they ate there from, and their shame became apparent to them; and they began to stitch upon themselves some leaves of the garden; and Adam rebelled against his Lord, and went astray
Then his Lord chose him, and relented towards him, and guided him
Said he, "Go down, you twain, there from altogether, some of you foes to the other. And if there should come to you from Me a guidance; then whoever follows My guidance shall neither err nor come to grief
But he who turns away from Remembrance of Me, verily, for him shall be a narrow life; and I shall bring him blind to the assembly on the Day of Resurrection
He shall say, "My Lord! Wherefore have you gathered me blind when I used to see
He shall say, "Our revelations came to you, and you did forget them; In like manner are you forgotten this Day
Thus do We recompense him who is extravagant and believes not in the revelations of his Lord; and the doom of the hereafter is keener and more lasting
Is it not guidance for them to know how many generations We have destroyed before them, amidst whose dwelling-places they walk? Verily, in that are signs to men of thought (or intelligence)
But for the decree already passed from your Lord, and a term already fixed, the judgment would have come to them now
Therefore, bear patiently with what they say, and celebrate the praises of your Lord ere the rising of the sun, and ere its setting, and glorify Him at times in the night and at the two ends of the day, that you may find acceptance
And do not strain after what We have provided a few of them - the splendours of the life of this world, through which We test them; but the provision of your Lord is better and more lasting
Bid your people worship, and persevere in it; We do not ask you to provide, it is We Who will provide for you. But the sequel is for righteousness
They say, "Unless he brings us a sign from his Lord.....". What! Has there not come to them the proof of what was in the former scriptures
But had We destroyed them with doom before it, they would have said, "If only Thou had sent to us a messenger, that we might follow Thy signs before we were abased and put to shame
Say, "Each one has to wait, so wait you also! But in the end you shall know who it is that is on the straight and level path, and who it is that is guided right
Their reckoning draws nigh to men, yet in heedlessness they turn aside
No new reminder comes to them from their Lord, but they listen to it as in (or while they play (or as a jest)
Their heart trifling with it (or pre-occupied elsewhere). And those who do wrong discourse secretly, saying, "Is this man aught but a mortal like yourselves? Will you succumb to magic with open eyes
Say, "My Lord knows what is said in the heavens and the earth, He is Hearer and Knower
Nay!" they say, "Muddled dreams; nay! He has forged it; nay! He is a poet; but let him bring us a sign as those of yore were sent
Of those before them not one of the communities which We destroyed believed, how will these believe
Nor did We send before them any but men whom We inspired? Ask you the people of the Scriptures if you do not know
Nor did We give them bodies that ate no food, nor were they immortal
Yet We made Our promise to them good, and We saved them and whom We pleased; but We destroyed those who committed excesses
Now have We sent down to you a Book in which is a reminder for you; have you then no sense
How many a community that had done wrong have We shattered, and raised up after it another people
And when they perceived Our Might, behold, they tried to flee from it
Flee not away, but return to what you delighted in, and to your dwellings, that you may be questioned
Said they, "O woe is us! Verily, we were wrong-doers
And that ceased not to be their cry until We made them like mown down fields, extinct (or as smouldering ashes)
We did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between the two in play
Had We wished to find a pastime, We could have found it in (or nearer) Our Presence, if We would do such a thing
Nay, We hurl the True against the False and it does break its head, and lo! It vanishes. But woe to you for what you attribute (to Allah)
Unto Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth, and those who dwell in His Presence are not too proud to serve Him, nor do they weary
They glorify Him by night and day without intermission
Or have they chosen gods from the earth who can raise the dead
Were there in both (heaven and earth) gods beside Allah, both would surely have been disordered. Glorified is Allah, the Lord of the Throne, above all they ascribe unto Him
He can not be questioned concerning what He does, but They shall be questioned
Have they chosen gods beside Him? Say, "Bring your proofs. This is the reminder (Message) of those who are with me (Muhammad), and of those who were before me." Nay, most of them know not the truth, so they turn away
We have not sent any messenger before you, but We inspired him that, "There is no god but Me, so serve you Me
And they say, "The Beneficent has taken a son; glorified be He! Nay, but they are honoured servants
They speak not until He speaks; and they act by His command (John)
He knows what is before them, and what is behind them, and they can not intercede except for him whom He accepts; and they shrink through awe of Him
And whoever of them should say, "Verily, I am God instead of (or besides) Him," such a one We recompense with hell; thus do We repay the wrong-doers
Do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were of one piece, and We parted them; and We made every living thing from water. Will they then not believe
And We placed on the earth firm mountains lest it should move with them, and He made therein open roads for paths, per chance (or possibly) they may be guided
And We made the heaven a guarded canopy; yet from our signs they turn aside
He it is who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, they float each in their orbit
We appointed immortality for no mortal before you. What! If you die, will they live on forever
Every soul must taste of death. We will test you with evil and with good, as a trial; and unto Us will you be returned
And when those who disbelieve see you, they only take you for a jest, saying, "Is this he who mentions your gods?" Yet they blaspheme at the mention of the Beneficent
Man is made of haste. I will show you My signs; but do not ask Me to hasten
And they say, "When will this threat (come to pass), if you tell the truth
If those who disbelieve but knew the time when they will not be able to ward off the Fire from their faces and from their backs, and they will not be helped
Nay, it shall come on them unawares, and shall dumbfound them, and they shall not be able to repel it, nor shall they be reprieved
Prophets before you have been mocked at, but that whereat they jested encompassed those who mocked
Say, "Who guards you by night and by day from the Beneficent?" Nay, but they turn away from the mention of their Lord
Have they gods to defend them against Us? These cannot help themselves, nor can they be defended against Us
Nay, but We have granted enjoyment to these men and to their fathers until the period grew long for them. Do they not see that We come to the land and shorten its borders? Shall they then prevail
Say, "I only warn you by inspiration;" but the deaf hear not the call when they are warned
But if a breath of the Wrath of your Lord touches them, they will surely say, "O, woe is us! Verily, we were wrong-doers
We will place a just balance on the Day of Resurrection, and no soul shall be wronged in anything. Even though it is the weight of a grain of mustard seed, We will bring it; for We are sufficient as a reckoner
In the past We did give to Moses and Aaron the Criterion (or Discrimination), and a Light and a Reminder to those who fear (evil)
Those who fear their Lord in secret (in thought), and who dread the Hour (of Judgment)
This is a blessed Reminder which We have sent down (or revealed), will you then reject it
And We gave Abraham of old his Rectitude of conduct (or proper course, as distinct from Faith); for We were aware of him (his faith)
When he said to his father and to his people, "What are these images to which you pay devotion
Said they, "We found our fathers worshipping them
Said he, "Verily, both you and your fathers have been in obvious error
They said, "Do you come to us with the truth, or are you but of those who jest
He said, "Nay, but your Lord is Lord of the heavens and the earth, which He originated (created from nothing); and I am of those who testify unto this
And, by Allah! I have a plan for your idols after you have gone and turned your backs
So he broke them in pieces, all except their largest, that they might have recourse to it
Said they, "Who has done this to our gods? Surely, he is of the evil-doers
Others said, "We heard a youth mention them, he is called Abraham
Said they, "Then bring him before the eyes of the people, that they may bear witness
Said they, "Was it you who did this to our gods, O Abraham
Said he, "Nay, it was this largest of the idols. But ask them, if they can speak
Then they turned to themselves and said, "Surely, you are the ones in the wrong
Then were they confounded with shame and said, "You knew well that these cannot speak
Said he, "Will you then worship, beside Allah, that which cannot profit you at all, nor harm you
Fie upon you, and what you serve beside Allah! Have you then no sense
They cried, "Burn him, and stand by your gods, if you are going to do anything
We said, "O fire! Be you cool and a safety for Abraham
They desired to set a snare for him, but We made them the losers
And We brought him and Lot safely to the land (Aram or Syria) which We have blessed for all nations (or peoples)
And We bestowed upon him Isaac, and as an additional gift (a grandson), Jacob and each of them We made righteous
And We made them Leaders to guide men by Our command, and We sent inspiration to them to do good works, and to be steadfast in prayer, and to practice charity; and they were constant in their service of Us alone
And Lot, to him We gave judgment and knowledge, and We delivered him safely from the community which practiced abominations; truly, they were a people given to evil lewdness
And We brought him into Our Mercy; verily, he was of the righteous
And Noah, of old times, when he called We answered him and saved him and his people from the great affliction
And We helped him against the people who said Our signs were lies; verily, they were a bad people, therefore did We drown them all
And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment concerning the field, when some people´s sheep had strayed therein at night; and We were witness to their judgment
And We gave Solomon right understanding of matters (or cases). To each of them We gave judgment and knowledge; and it was by Our power that the hills and the birds celebrate Our praises with David. It was We who did it
And We taught him the art of making coats of mail for you, to shield you from each other´s violence; are you then grateful
And to Solomon We subjected the violent wind, to flow tamely at his bidding to the land which We have blessed - for We are aware of all things
And some devils (evil ones), who dived for him, and did other works beside, it was We who kept guard over them
And Job, when he cried to his Lord, saying, "Lo! Adversity has touched me, but you are the most Merciful of the merciful ones
And We answered him, and removed from him the distress that was upon him; and We restored to him his people, and doubled their number as a mercy from Us, and as a remembrance to those who serve Us
And (remember) Ishmael, and Idris (Enoch?), and Zul-Kifl (Ezekiel?), all men of constancy and patient
And We admitted them into Our Mercy; verily, they were among the righteous
And remember Zun-nun (the man of the Whale, Jonah), when he went away in wrath and thought that We had no power over him; but he cried out in the darkness, "There is no God but Thou, celebrated be Thy praise! Verily, I was of the wrong
And We answered him, and saved him from the distress. Thus do We deliver those who have faith
And (remember) Zachariah, when he cried unto his Lord, "O Lord! Leave me not without off-spring, though you are the best of inheritors
And We answered him, and bestowed upon him Yahya (John); and We made his wife right for him (cured her barrenness). Verily, they used to vie with one another in good works, and they called unto Us with longing and awe, and were humble (or submissive) befo
And (remember) her who guarded her chastity, and We breathed into her of Our Spirit, and We made her and her son a sign unto the worlds (or all peoples, or all creatures)
Verily, this your religion (or brotherhood) is a single religion (brotherhood); and I am your Lord, so serve Me
But they cut up their affairs (religion, politics etc. into fragments) amongst themselves, yet they all shall return unto Us
And he who acts right and he who is a believer (or has faith), there is no denial of his efforts, for, verily, We record it for him
There is a ban upon any community which We have destroyed that they shall not return
Until Yagug and Magug (Gog and Magog, Lawless tribes or Lawlessness itself) are let loose (through every barrier), and they hasten out of every mound (rock, nook and cranny)
And the True Promise draws nigh, and lo! They are staring, wide-eyed are those who disbelieve, saying, "O, woe is us! We were heedless of this, aye, we were wrong-doers
Verily, ye, and what you serve beside Allah, shall be the fuel of hell. Thereto shall you go down
Had these been gods, they would not have come hither, but all shall dwell therein
For them therein is groaning, and they shall not be heard
Verily, those for whom the Good from Us has gone before, they will be removed far there from
They shall not hear the slightest sound of Hell, and they will dwell in what their souls desire
The Great Terror shall not grieve them; but the angels shall greet them, saying, "This is your day, the one which you were promised
The Day when We will roll up the heavens as a recorder rolls up the scroll. As We produced it at its first creation, We shall repeat it - a promise binding upon Us; verily, We shall do it
And already have We written in the Psalms after the Reminder (the Message of Moses) that "My righteous servants shall inherit the earth
Verily, in this is a plain statement for a people who serve Me
We have sent you not, but as a mercy to the worlds
Say, "I am only inspired that your God is one God; will ye, then, surrender unto Him (become Muslims)
But if they turn their backs, then say, "I have proclaimed the message to you all alike, though I know not if what you are promised be near or far
Verily, He knows what is spoken openly, and that which you hide
I know not but that this may be a trial for you, and provision for a season
Say, "O My Lord! Judge you with truth! Our Lord is the Beneficent Whose aid is to be sought against the blasphemies you utter
O mankind! Fear your Lord. Verily, the convulsions of the Hour (of Judgment) will be a thing terrible
On the day you shall see it, every suckling woman shall be scared away from that to which she gave suck; and every pregnant woman shall drop her load unformed; and you shall see men in drunken riot, though not drunk: but dreadful will be the wrath of Alla
And yet amongst men are such who wrangles about Allah without knowledge, and follows every rebellious devil
Against whom it is written down that whoever turns to him for friendship, verily, He will lead him astray, and will guide him towards the penalty of the blaze
O Mankind! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, consider that We created you from earth, then from a seed, then from a clot, then from a little lump of flesh, shaped or shapeless, that We may explain to you. And We make what We please to remain in
That is because Allah, He is the Truth. Lo! He quickens the dead, and lo! He is Able to do all things
And because the Hour will come; there is no doubt thereof; and because Allah will raise those who are in the graves
And yet amongst men are those who wrangles about Allah without knowledge, without guidance, and without a Book of Enlightenment
Turning his neck from the way of Allah; for him is disgrace in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection We will make him taste the doom of burning
This is for what your two hands have sent before you, and in this Allah is not an oppressor unto His servants
And amongst men are those who serve Allah wavering on a brink; so that if there befall him good, he is comforted; but if there befall him a trial, he falls away. He loses both this world and the Hereafter - that is an obvious loss
He calls, besides Allah, on what can neither harm him nor profit him - that is a wide error
He calls on him whose harm is nearer than his benefit - verily, an evil patron and an evil comrade
Verily, Allah makes those who believe and do aright enter into Gardens beneath which rivers flow; verily, Allah does what He intends
He who thinks that Allah will not help him (Muhammad) in this world or in the Hereafter, let him stretch a rope to the ceiling (or heaven) and put an end to himself; and then let him see if his plan will remove that which enrages him
Thus have We sent down Manifest Signs; for, verily, Allah guides whom He will
Verily, those who believe this Revelation, and those who are Jews, and the Sabaeans, and the Christians, and the Magians, and those who join other gods with Allah, verily, Allah will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection; verily, Allah is witness
Do you not see that unto Allah bow down in worship (or submit in service and adoration) whoever is in the heavens and whoever is in the earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the mountains, and the trees, and the beasts, and many among manki
These twain are two opponents who dispute about their Lord. But those who disbelieve, garments (or coverings) of fire will be cut out for them, and on their heads boiling water will be poured down
Whereby that which is in their bellies and their skins shall be scalded
And for them are hooks of iron
Whenever they desire to come forth there from through pain, they will be sent back into it: and (it is said unto them) "Taste you the penalty of the burning
Verily, Allah will make those who believe and do right enter into Gardens beneath which rivers flow; they shall be bedecked therein with bracelets of gold and with pearls, and their garments therein shall be of silk
For they are guided to goodly speech, and they shall be guided to the path of Him who is worthy of all praise (the All-laudable or Glorious One)
Verily, those who disbelieve and bar men from Allah´s path and from the Sacred Place of Worship, which We have appointed for all mankind alike, the dweller therein and the stranger - and he who desires therein profanity or injustice, We will make hi
And when We prepared the site (in Mecca) for Abraham as the place of the Holy House, saying, "Associate naught with Me, but cleanse My House for those who make the rounds, for those who stand to pray, for those who bow, and for those too who prostrat
And proclaim amongst men the Pilgrimage; they will come to you on foot and on every kind of camel, lean from journeys through distant mountain and deep ravines
That they may witness things of benefit for them, and that they may mention the name of Allah for (or on) appointed days over the cattle Allah has provided them with (for sacrifice), then eat thereof and feed the distressed ones in want
Then let them make an end of their self-neglect, and let them pay their vows and go around the ancient House
That do. And whoever magnifies the sacred things of Allah it is better for him with his Lord. Cattle are lawful for you, except that which has been recited to you. So shun the abomination of idols, and shun lying speech
Turning unto Allah only, not associating aught with Him; for he who associates aught with Allah, it is as though he had fallen from heaven, and the birds snatch him up, or the wind blows him away into a far distant place
That is his State. And he who honours the Symbols of Allah (and sacrificial animals), they come (or ought to come) from the piety of heart
Therein have you benefits for an appointed term. In the end the place for sacrificing them is near the Ancient House (Mina near the Kaaba)
To every nation have We appointed rites, that they may mention the name of Allah over the sustenance He has provided them from animals fit for food; and your God is one God; to Him then surrender, and give glad tidings to the humble
To those whose heart, when Allah is mentioned, are filled with awe, and to those who endure patiently all that befalls them, and to those who are steadfast in prayer and who spend of what We have given them
The camels! We have appointed them for you as one of the symbols of Allah. Therein have you much good; so mention the name of Allah over them as they stand in a row, and when they are down (dead after slaughter) eat of them, and feed the easily contented
Their meat will never reach to Allah, nor yet their blood, but the piety from you will reach Him. Thus hath He subjected them to you that you may magnify Allah for guiding you: and give you glad tidings to those who do right
Verily, Allah will defend those who are true; verily, Allah loves not any treacherous ingrate (or traitor and ingrate)
Permission is given to those who fight because they have been wronged, and, indeed, Allah has power to give them victory
Those who have been driven from their homes unjustly only because they said, "Our Lord is Allah;" - for were it not for Allah repelling some men by means of others, cloisters and churches and synagogues and mosques, wherein the name of Allah is
Those who, if We establish them in the land, are steadfast in prayer, and give regular charity, and bid what is right, and forbid what is wrong - with Allah rests the end (final outcome) of affairs
But if they call you liar, even so did the people of Noah, and the tribes of A´ad and Thamud, they denied (My messengers) before you
And the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot
And the dweller of Midian; and Moses was called a liar too: but I indulged the disbelievers a long while, and then I seized them, and how terrible was My rejection
And how many a city (community) have We destroyed while it was guilty (did wrong), and it tumbled down on its roof, lying ruined to this day, and how many a deserted well and lofty palace
Have they not travelled through the land? And have they not heart wherewith to feel (understand), and ears wherewith to hear? For, indeed, it is not their eyes that are blind, but it is the hearts which are within their breasts that grow blind
They will bid you to hasten on the torment, but Allah will never fail in his promise; for, verily, a day with your Lord is as a thousand years of what you number
And to how many a city have I given full range while it yet did wrong! Then I seized it, and unto Me was the return
Say, "O mankind! I am naught but a plain Warner to you
And to those who believe and do right, for them is forgiveness and a generous provision
But those who strive to discredit Our signs, they are rightful owners of the Fire
We have not sent before you any messenger or prophet, but that when he formed a desire (or recited the message), Satan introduced not something (evil or vain) into it; but Allah annuls what Satan proposes; then does Allah confirm (establish) His Signs (re)
That He may make that which Satan introduces a trial unto those in whose heart is a disease, and those whose heart are hardened - verily, the wrongdoers are in a wide schism
And that those who have been given knowledge may know that it is the truth from your Lord, and may believe therein, and that their heart may surrender humbly unto Him. Verily, Allah surely will guide those who believe into the Straight Way
But those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the Hour (of Judgment) comes on them suddenly, or there comes on them the torment of the Day of Disaster
The dominion (or sovereignty) on that day shall be Allah´s, He shall judge between them; and those who believe and do aright shall be in Gardens of Delight
But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelation, for them is a shameful doom
And those who flee their homes in the cause of Allah, and then are slain or die, Allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision; for, verily, Allah is the best of providers
Assuredly, He shall make them enter by an entrance that they will love. For, verily, Allah is Knower, Most-forbearing
That is so. Whoever retaliates with the like of what He has been made to suffer, and shall then be wronged again, Allah shall surely succour him; verily, Allah blots out sins and is constantly Forgiving
That is because Allah causes the night to pass into day, and causes the day to pass into night, and because Allah is Hearer, Seer
That is because Allah, He is the Truth (or Reality), and that whereon they call instead of Him is the False, and because Allah, He is the High, the Great
See you not how Allah sends down water from the sky, and on the morrow the earth is green? Verily, Allah is Subtile, Aware
Unto Him belongs all that is in the heavens and that is in the earth; verily, Allah is the Absolute, the Owner of all Praise
Have you not seen that Allah has subjected for you all that is in the earth, and the ship that runs on in the sea at His bidding, and He holds back the sky from falling on the earth save at His bidding? Verily, Allah to mankind is Gracious, Merciful
He it is who quickens you, then makes you die, then will He quicken you again; verily, man is indeed ungrateful
Unto every nation have We given sacred rites which they are to perform; so let them not then dispute about the matter, but summon you unto your Lord; verily, you (Muhammad) indeed follow right guidance
But if they wrangle with you, say, "Allah best knows what you do
Allah shall judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein you differ
Did you not know that Allah knows what is in the heavens and the earth? Verily, it is in a Record; verily, it is easy for Allah
And they serve beside Allah that for which He has sent down (revealed) no warrant, and that whereof they have no knowledge. For wrongdoers there is no helper
When Our clear revelations are read to them, you may recognize disdain in the faces of those who disbelieve; they well-nigh attack those who recite Our revelations to them. Say, "Shall I inform you of something worse than that for you? The Fire which
O mankind! A similitude is coined for you, so pay heed to it. Verily, those on whom you call beside Allah could never create a fly even if they combine together to do it. And if the fly should snatch something from them they could not rescue it from it. S
They do not value Allah at His true value; verily, Allah is Powerful, Mighty
Allah chooses from the angels messengers, and also from mankind; verily, Allah is Hearer and Seer
He knows what is before them and what is behind them; and unto Allah all things return
O you who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves (in obeisance), and serve your Lord, and do good, that per chance (or possibly) you may prosper
And strive in the cause of Allah, with the effort which is His due. He has chosen you, and has not laid upon you any hardship (or hindrance) in religion - the faith of your father Abraham. He has named you Muslims of old and in this (Scripture), that the
Successful indeed are the believers (or the believers will eventually win)
Who in their prayers are humble
And who shun vain talk
And who are constantly active in charitable works
And who abstain from sexual immodesty (or guard their modesty or chastity or sexual purity)
Except for with those joined with them in marriage or the captive whom their right hand possesses, for then, verily, they are free from blame
But whoever craves aught beyond that, they are the transgressors
And those who faithfully observe their trusts and covenants
And who guard well (pay heed to) their prayers
These will be the heirs
Who shall inherit Paradise; they shall dwell therein
We have created man from an extract of clay
Then We made him a drop (sperm) in a safe depository (the womb)
Then We made the drop into a clot, and We made the clot into a lump (foetus); then We made the lump into bone, and We clothed the bone with flesh; then We produced from it another creature. Blessed be Allah, the best of Creators
Then shall you after that surely die
Then, lo! On the Day of Resurrection shall you surely be raised
And We have created above you seven paths; and We are never heedless of creation
And We send down from the heaven water by measure, and We make it rest in the earth; but, verily, We are able to withdraw it
Then We produce for you thereby gardens of date-palms and grapes wherein you have much fruits, and whereof you eat
And a tree growing out of Mount Sinai (Olives) which produces oil, and a relish for eaters
And, verily, you have a lesson in the cattle; We give you to drink of what is in their bodies; and you have therein many uses, and of them you eat
And on them and on ships you are carried
We sent Noah unto his people, and he said, "O my people! Serve Allah, you have no God but Him; do you then not fear (evil)
Said the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people, "This is nothing but a mortal like yourselves who wishes to make himself superior to you. Had Allah pleased He could surely have sent angels. We have not heard of this from our forefathers
He is nothing but a man possessed; so watch him for a while
Said he, "My Lord! Help me, for they deny me
And We inspired him, saying "Make the ark under Our eyes and Our inspiration; and when the oven (of Allah´s wrath) boils over (or the fountains or springs of the earth are about to gush forth), conduct into it of every kind two spouses, and you
But when you are settled, you and those with you in the ark, say, "Praise belongs to Allah, Who saved us from the unjust people
And say, ´My Lord! Cause me to land on a blessed landing place, for you are the best of all who bring to land.´
Verily, in this is a sign, and, verily, We are ever trying them (mankind)
Then We raised up after them another generation
And We sent amongst them a messenger of their own (or from among them), saying, "Serve Allah, you have no God but He; will you then not fear (evil)
Said the chiefs of the people who disbelieved, and denied the meeting in the Hereafter, and to whom We gave enjoyment in the life of this world, "This is only a mortal like yourselves, who eats of what you eat, and drinks of what you drink
If you obey a mortal like yourselves, verily, you will then be surely losers
Does he promise you that when you are dead, and have become dust and bones, that then you will be brought forth
Be gone, be gone, with that which you are promised (or it is far-fetched)
There is only our life in this world. We die and we live, and we shall not be raised again
He is only a man who invents a lie about Allah. And we believe him not
Said he, "My Lord! Help me, for they deny me
He said, "Within a little while they will surely be sorry
Then the blast seized them rightfully; and We made them as rubbish borne by a torrent (of Time); so, away with the wrong-doing people
Then after them We brought forth other generations
No nation (or people) can hasten its appointed term, nor delay it
Then We sent Our messengers one after another. Whenever its messenger came unto any nation they denied him; so We caused them to follow one another (to disaster); and We made them bywords. Away then with a people who believe not
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs, and with plain authority
To Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they were inflated with pride, and were a despotic people
And they said, "Shall we believe two mortals like ourselves, and whose people are servile unto us
So they accused them of lying, and became of those who perished
And We verily gave Moses the Book, that per chance (or possibly) they might be guided
And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign; and We gave them both shelter on high, a place of security and springs
O you messengers! Eat of the good things and do right; verily, I am aware of what you do
And, verily, this your religion (or brotherhood) is one religion (or brotherhood), and I am your Lord; so keep your duty unto Me
But they (mankind) have broken their religion (or affair) between them into sects, each sect rejoicing in its own tenets
So leave them in their confused error (or ignorance) for a time
Think they that in the wealth and children, wherewith We provide them
We hasten unto them with good things? Nay, but they perceive not
Verily, those who walk in awe of their Lord
And those who believe in the revelations of their Lord
And those who ascribe not partners unto their Lord
And those who give what they give with heart afraid because they are about to return unto their Lord
These race to good things, and they shall be the first in the race
But We will not oblige a soul beyond its capacity; for with us is a Record that utters the truth, and they shall not be wronged
Nay, their heart are in ignorance of this, and they do deeds beside this which they continue to do
Until, when We catch the affluent ones amongst them with the punishment, then lo! They cry in supplication
Supplicate not this day! Assuredly, you will not be helped by (or against) Us
My revelations were recited to you, but you turned back upon your heels
In arrogant scorn thereof, raving vain nonsensical tales by night
Have they not pondered over the words, or has something new come unto them which came not to their forefathers
Or know they not their messenger that they thus deny him
Or do they say, "He is possessed"? Nay, but he came to them with the Truth, and most of them are haters of Truth
But if the truth were to conform to their desires, verily, the heavens and the earth and whoever is therein would be corrupted. Nay, We brought them their Reminder (The Quran), but from their Reminder they now turn away
Or do you ask them for a tribute? But the bounty of your Lord is better, for He is the best of those who provide
And, verily, you do call them to the Straight Way
But, verily, those who believe not in the Hereafter, they are indeed astray from that Way
But if We had mercy on them, and relieved their distress, they still would persist in their rebellion, blindly wandering on
And We caught them with the punishment, but they humble not themselves before their Lord, nor do they pray
Until, when We open for them the gate of extreme torment, then lo! They are plunged into despair
He it is who produced for you hearing and sight, and heart (or feelings, understanding, mind). Little thanks give you
And He it is Who has sown you broadcast in the earth, and unto Him shall you be gathered
And He it is Who gives you life and death; and His is the alternation of the night and the day; have you then no sense
Nay, but they say the like of that which those of yore did say
They said, "What! When we have become earth and bones, are we then going to be raised again
We were already promised this, we and our forefathers. Lo! this is naught but old folks´ tales
Say, "Whose is the earth and those who are therein, if you have knowledge
They will say, "Allah´s." Say, "Will you then not remember
Say, "Who is Lord of the seven heavens, and Lord of the Mighty Throne
They will say, "Allah." Say, "Will you then not keep your duty unto Him
Say, "In whose hand is the dominion over all things; He succours (or protects) but is not succoured (or needs no protection or against whom there is no protection), if you did but know
They will say, "Allah´s". Say, "How then can you be so deluded
Nay, We have brought them the Truth, but, verily, they are Liars
Allah never took a son, nor was there ever any God with Him; else would each God have assuredly gone off with (or championed, controlled) that which he had created, and some would assuredly have exalted themselves over (or overcome) others. Glorified be A
Knower of the invisible and the visible, exalted be He above what they associate with Him
Say, "My Lord! if you should show me what they are promised
My Lord! Then place me not amongst the wrong-doing people
And verily We are able to show you that which We have promised them
Repel evil by that which is best. We are best Aware of that which they allege
And say, "My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from the suggestions of the devils
And I seek refuge in Thee from their presence
Until when death comes to any one of them he says, "My Lord! Send me back
That I may do right in that which I have left behind." Nay! It is but a mere word he speaks; behind them is a barrier until the Day they shall be raised
And when the trumpet shall be blown, and there shall be no kinship between them on that day, nor will they ask about each other then
And those whose scales are heavy (with good deeds), they are the successful
But those whose scales are light, these are they who lose their souls, in hell will they abide
The fire shall scorch their faces, and they shall curl their lips (in gloom) therein
(It will be said) "Were not My revelations recited to you? And did you not treat them as falsehoods
They will say, "Our Lord our misfortune overcame us, and we became a people astray
Our Lord! Take us out of this, and if we return to evil, then shall we be unjust indeed
He will say, "Be gone into it, and speak you not to Me
Verily, there was a sect of My servants who used to pray, "Our Lord! We believe, so forgive us, and have mercy upon us, for Thou art the best of the merciful ones
But you took them for a jest (treated them with ridicule) until you forgot My reminder and did laugh at them
Verily, I have rewarded them this day that they were steadfast; verily, they are indeed triumphant, blissful now
He will say, "How long a number of years did you tarry on earth
They will say, "We tarried but a day or part of a day, but ask those who keep count
He will say, "You have only tarried a little, if you but knew
Did you then think that We created you for jest (or sport, without purpose), and that you would not be returned to Us
But exalted be Allah, the True King; there is no God but He, the Lord of the Noble Throne (or Throne of Honour)
He who calls unto any other God along with Allah has no proof thereof; verily, his account is only with his Lord; verily, the disbelievers shall not be successful
And say, "Lord, Forgive and have mercy, for you are the best of the merciful ones
This is a chapter which We have revealed and ordained. In it We have revealed manifest signs in order that you may take heed
The man and the woman guilty of adultery (fornication, whoring), scourge each of them with a hundred stripes, and let not compassion for them withhold you from obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day; and let a party of the believers
Let no adulterer marry any but an adulteress or an idolatress (or unbeliever), nor let any but such a man or an idolater (or unbeliever) marry such a woman. All this is forbidden to believers
And those who launch a charge (accusations, imputations) on chaste women, but bring not four witnesses, scourge them with eighty stripes, and never afterwards accept their testimony, for these are, indeed, evil-doers (workers of abomination)
Except such as repent after that and make amends, for, verily, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful
And those who cast charges (accusations, imputations) against their wives and have no witnesses except themselves, then the testimony of one of them shall be to testify four times that, by Allah, he is of those who speak the truth
And a fifth, to invoke the curse of Allah on him if he be of those who lie
And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bears testimony four times that, by Allah, he is of those who lie
And the fifth that the wrath of Allah shall be on her if he be of those who speak the truth
And were it not for the grace of Allah upon you and His mercy unto you, and that Allah is Relenting, Wise (he would have been ruined)
Verily, those who spread the slander are a gang among you. Deem it not as an evil for you. Nay, it is good for you. Every man of them shall have what he has earned of sin; and he among them who had the greater share (took the lead), for him is an awful do
Why did not, when you heard it, the believers, men and women, think good of their own folk, and say, "This is an obvious lie
Why did they not bring four witnesses to it? But since they did not bring witnesses, then verily they stand forth as liars in the sight of Allah
And but for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy in this world and the Hereafter, an awful doom would have seized you, for that which you glibly and hastily spread abroad
Behold, you received it with your tongues, and spoke with your mouths what you had no knowledge of, and deemed it a light thing, while it was most grave in the sight of Allah
And why, when you heard it, did you not say, "It is not for us to speak of this? Glory be to Thee, O Allah, this is an awful slander
Allah admonishes you that you return not to the like of it ever, if you be believers
And He expounds to you His revelations, for Allah is Knower, Wise
Verily, those who love to see slander (or scandal) broadcast amongst the believers, for them is grievous woe in this world and the Hereafter; Allah knows, but you know not
And but for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy, and that Allah is kind and compassionate
O you who believe! Follow not the footsteps of Satan, for he who follows the footsteps of Satan, verily, he bids you filth (the shameful) and wrong. Had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you and His mercy unto you, not one of you would have grown pu
And let not those amongst you who have plenty (dignity and ease and ample means) swear that they will not give aught to their kinsman and the needy and those who are fugitives from their homes in the cause of Allah, but let them forgive and show indulgenc
Verily, those who slander (cast aspersions) on virtuous (or chaste) women who have been careless (indiscreet) but believing, shall be cursed in this world and the Hereafter; theirs will be an awful doom
On the day when their tongues and hands and feet shall testify against them as to what they used to do
On that day Allah will pay them their just due; and they shall know that Allah, He is the Manifest Truth
Vile (impure) women are for vile (impure) men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are for good men, and good men for good women, such are innocent of what people they say; for them is forgiveness and a noble provision
O you who believe! Enter not into houses which are not your own, until you have asked permission (announced your presence) and saluted (invoked peace on) the people thereof. That is better for you; per chance (or possibly) you may be mindful
And if you find no one therein, then enter not until permission is given you, and if it be said unto you, "Go away." then go away, for it is purer for you; Allah knows what you do
It is no crime against you that you enter uninhabited houses, wherein is comfort for you; but Allah knows what you proclaim and what you hide
Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks and guard their modesty; that is purer for them; verily, Allah is well aware of what they do
And say to the believing women that they cast down their looks and guard their modesty, and display not their ornaments, except those which are obvious from the outside; and let them pull their veils over their bosoms and not display their ornaments (and beauty) save to their husbands and fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or their brothers´ sons, or their sisters´ sons, or their women, or what their right hands possess (slaves), or their male attendants who are incapable (eunuchs or old men), or to children who do not note women´s nakedness; and that they beat not with their feet to draw attention to their hidden ornaments; but turn you all to Allah, O you believers, in order that you may succeed (or prosper or attain bliss)
And marry the single amongst you, and the righteous among your slaves and your handmaidens. If they be poor, Allah will enrich them of His grace, for Allah encompasses all and knows all
And let those who cannot find a match keep chaste until Allah gives them means from His grace. And if any of your slaves asks for a Deed in writing (an agreement to purchase their freedom), write it for them if you know any good in them; yea, give them so
Now have We sent down to you clear revelations, and the example of those who have passed away before you, and as an admonition to those who fear (avoid) evil
Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth; The similitude of His light is as a niche in which is a lamp, and the lamp is in a glass, the glass is as though it were a brilliant star; it is lit from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the east nor of
(This lamp is found, or the light is lit) In the houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His name shall be remembered (or mentioned) therein. His praises are celebrated therein mornings and evenings
By men whom neither merchandise nor selling (commerce) divert from the remembrance of Allah and steadfastness in prayer and charity, who are in awe of the day when heart and eyes shall be transformed
That Allah may reward them for the best of that which they have done, and give them increase of His bounty; for Allah gives blessings without stint to whom He will
But those who disbelieve, their works are like the mirage in a desert, the thirsty suppose it to be water till when he comes to it he finds nothing, but he finds, instead, Allah is with him; and He will pay him his account, for Allah is quick to take acco
Or like darkness on a deep sea. There covers it a wave above which is another wave, above which is a cloud, layers of darkness upon darkness; when he puts out his hand he can scarcely see it; for him to whom Allah has given no light, he has no light
Have you not seen that Allah, He it is whom praise all who are in the heavens and the earth, and the birds in their flight? Each one knows its worship and its praise, and Allah is aware of what they do
And unto Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and unto Allah is the journeying
Have you not seen how Allah drives the clouds gently, and then gathers them together, then heaps them up (or layers them)? Then you may see the rain coming forth from their midst; and He sends down from the sky mountainous masses wherein is hail; He smite
Allah alternates the night and the day. Verily, in all these things is a lesson to those endowed with vision
And Allah created every beast from water, and of them are some that creep upon their bellies, and some that walk upon two legs, and some walk upon four. Allah creates what He wills; verily, Allah has power over all things
We have, indeed, sent down revelations which make things (hidden) manifest, and Allah guides whom He pleases unto the Straight Way
They say, "We believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and we obey." But after that some of them turn their backs; they are not really believers
And when they appeal to Allah and His Messenger to judge between them, lo! A section of them is averse
But had the right been on their side they would have come unto Him willingly enough
Is there in their heart a disease, or do they doubt, or do they fear lest Allah and His Messenger should deal unjustly by them?- Nay, it is they who do wrong (or are unjust)
The speech of the believers, when they appeal unto Allah and His Messenger to judge between them, is only to say, "We hear and we obey;" and such are the successful
He who obeys Allah and His Messenger and fears Allah and keeps his duty to Him, such indeed are the victorious
They swear by Allah with their most solemn oath that had you ordered them they would surely go forth. Say, "Swear not; obedience is more reasonable; verily, Allah is Informed of what you do
Say, "Obey Allah and obey the Messenger; but if you turn away then it is for him to do only that wherewith he has been charged, and for you to do only that wherewith you have been charged. If you obey him, you are rightly guided. But the Messenger ha
Allah promises those of you who believe and do right that He will give them the succession (or make them inheritors to the present rulers), in the earth even as He gave the succession to those before them; and that He will surely establish for them their
Establish regular worship and regularly pay the Zakah (the poor-tax) and obey the Messenger, in order that you may obtain mercy
Think not that those who disbelieve can frustrate (the plan of Allah) on earth; their resort is the Fire, and it is indeed an ill destination
O you who believe! Let those whom your right hands possess (slaves), and the children amongst you who have not reached puberty, ask leave of you on three occasions (before coming into your presence) - before the prayer of dawn, and when you put off your c
And when your children reach puberty let them ask leave as those before them asked leave. Thus does Allah explain to you His revelations, for Allah is Knower, Wise
And women past childbearing, who have no hope of marriage, it is no crime for them if they discard their outer garments in such a way as not to display their adornments. But to refrain is better for them, for Allah is Hearer, Knower
There is no blame upon the blind, nor blame upon the lame, nor blame upon the sick nor on yourselves if you eat from your houses, or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters
Only those are believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and when they are with him (the Messenger) upon some common business, go not away until they have asked leave of him. Verily, those who ask your leave they it is who believe in Allah and His
Make not the calling (or summons) of the Messenger among you like your calling (or summons) one to the other. Allah knows those of you who steal away, hiding themselves. And let those who conspire to evade his orders beware lest grief or painful punishmen
Verily, to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He knows their condition, and the Day when they shall be returned unto Him so that He may inform them of what they did. Allah is Knower of all things
Blessed is He Who has revealed unto His servants the Discrimination (or Criterion) that it may be an admonition to all peoples
He unto Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, He has chosen no son nor has He any partner in the sovereignty. He has created everything, and then given it its measure (proportions)
Yet they take beside Him other gods who create not aught, but are themselves created, and cannot control harm or profit for themselves, and can control neither death, nor life, nor resurrection
And those who disbelieve say, "This is nothing but a lie which he has invented, and another people hath helped him with it;" But, in truth, it is they who have wrought an injustice and a falsehood
And they say, "Old folks´ tales, which he has written down while they are dictated to him morning and evening
Say, "He Who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth, He has revealed it; verily, He is ever Forgiving, Merciful
And they say, "What ails this messenger that he eats food and walks in the markets? Why is not an angel sent down unto him, to be a Warner with him
Or a treasure thrown down unto him, or why has he not a garden to eat from....?" And the unjust say, "You only follow a man bewitched (or obsessed)
See how they coin similitudes for you, so that they are all astray and cannot find a way
Blessed is He Who, if He will, can make for you better than all that - Gardens beneath which rivers flow - and can make for you castles (mansions, palaces)
Nay, but they deny the coming of the Hour, and for those who deny the Hour We have prepared a blaze
When it sees them from a far place, they shall hear its raging and roaring
And when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof, chained together, they shall pray for destruction there
Pray not that day for one destruction, but pray for many destructions
Say, "Is that better or the Garden of Eternity (Immortality) which is promised unto those who fear (ward off evil), which is ever a reward and a goal
Therein abiding, they shall have all that they desire. It is for your Lord a promise that must be fulfiled
And on the day when He will gather them and that which they served beside Allah, He will say, "Was it you who misled these my servants or did they themselves wander from the way
They will say, "Be you glorified! It was not befitting for us to take any patrons besides Thee; but Thou didst give them and their fathers ease until they forgot the Reminder and became a lost people
And thus have they proved you liars for what you say, and you cannot avert or obtain help. And he among you who does wrong, We will make him taste great torment
We have not sent before you any messengers, but lo! They ate food and walked in the markets; but We have made some of you a test for others: will you be steadfast? your Lord is ever Seer
And those who look not for a meeting with Us say, "Why are angels not sent down to us, or we do not see our Lord?" Assuredly they have an arrogant conceit of themselves and excessive is their insolence
On the day when they behold the angels, there will be no good tidings for the guilty; and the angels will say, "There is a forbidden barrier for you
And We will turn on to the works which they have done, and make them like dust scattered
The companions of the Garden on that day shall be in a better abiding-place and a better noonday rest
The day the heavens shall be cleft asunder with the clouds, and the angels shall be sent down, descending in ranks
The true kingdom (sovereignty, dominion) on that day shall belong to the Beneficent, and it shall be a hard day for the disbelievers
And the day when the wrongdoers shall bite his hands and say, "O, would that I had chosen the way with the Messenger
O, woe is me! Would that I had not taken such a one for a friend
He verily led me astray from the Reminder after it had reached me. Satan is ever a deserter of men
And the Messenger says, "My Lord! Verily, my own people have made this Quran of no account
Thus have We made for every prophet an opponent from among the guilty; but your Lord is sufficient as good guide and helper
Those who disbelieve said, "Why is not the Quran sent down to him all at once (in one piece)?" It is revealed as it is so that We may strengthen your heart therewith, and We have rehearsed it to you gradually, in well-arranged stages
And they bring you no similitude but We reveal the truth and the best interpretation thereof (or a better argument)
They who shall be gathered upon their faces into hell, such are worse in plight and further from the path
And We did give to Moses the Book, and placed with him his brother, Aaron, as a minister (or Priest)
And We said, "Go you together to the people who have denied Our revelations. Then We destroyed them with utter destruction
And the people of Noah, when they denied the messenger, We drowned them, and made them a sign for mankind. We prepared for the wrongdoers a grievous woe
And (the tribes of) A´ad and Thamud and the people of Ar´Rass, and many generations between them
For each of them We set forth parables and examples, and each one have We utterly ruined
Indeed, they have come past the cities which were rained on with an evil rain; have they not seen them? Nay, but they fear not the Resurrection (or hope not for resurrection)
And when they see you (Muhammad) they only took you for a jest, "Is this he whom Allah has sent as a Messenger
He well-nigh leads us astray from our gods, had we not been constant to them." But they shall know, when they see the torment, who errs most from the path
Have you considered him who takes for his god his own lusts (prejudices, fantasies, superstitions)? Would you then be guardian over him
Or do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are but like the cattle, nay, they are further astray in the path
Have you not seen how your Lord spreads the shadow? Had He willed He could have made it still - We make the sun its guide
Then We contract it towards Us with a gradual contraction in easy stages
And He it is who made the night a covering for you; and sleep for repose, and made the day a resurrection
And He it is who sent the winds as glad tidings heralding His mercy; and We send down purifying water from the sky
That We may quicken therewith the dead land, and slake the thirst of the things We have created - beasts and men in great numbers
And verily, We have repeated it (the lesson) in various ways among them that they may remember; but most of mankind begrudge aught save ingratitude
But, had We pleased, We could have raised a Warner in every village (or population centre)
So obey not the disbelievers, but strive against them herewith (with the Quran) with great endeavour
He it is who has set free the two bodies of water (rivers and seas), one palatable and sweet, and the other salty and bitter, and has set a barrier between them, forbidding passage
And He it is who has created man from water, and has appointed for him kindred by blood and kindred by marriage for your Lord is ever Powerful
Yet they worship beside Allah what can neither profit them nor harm them; but the disbeliever is ever a partisan of evil against his Lord
We have only sent you to give glad tidings and as a Warner
Say, "I ask you for no reward for this, save that whoever will may choose a way unto his Lord
And rely you upon the Living One who dies not; and celebrate His praise; He is sufficient as Knower about the faults of His servants
He who created the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, in six days, and then mounted the Throne; the Beneficent! Ask any one who is aware concerning Him
And when it is said unto them, "Adore you the Beneficent", they say, "What is the Beneficent? Shall we adore what you do order us?" And it only increases their aversion
Blessed be He who placed in the heavens mansions (constellations) of stars, and has placed therein a great lamp and an illuminating moon
And He it is who made the night and the day alternating, for him who desires to remember or who desires thankfulness
And the faithful servants of the Beneficent are those who walk upon the earth modestly, and when the ignorant (or foolish) address them, answer, "Peace
And those who pass the night before their Lord, prostrate and standing
And those who say, "Our Lord! Avert from us the doom of hell; verily, its wrath is indeed a grievous affliction
Verily, indeed an evil abode and state
And those who when they spend are neither extravagant nor miserly, but who always take their stand between the two
And those who call not upon another god with Allah; nor take the life which Allah has forbidden save in justice; nor commit adultery (or fornication) - for he who does that shall pay the penalty
The penalty will be doubled for him on the Day of Judgment, and he will abide therein despised forever
Save he who repents and believes and does righteous work; for such Allah will change their evil deeds to good deeds. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful
And he who repents and does good, verily, he has turned to Allah with true conversion
And those who will not witness vanity (frivolous, foolish, ignorant, futile and useless things, falsehood); and when they pass by vain (frivolous, foolish, futile, ignorant, false) discourse, pass by with dignity
And those who when they are reminded of the revelations of their Lord, fall not deaf and blind thereat
And those who say, "Our Lord! Grant us comfort and cheer from our wives and offspring, and make us models for all those who ward off evil (or to lead the righteous)
These shall be rewarded with a high place for that they were steadfast: and they will meet therein with welcome and peace
Abiding therein for ever; a happy abode and state
Say (to the rejecters), "My Lord is not concerned (or uneased) because of you if you call not on Him (in prayer); but you have denied (Him or the Truth), therefore will there be judgment
TA SIN MIM
These are the verses of the Book that clarifies (illuminates)
It may be that you are tormenting your soul that they will not be believers
If We will, We can send down upon them from heaven a sign which would bend their necks in humility
But there comes not to them a fresh Reminder from the Beneficent that they did not turn away from
They have indeed rejected the message, but soon enough will come to them the truth of that at which they mocked
Have they not looked to the earth, how We caused to grow therein of every noble kind
Verily, in that is indeed a sign; but most of them are not believers
Lo! Your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
And when your Lord called Moses, saying, "Go to the iniquitous people
To the people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear (Allah or doing evil)
Said he, "My Lord! Verily, I fear that they will call me liar
And my breast will be straitened, and my tongue is not fluent; so send then unto Aaron (or send them Aaron)
For they have a crime against me. And I fear that they may kill me
Said He, "Not so; but go, both, with Our signs; verily, We are with you listening
And go to Pharaoh and say, ´Verily, we bear a message from the Lord of the Worlds
(saying) Send you with us the children of Israel.´
And he said, "Did we not cherish you as a child amongst us? And did you not dwell amongst us for many years of your life
And you did do a deed which you know you did do (he slew an Egyptian), and you are of the ungrateful
Moses said, "I did commit this, and I was of those who erred
And I fled from you when I feared you. But my Lord granted me better judgment, and made me one of His messengers
And this is the favour you have reproached me with, that you have enslaved the children of Israel
Said Pharaoh, "Who is the Lord of the Worlds
Said he, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between the two, if you want certainty
Said he (Pharaoh) to those about him, "Do you not hear
Moses said, "(He is) your Lord and the Lord of your fathers from the beginning
Said he (Pharaoh), "Verily, the messenger who is sent to you is surely mad
Moses said, "(He is) The Lord of the East and of the West, and of all that is between the two, if you did but understand
Said he (Pharaoh), "If you do take a god besides me I will surely place you among the prisoners
Moses said, "What, if I come to you with something obvious (to the senses)
Said he, "Bring it, if you are of those who tell the truth
And he threw down his rod, and, behold, it was an obvious serpent
And he plucked out his hand, and, behold, it was white to the spectators
He (Pharaoh) said to the chiefs around him, "Verily, this is a knowing (expert) magician (sorcerer, wizard)
He desires to turn you out of your land. What is it then you counsel (advise, suggest)
They said, "Put him off a while, him and his brother, and send into the cities
To collect and bring to you every knowing (expert) magician
And the magicians assembled at the appointed time on a well-known day (a festival day)
And it was said to the people, "Are you assembling
(They said), "Aye, so that we may follow the magicians if they win
And when the sorcerers came they said unto Pharaoh, "Will we have a sure reward if we win
He said, "Yes; and, verily, you shall then be of those who are brought nigh to me (or to my throne in affection and rank)
And Moses said to them, "Throw down what you have to throw
So they threw down their ropes and their rods and said, "By Pharaoh´s might, verily, it is we who shall be the winners
And Moses threw down his rod, and, lo, it swallowed up what they had falsely devised
And the magicians threw themselves down, in obeisance
Saying, "We believe in the Lord of the Worlds
The Lord of Moses and Aaron
Said Pharaoh, "Do you believe in Him ere I give you permission? Surely, he is your leader (in a conspiracy) who has taught you sorcery. But soon you shall know. I will surely cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, and I will crucify yo
They said, "No matter! Verily, unto our Lord do we (or "will we" or "in any case") return
Verily, we ardently hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, for we are the foremost of believers
And We inspired Moses, saying, "Journey by night with my servants; verily, you are pursued
And Pharaoh sent into the cities summoners
(Who said) "Verily, these are a small company
And, verily, they are offenders against us
But we are a multitude and wary
So we (or We) expelled them out of gardens and springs
And treasures, and noble positions
Thus it was, but We made the children of Israel inheritors of these things
And they pursued them at dawn
And when the two hosts saw each other, the companions of Moses said, "Verily, we are overtaken
Said he, "Not so; verily, my Lord is with me. He will guide me
And We inspired Moses, saying, "Strike the sea with your rod." And it was cleft asunder, and each part was like a mighty mountain
And then We brought the others thither
And We saved Moses and those with him, every one
We drowned the others
Lo! Herein is indeed a sign: but most of them are not believers
And, verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
And recite unto them the story of Abraham
When he said to his father and his people, "What do you worship
They said, "We worship idols, and we are devoted to them
He said, "Can they hear you when you call
Or benefit you, or harm you
They said, "No; but we found our fathers doing thus
He said, "Have you considered that which you worship (or serve)
You and your forefathers
Verily, they are foes unto me, save only the Lord of the Worlds
Who created me and does guide me
And who feeds me food and waters me
And when I am sick He heals me
He who causes me to die, and then gives me life again
And who, I ardently hope, will forgive me my sins on the Day of Judgment
My Lord, grant me wisdom (or judgment), and let me join the righteous
And give me a good report amongst the later generations
And place me among the heirs of the Garden of Delight
And forgive my father. Verily, he is of those who err
And disgrace me not on the Day when they are raised
The Day when wealth shall profit not, nor sons
But only he who comes to Allah with a whole (sound) heart
And the Garden will be brought near to the righteous
And Hell shall be brought forth plainly to those who go astray
And it will be said unto them, ´Where is all that you used to worship
Beside Allah? Can they help you, or help themselves?´
Then they shall be hurled therein, they and the seducers
And the hosts of Iblis all together
They shall say, while they quarrel therein
´By Allah! In truth, we were in manifest error
´When we made you equal to the Lord of the Worlds
´It was only the guilty who led us astray
´But now we have no intercessors
´And no loving friend
´Oh, that we had another turn on earth, that we might be of the believers.´
Verily, in this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
And, verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
The people of Noah denied the messengers
When their brother Noah said to them, "Will you not fear (Allah and avoid evil)
Verily, I am a faithful messenger to you
So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me
I ask you for it no wages; my wage is only the concern of the Lord of the Worlds
So fear Allah and obey me
They said, "Shall we believe in you, when the meanest follow you
He said, "What knowledge have I of what they were doing
Their account is only with my Lord, if you but understood
And I am not here to drive away the believers
I am only a plain Warner
They said, "Verily, if you desist not, O Noah! you shall surely be of those who are stoned
Said he, "My Lord! Verily, my own people reject me
Judge you between us openly, and deliver me and those of the believers who are with me
So We saved him and those with him in the laden ark
Then We drowned the rest
Verily, in this indeed is a sign, yet most of them are not believers
And, verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
And (the people of) A´ad denied the messengers
When their brother Hud said to them, "Will you not fear
Verily, I am to you a faithful messenger
So keep your duty to Allah and obey me
I ask of you no fee for it; my wage is only the concern of the Lord of the Worlds
Do you build on every height a monument of vain delight
And build you fine strong buildings that per chance (or possibly) you may be immortal
And when you seize by force, assault you like tyrants
Rather fear Allah and obey me
And keep your duty to Him who has bestowed on you freely all that you know
And has aided you with cattle and sons
And gardens and springs
Verily, I fear for you the retribution of an awful day
They said, "It is the same to us if you admonish or are not of those who admonish
This is nothing but the fable of men of old
For we are not the ones to be doomed (or tormented)
And they denied him; therefore, We destroyed them. Verily, in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers
And, verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
(The tribe of) Thamud denied the messengers
When their brother Salih said to them, "Will you not fear
Verily, I am to you a faithful messenger
So keep your duty to Allah and obey me
I ask not of you any wages; my wage is the concern only of the Lord of the Worlds
Shall you be left here secure in that which is before us
In gardens and springs
And tilled fields and heavily sheathed palms
Though you hew out dwellings in the mountain skillfully
But keep your duty to Allah and obey me
And obey not the bidding of the extravagant (profligate, wasters)
Who spread corruption in the earth and mend not their ways
They said, "You art only of the bewitched
You art but mortal like us; so bring us a sign, if you are truthful
He said, "Behold this she-camel (a test of faith). She has the right to drink, and you have a right to drink, each on an appointed day
Touch her not with evil, lest there seize you the retribution of an awful day
But they hamstrung her, and on the morrow they repented
So the retribution seized them; verily, in this is a sign; but most of them are not believers
And verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
The people of Lot denied the messengers
When their brother Lot said to them, "Will you not fear (Allah or evil)
Verily, I am to you a faithful messenger
So keep your duty to Allah and obey me
I ask you not for it any wages; my wage is only the concern of the Lord of the Worlds
Do you approach the males of all creatures of the world
And leave the mates your Lord has created for you? Nay, but you are people who transgress
They said, "Surely, if you do not desist, O Lot! you shall be of those who are expelled
Said he, "I am, in truth, of those who hate your conduct
My Lord! Save me and my people from what they do
So We saved him and his people, every one
Except an old woman (Lot´s wife) amongst those who lingered behind
Then We destroyed the others
We rained down upon them a shower (of brimstone); and dreadful was the rain for those who had been warned
Verily, in this is a sign; yet most of them are not believers
And, verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
The Dwellers of the Grove (Midianites) denied the messengers
Shu´eyb said unto them, "Will you not fear
Verily, I am to you a faithful messenger
So do your duty to Allah and obey me
I ask not of you for it any wages; my wage is only the concern of the Lord of the Worlds
Give full measure, and be not of those who diminish (give less than due)
And weigh with a true balance
And wrong (or cheat) not mankind of their goods; and waste not the land, despoiling it
And keep your duty unto Him who created you and the generations of the past
Said they, "You art only of the bewitched
And you are only a mortal like ourselves; and, verily, we think that you are surely of the liars
So make portions of the heaven fall down upon us, if you are of the truthful
Said he, "My Lord knows best what you do
But they rejected him, so the torment of the day of gloom (Ashes from a volcanic eruption?) seized them. Lo! It was the retribution of an awful day
Verily, in this is a sign; but most of them are not believers
Verily, your Lord, He is indeed the Mighty, the Merciful
And, verily, it is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds
Which the Faithful Spirit of Truth (Gabriel) has brought down
Upon your heart, that you may be one of the Warners
In plain Arabic language
And, verily, it is also in the scriptures of the past
Is it not a sign for them that the learned men of the children of Israel recognize it
Had We sent it down to any one of any other nation but the Arabs
And he had read it unto them, they would not have believed therein
Thus have We made for it a way into the heart of the guilty
But they will not believe therein until they see the painful doom
And it shall come to them suddenly when they perceive not
They will say, "Shall we be reprieved
What! Do they wish to hasten on Our penalty
What think you? If We let them enjoy life for years
And then there comes to them that which they are promised
That which they had to enjoy will avail them not
But We destroy not any population but it had its Warners
For reminder, for We are never unjust
No devils (or evil ones) brought down this revelation (the Quran)
It is not fit work for them; nor is it in their power to do so
Verily, they are banished from listening
Therefore, call not upon gods other than Allah, lest you be of the doomed
But warn your people who are near of kin
And lower your wing (in kindness and protection as the hen does over its chicks) to those of the believers who follow you
But if they rebel against you, say, "Verily, I am innocent of what you do
And put your trust (rely) upon the Mighty, the Merciful
Who sees you when you do stand up (to pray)
And your postures (or movements) among those who prostrate themselves (in obeisance)
Verily, He, only He, is the Hearer, the Knower
Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend
They descend upon every wicked liar
And impart what they have heard; but most of them are liars
As for poets, those follow them who are astray
Have you not seen how they wander confused in every valley (or by way)
And that they say that which they do not do
Save those who believe and do good works, and remember Allah much, and defend themselves after they are wronged. Those who do wrong will come to know with what a turn they shall be turned
TA SIN. These are the verses of the Quran, a book that clarifies
A guidance and glad tidings to the believers
Who establish regular worship and give regular charity and are sure of the Hereafter
Lo!, As for those who believe not in the Hereafter, We have made for them their works fair-seeming, and they shall wander blindly on
These are they who shall have grievous torment, and theirs in the Hereafter shall be the greatest loss
Verily, you receive this Quran from the presence of the Wise, the All-knowing One
(Remember) When Moses said to his people, "Verily, I perceive a fire, I will bring you there from news; or I will bring you a burning brand that you may be warmed
But when he reached it he was called, with the words, "Blessed is He Who is in the Fire, and He Who is round about it! And glorified be Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
O Moses! Verily, I am Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
Throw down your staff!" But when he saw it writhing as though it was a snake, he turned fleeing, and looked not back. (But it was said to him) "O Moses! Fear not; verily, the messengers fear not in My presence
Save only those who have done wrong and then substitute good for evil; and, verily, I am Forgiving, Merciful
Put your hand in they bosom, it shall come forth white without stain (or hurt); one of nine signs to Pharaoh and his people; verily, they are a rebellious, transgressing people
But when Our signs came to them visibly (that should have opened their eyes), they said, "This is obvious sorcery
And they denied them, though their souls acknowledged them, for spite and arrogance; but behold the nature of the consequences for the evildoers (transgressors)
And We gave David and Solomon knowledge; and they both said, "Praise belongs to Allah, Who hath favoured us over many of His believing servants
And Solomon was David´s heir. He said, "O you people! We have been taught the language of birds, and we have been given abundance; verily, this is manifest grace
And assembled for Solomon were his hosts of the Jinn and of mankind, and birds, and they were marshalled in battle order
Until, when they came upon the Valley of the Ants, an ant said, "O you ants! Enter your dwellings, that Solomon and his hosts crush you not unperceiving (unknowing)
And he (Solomon) smiled, laughing at her speech, and said, "O Lord! Excite (cause) me to be thankful for Thy favour, wherewith Thou hast favoured me and my parents, and to do righteousness which may please Thee; and include me by Thy Grace amongst Th
And he reviewed the birds, and said, "How is it that I see not the hoopoe (perhaps used as a spy, messenger or observer or symbolizing one)? Is he then amongst the absent
I will surely punish him with a severe penalty; or I will slay him unless he brings me clear authority (or reason for his absence)
But he was not long in coming, and said, "I have compassed (covered territory or found out) what you compassed (covered or understood) not; for I come unto you from Sheba with sure information
Verily, I found a woman ruling over them, and she was given abundance of all things, and she had a mighty throne
And I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of Allah, for Satan had made their works fair-seeming to them, and turned them away from the Way (of Truth), so that they are not guided right
So they will not worship Allah, Who brings forth the secrets in the heavens and the earth, and knows what they hide and what they manifest
Allah, there is no God but He, the Lord of the Mighty Throne
Said he (Solomon), "We will see whether you have told the truth, or whether you are of those who lie
Go with this my letter and throw it before them, then turn away from them, and see what answer they return
Said she (the Queen of Sheba after she had received the letter), "O you chiefs! Verily, a noble letter has been thrown before me
It is from Solomon, and, verily, it is as follows, ´In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful
Exalt not yourself against me, but come to me as those who Surrender (unto Allah i.e. as a Muslim)
She said, "You chiefs! Pronounce for me in my affair (or advise me). I never decide an affair until you testify for me
They said, "We are endowed with strength, and endowed with martial prowess; but the command is yours, so consider what you will command
She said, "Verily, kings when they enter a city, despoil it, and demean the mighty ones of its people; thus they will do
But, verily, I am going to send to them a gift, and will wait to see with what answer the messengers return
And when the envoy came to Solomon, he (Solomon) said, "Do you offer me wealth, when what Allah has given me is better than what He has given to you? Nay, it is you (not I) who rejoice (exult) in your gifts
Return unto them, for we will surely come to them with hosts which they cannot resist; and we will surely drive them out thence with shame and they will be humbled
Said he, "O you chiefs! Which of you will bring me her throne before they come unto me surrendering
Said an Ifrit (a powerful and cunning demon) of the Jinn, "I will bring it you before you can rise up from your chair of council, for I am strong for such work, and trustworthy
He who had the knowledge of the Book said, "I will bring it to you before your glance can turn." And when he saw it set down beside him, he (Solomon) said, "This is of my Lord´s grace that He may try me whether I give thanks or am ungrateful - truly, my Lord is rich (independent, free of all needs) and Bountiful
Said he, "Disguise for her throne; let us see whether she is guided, or whether she is of those who receive no guidance
And when she came it was said unto her, "Is this your throne?" She said, "It was just like this (it could be the one)." and Solomon said, "We were given knowledge before her, and we had Surrendered (to Allah)
But that which she worshipped beside Allah diverted her; for she came of people who had no faith
And it was said to her, "Enter the court." And when she saw it, she thought it was a pool, and she bared her legs (tucked up her skirt to go into it). Said he, "Verily, it is a court paved with glass!" Said she, "My Lord! Verily
And We sent unto Thamud their brother Salih, saying "Serve Allah;" but behold! they became two parties quarrelling
Said he, "O my people! Why do you hasten on evil rather than good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of Allah that you may obtain mercy
They said, "We auger evil of you and those who are with you. Said he, "Your augury is in Allah´s hands; nay, but you are a people who are being tested
And there were in the city nine persons who despoiled the land and reformed not
Said they, "Swear to each other by Allah that we will surely fall on him and his people by night; then we will surely say unto his family, ´We witnessed not the destruction of his household; and we are truth tellers!´
And they plotted a plot, and We plotted a plot while they perceive not
Behold, what was the nature of the consequences of their plotting, for lo! We destroyed them and their people, everyone
Thus are their houses in utter ruin, for that they did wrong; verily, in that is a sign to people who have knowledge
But We saved those who believed and who did fear (or avoid evil)
And Lot when he said to his people, "Do you commit abomination knowingly
Must you needs lust after men instead of women? Nay! You are a senseless people
But the answer of his people was only to say, "Drive out Lot´s family from your city, for they are a folk who would keep pure
But We saved him and his family except his wife; her We destined to be of those who lingered behind
And We rained down upon them a shower, and dreadful is the rain for those who have been warned
Say, "Praise belongs to Allah; and peace be upon His servants whom He has chosen! Is Allah best, or what they associate as partners with Him
He who created the heavens and the earth; and sends down upon you water from the sky wherewith We cause to grow beautiful orchards, whose trees it has never been yours to grow; is there a God besides Him? Nay, but they are a people who ascribe equals with Him
He who made the earth a fixed abode, and placed rivers in its folds; and placed upon it firm mountains; and placed a barrier between the two waters; is there any God besides Allah? Nay, but most of them know not
He who answers the distressed when he calls upon Him and removes the evil; and has made you Vicegerents (or Successors) in the earth; is there a God besides Allah? Little do they reflect
He who guides you in the darkness of the land and of the sea; and He who sends winds as heralds of His mercy; is there a God besides Allah? High exalted be Allah above what they associate with Him
He who began the creation and then reproduces it; and who provides for you from the heaven and the earth; is there any God besides Allah? Bring your proofs if you are truthful
Say, "None in the heavens or the earth knows the unseen save only Allah; and they perceive not when they shall be raised
Nay, but does their knowledge reach to the Hereafter? Nay, but they are in doubt concerning it. Nay, but they are blind thereto
And those who disbelieved say, "What! When we have become dust and (or like) our fathers, shall we indeed be brought forth
We were promised this, we and our fathers before us, this is nothing but ancient fables
Say, "Travel in the land and see the nature of the sequel for the guilty
And grieve not you for them, and be not in distress because of what they plot
They say, "When shall this promise be if you do tell the truth
Say; "It may be that a part of what you would hasten is pressing close behind you
But, verily, your Lord is full of grace to mankind, but most of them will not be thankful
Verily, your Lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they manifest
And there is no secret thing in the heaven or the earth, save that it is in a Clear Record
Verily, this Quran relates to the people of Israel most of that whereon they do dispute
And, lo! It is a guidance and a mercy to the believers
Verily, your Lord decides between them by His Wisdom (or Judgment), for He is the Mighty, the Wise
Rely you then upon Allah, for you stand on obvious Truth
Verily, you can not make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf to hear the call when they turn to flee
Nor can you guide the blind out of their error. You can make none to hear, save those who believe Our revelations and have Surrendered
And when the word is fulfiled against them We will bring forth a beast out of the earth (gross materialism?) that shall speak to (or wound) them, because mankind had not faith in Our revelations
And the Day when We will gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our revelations, and they shall be marshalled
Until, when they come before their Lord, He will say, "Did you deny my revelations when you had compassed no knowledge thereof? Or what is it that you were doing
And the Word shall be fulfiled concerning them because they did wrong, and they will not be able to speak
Did they not see that how We have made the night for them to rest in, and the day to see by? Verily, in that are signs to people who believe
And the Day when the trumpet shall be blown and all who are in the heavens and the earth shall be startled in fear (or horrified), save whom Allah wills. And all shall come unto Him, humbled
And you see the mountains (things seemingly firm and reliable) which you do deem firm, drifting away like the passing of the clouds - the work of Allah who orders all things. Verily, He is well aware of what you do
He who brings a good deed shall have better than its worth; and from the alarm of that day they shall be safe
But those who bring an evil deed shall be thrown down upon their faces in the Fire. Shall you be rewarded save for what you did
(Say) I (Muhammad) am commanded to serve the Lord of this land (Mecca) which He has made sacred, and unto Whom belong all things. And I am commanded to be of those who Surrender (unto Him)
And to recite the Quran; And he who is guided right, is guided right only for his own soul; and as for him who goes astray - say unto him, "I am only of those who warn
And say, "Praise be to Allah, Who will show you His signs so that you shall recognize them; for your Lord is not heedless of what you do
TA SIN MIM
These are the verses of the Book (Scripture) that clarifies
We narrate unto you something from the history of Moses and Pharaoh with truth unto a people who believe
Verily, Pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided the people thereof into sects (and casts); one section of them he oppressed, slaughtering their sons and sparing their women. Verily, he was of those who work corruption
And We wished to be gracious to those who were weakened by oppression in the earth, and to make them models, and to make them the inheritors
And to establish them firmly in the earth; and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts that which they feared from them
And We inspired the mother of Moses, saying, "Suckle him; and when you are afraid for him then float him into the river, and fear not and grieve not; verily, We shall restore him to you, and make him of one of Our Messengers
And Pharaoh´s family picked him up that he might become for them a foe and a grief; for verily, Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts were ever sinners
And Pharaoh´s wife said, "He is a joy to my eyes, and to yours. Kill him not; it may be that he will profit us, or that we may take him for a son;" for they perceived not
And the heart of the mother of Moses became void (empty) on the morrow; she well nigh disclosed him, had We not strengthened her heart that she might be of the believers
And she said to his (Moses´) sister, "Follow him up." And she (his sister) watched him from afar (or as a stranger), and they perceive not
And We made unlawful (or unacceptable) for him the wet-nurses. And she (his sister) said, "Shall I guide you to the people of a house who will bring him up for you, and who will be sincere and devoted
So We restored him to his mother that her eye might be cheered, and that she might not grieve, and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true. But most of them understand not
And when he reached maturity and was firmly established, We gave him Wisdom and Knowledge; for thus do We reward those who do good
And he entered into the city at a time when the people thereof were heedless, and he found therein two men fighting; the one of his own sect and the other of his enemies. And he who was of his sect asked his aid against him who was of his enemies. So Mose
He said, "My Lord! Verily, I have wronged my soul, but forgive me." So He forgave him; verily He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
He said, "My Lord! For that you have been gracious to me, I will never more be a supporter of the guilty
And on the morrow he was in the city, fearing, vigilant. And behold, he whom he had helped the day before, cried again to him for help. Moses said unto him, "Verily, you are obviously quarrelsome (a hothead)
And when he would have attacked him who was the enemy to them both, he said, "O Moses! Would (or desire) you to slay me as you did slay a person yesterday? You would be (or are or desire to be) only a tyrant in the earth; and you would not be (or ar)
And a man came from the remote parts of the city running. He said, "O Moses! Verily, the chiefs are deliberating concerning you to slay you; therefore go forth; verily, I am to you a sincere adviser
So he went forth there from, fearing, vigilant. Said he, "Lord, save me from the unjust people
And when he turned his face towards Midian, he said, "It may be that my Lord will guide me to a smooth and straight path
And when he came unto the water of Midian he found thereat a group of people watering their flocks. And he found apart from them two women keeping back their flocks. Said he, "What is the matter with you?" They said, "We cannot water our fl
So he watered their flock for them; then he turned aside into the shade and said, "My Lord! Verily, I stand in need of what good Thou sends down to me
And one of the two women came to him walking shyly; said she, "Verily, my father calls you, to reward you with a payment for that you did water our flocks for us." And when he came to him and related to him his whole story, he said, "Fear n
One of the two women said, "O my father! Hire him; verily, the best of those whom you can hire is the strong and faithful
Said he, "Verily, I desire to marry you to one of these daughters of mine, on condition that you do serve me for hire eight years; and if you shall fulfil ten it is of your own accord; for I desire not to make it hard for you. Allah willing, you will
Said he, "That is settled between you and me. Whichever of the two terms I fulfil, there will be no ill-will (or injustice) against (or in) me, for Allah is surety over (witness of or approves of) what we say
And when Moses had fulfiled the appointed time, and was travelling with his people, he perceived in the mountain a fire and said to his family, "Tarry you here; verily, I have perceived a fire; I hope to bring you tidings thence, or a brand of fire t
And when he came to it he was called by a voice, from the right side of the valley, in the blessed field, out of a tree, "O Moses! Verily, I am Allah the Lord of the Worlds
So throw down your rod." And when he saw it writhing as though it were a snake, he turned away and fled and did not turn. "O Moses! Approach and fear not, verily, you are amongst the secure
Thrust your hand into your bosom, it shall come out white, without hurt; and then fold again your wing, that you do now stretch out through dread (i.e. guard your heart from fear); for these are two signs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs. Verily
Said he, "My Lord! Verily, I have killed a person amongst them, and I fear that they will kill me
My brother Aaron, he is more eloquent of tongue than I; send him then with me to verify (confirm, support) me. Verily, I fear that they will deny me
He said, "We will strengthen your arm with your brother; and We give you both authority (or power), and they shall not reach (touch) you for Our signs (they will make you triumphant). You two and those who follow you shall gain the upper hand
And when Moses came to them with Our manifest signs, they said, "This is naught but invented magic; we have not heard of this amongst our forefathers
Moses said, "My Lord is best aware of who comes with guidance from Him, and whose end shall be the best. Verily, the unjust shall not be successful
And Pharaoh said, "O you chiefs! I know of no God for you except me; then set me a Fire, O Haman! To bake some clay and make for me a tower, so that I may mount up to the God of Moses; for, verily, I think he is of those who lie
And he became inflated with pride, he and his armies in the land, without justification; and thought that they would not be returned to Us
And We overtook him and his army, and We flung them into the sea; behold, then, what was the end of the unjust
But We made them models (examples or leaders) calling (or leading) to the fire; and on the Day of Resurrection they shall not be helped
And We followed them up in this world with a curse; and on the Day of Resurrection they shall be among the abhorred
And We gave Moses the Book, after that We had destroyed the former generations, to give insight to mankind, and a guidance and a mercy; per chance (or possibly), they may reflect
You (Muhammad) were not upon the Western side when We expounded unto Moses his mission, nor were you of the witnesses (of those events)
But We raised up other generations, and long were the ages that passed over them; but you were not a dweller among the people of Midian, reciting to them Our signs; but We kept sending our Messengers
Nor were you by the side of the mountain when We called; yet are you sent as a mercy from your Lord, that you may warn a people to whom no Warner has come before you that per chance (or possibly) they may be give heed
Otherwise, if a disaster should befall them for what their hands have sent before, they should say, "Our Lord! Why did Thou not send to us a messenger that we might have followed Thy revelations and been of the believers
But when the truth comes to them from Us they say, "Why are not signs given to him the like of what Moses was given." Did they not disbelieve in what Moses was given before? They say, "Two works of sorcery back up each other (The Torah and)
Say, "Bring, then, a book from Allah which shall be a better guide than both that I may follow it, if you are truthful
And if they cannot answer you, then know that they follow their own lusts (prejudices, fantasies, superstitions); and who is more in error than he who follows his own lust without guidance from Allah? Verily, Allah guides not a wrong doing people
And We caused the Word to reach them, per chance (or possibly) they may be mindful
Those to whom We gave the Book before it (the Quran), they believe therein
And when it is recited to them they say, "We believe in it. It is the Truth from Our Lord. Verily, we were, even before it came, of those who Surrender (or were Muslim)
These shall be given their reward twice over, because they were steadfast, and repelled evil with good, and spend of what We have bestowed upon them
And when they hear vain talk, they turn away from it and say, "We have our works, and you have your works. Peace be upon you! We do not seek the ignorant
Verily, you can not guide whom you do like, but Allah guides whom He wills; for He knows best who are to be guided
And they say, "If we follow the Guidance we shall be snatched away from the land." Have We not established for them a safe sanctuary, to which are imported the fruits of all things as a provision from Us? But most of them know not
How many a community have We destroyed that exulted in its means of subsistence? Yonder are their dwellings which have not been inhabited after them, except for a while. And We, even We, are the inheritors
But your Lord would never destroy a community until He has sent to its centre a messenger to recite to them Our signs; nor would We destroy populations unless their people practiced iniquity
Whatever thing you may be given, it is a provision for the life of this world and the adornment thereof; but that which Allah has is better and more enduring. Have you then no sense
Is He to whom We have promised a goodly promise, which he shall meet with, like him to whom We have given the enjoyment in the life of this world, and who on the Day of Resurrection shall be of the arraigned (brought up to deserve punishment)
And on the Day when He will call them and say, "Where are My partners which you imagined
And those concerning whom the Word will have come true shall say, "Our Lord! These are those whom we have seduced away; we seduced them as we were seduced ourselves: but we declare our innocence before Thee - they did not worship us
And it will be said, "Call upon your pretend partners; and they will call upon them, but they will not answer them, and they shall see the Doom. Ah, would that they had been guided right
And on the Day when He shall call unto them and say, "What was it you answered the messengers
And history shall be obscure to them on that day, nor shall they ask each other
But, as for him who repents and believes and does right, it may be that he will be among the successful
For your Lord brings to pass what He pleases and chooses; they have never the choice! Glorified be Allah and exalted above all they associate with Him
Your Lord knows what they conceal in their breasts and what they manifest
He is Allah; there is no God but He; to Him belongs all praise, in the first place (or state) and the last; and His is the command; and unto Him shall you return
Have you considered, if Allah were to make for you the night endless until the Day of Resurrection, who is the god, but Allah, to bring you light? Will you not then hear
Say, "Have you considered, if Allah were to make for you the day endless until the Day of Judgment, who is the god, except Allah, to bring you the night to rest therein? Can you not then see
But of His mercy He has made for you the night and the day, that you may rest therein, and crave of His grace, per chance (or possibly) you may give thanks
And the day when He shall call them and say, "Where are my partners whom you did pretend were such
And We will pluck from every nation a witness; and We will say, "Bring your proof and know that the truth belongs to Allah". And that which they had devised shall stray away from them
Qarun (Korah) was of the people of Moses, but he behaved insolently (oppressed them); and We gave him so much treasure that the keys thereof would have been a burden on men endowed with strength. When his people said to him, "Exult not; verily, Allah
But seek the abode of the Hereafter through what Allah has given you, and forget not your portion in this world, and do good as Allah has done good to you; and seek not corruption in the earth; verily, Allah loves not corrupters
Said he, "I have only been given it because of the knowledge which I possess." Knew he not that Allah had destroyed before him many generations of those who were mightier than he in strength and greater in following? But the guilty are not asked
And he went out amongst the people in his pomp. Those who desired the life of this world said, "O would that we had the like of what Qarun has been given! Verily, he is lord of mighty fortune
But those who had been given knowledge said, "Woe to you! The reward of Allah is better for him who believes and does right; but none shall obtain it except the steadfast
So We caused the earth to open up and swallow him with his house; and he had no troop to help him against Allah, nor was he of those who could save themselves
And on the morrow those who had yearned for his place the day before said, "Ah! Allah enlarges provision to whom He pleases of His servants, or He restricts it for whom He will. Had not Allah been gracious unto us, the earth would have cleft open and
That Home of the Hereafter, We assign it unto those who seek not arrogant oppression in the earth, nor yet corruption, and the end is for the righteous
He who brings a good deed shall have better than it; and he who brings an evil deed - those who do evil deeds shall only be rewarded for that which they have done
Verily, He who hath ordained the Quran for you will surely bring you back to the Place of Return (Mecca or Home in Heaven). Say, "My Lord knows best who brings guidance, and who is in error manifest
You had no hope that the Book (Scripture) would be inspired in you, but it is a mercy from your Lord! Be not, therefore, a helper of those who disbelieve
And let them not divert you from the revelations of Allah after they have been sent down to you; but call mankind unto your Lord and be not of the idolaters
And call not upon any other God along with Allah; there is no God but He. Everything is perishable (or will perish), except His countenance. His is the command, and unto Him shall you return
ALIF LAM MIM
Do men imagine that they will be left alone because they say, "We believe," and not be tested
We did try those who were before you, and Allah will surely know those who are sincere, and He will surely know those who feign
Do those who do evil reckon that they can outstrip Us? Evil is it that which they judge
He who looks forward to the meeting with Allah, - verily, the appointed time is surely nigh, and He is the Hearer and Knower
And he who strives, strives only for his own soul; for verily, Allah is altogether Independent of (His) creatures (or the worlds)
Those who believe and do right, We will surely blot out all evil from (or in) them; and reward them according to the best of their deeds (or with better than their deeds)
We have enjoined on man kindness to parents; but if they strive to make you join with Me that of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not. Unto Me is your return, and I will inform you of that which you did
But those who believe and do right, We will surely make them enter amongst the righteous
And there are those among men who say, "We believe in Allah!" but when they suffer for the sake of Allah, they mistake the persecution of men for the punishment of Allah; but if help come from your Lord they will say, "Verily, we were with
Allah surely knows those who believe, and surely knows the hypocrites
And those who disbelieved said to those who believed, "Follow our way (religion), we will bear your sins. But they cannot bear aught of their sins; verily, they are liars
But they shall surely bear their own burdens, and other burdens besides their own; and they shall surely be questioned on the Day of Resurrection concerning what they devised
And We sent Noah to his people, and he dwelt among them for a thousand save fifty years; and the deluge engulfed them while they persisted in evil-doing
But We saved him and the company of the ark, and made it a sign unto the worlds (all peoples or creatures)
And Abraham, when he said to his people, "Serve Allah and fear Him, that is better for you if you did but know
You serve instead of Allah only idols and you only invent a lie; verily, those whom you serve beside Allah own (control) no provision for you. So seek your provision from Allah, and serve Him, and give thanks to Him; unto Him shall you return
But if you deny this, then know that nations before you have denied it. The messenger has only to convey the message plainly
See they not how Allah produces creation, and then reproduces it? Verily, for Allah it is easy
Say, "Travel you in the earth, and behold how Allah originated creation; so will He produce a later creation. Verily, Allah has power over all things
He punishes whom He will, and bestows mercy on whom He will; and towards Him are you turned
You cannot make Him powerless (escape Him) in the earth, nor in the heavens; nor have you beside Allah a friend or a helper
And those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah and in their meeting with Him, these shall despair of My mercy; and for these is grievous woe
But the answer of his people was only to say, "Kill him" or "Burn him!" But Allah saved him from the fire; verily, in that are signs unto a people who have faith
He said, "Verily, you take beside Allah idols, through mutual friendship in the life of this world; but on the Day of Judgment you shall deny each other, and shall curse each other, and your resort shall be the fire, and you shall have none to help
And Lot believed him and said, "Verily, I flee unto (or for the sake of) my Lord! Verily, He, only He, is the Mighty, the Wise
And We granted Abraham Isaac and Jacob; and We placed in his seed the Prophethood and the Scriptures; and We gave him his reward in this world; and, verily, in the Hereafter he shall be among the righteous
And Lot! (Remember) When he said to his people, "Verily, you commit an abomination such as no creature did before you
Do you approach men? And cut off the highway? And practice wickedness in your assemblies?" But his people gave no answer but this, "Bring us the Wrath of Allah, if you speak the truth
Said he, "My Lord! Help me against a people who do evil
And when Our messengers came to Abraham with the glad tidings, they said, "We are about to destroy the people of these cities. Verily, the people thereof are evil-doers
Said he, "Verily, in it is Lot." They said, "We are best aware of who is therein; we shall of a surety save him and his people, except his wife, who is of those who lag behind
And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was troubled on account of them, and felt powerless to protect them. But they said, "Fear not, neither grieve; we are about to save you and your people, except your wife, who is of those who lag behind
Verily, we are about to send down upon the people of this city a horror from heaven, for that they are evil-livers
And, verily, of that We have left a manifest sign unto a people who have sense
And unto Midian We sent their brother Shu´eyb, and he said, "My people, serve Allah, and fear the Last Day; and do not evil, making mischief in the land, (despoiling it)
But they denied him; and the convulsion seized them, and on the morrow they lay prostrate in their dwellings
And A´ad and Thamud! But their fate is plain to you from their ruined habitations. Satan made their deeds fair seeming unto them, and turned them from the Way, gifted with intelligence and skill though they were
And Korah, Pharaoh and Haman! Moses did come to them with clear signs, but they were inflated with pride in the earth. Yet they could not outstrip Us
And each of them We seized in his sin; and of them were some against whom We sent a sandstorm; and some were caught by a mighty Blast; and some We caused the earth to swallow; and some We drowned. It was not Allah who injured (or oppressed, wronged) them
The similitude of those who choose other patrons than Allah, is as the likeness of a spider, that takes to himself a house; and, lo! The frailest of all houses is the spider´s house, if they but knew
Verily, Allah knows whatever thing they call upon beside Him; for He is the Mighty, the Wise
As for these similitudes (parables), We have coined for mankind, but none will understand them, save the wise
Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth. Verily, in this is a sign for those have faith
Recite what has been inspired in you of the Book; and establish worship. Verily, worship preserves from shameful deeds and iniquity, but surely the remembrance (or mention) of Allah is more important; and Allah knows what you do
And argue not with the people of the Book, unless with better means; except with those who have done wrong amongst them and say, "We believe in what is sent down to us, and what has been sent down to you; our God and your God is One, and unto Him we
Thus did We send down to you the Book; and those unto whom We gave the Book (Scriptures) before will believe therein, and of these (Pagan Arabs) also there are some who believe therein. None reject Our revelations save disbelievers
You (Muhammad) could not recite before this any Book (or Scripture), nor write it with your right hand, for then, indeed, might those who deal (or talk) in vanities (trivialities, falsehoods, irrelevancies) have doubted
Nay, but it is a clear revelation in the heart of those who are endowed with knowledge, and none deny Our revelations save the wrongdoers (or unjust)
And still they say, "Why have not signs been sent down upon him from his Lord." Say, "Verily, signs are with Allah only, and I am but a plain Warner
Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the Book which you do recite to them? Verily, in that is a mercy and a reminder to a people who believe
Say, "Allah is sufficient witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and those who believe in vanities (falsehoods, frivolities) and disbelieve in Allah, they it is who are the losers
They will wish you to hasten on the doom (punishment); but were it not that a term had been appointed, the doom would have come upon them ere now. And verily it will come upon them suddenly when they perceive not
They ask you to hurry on the doom, but, verily, hell encompasses the disbelievers
On the Day when the Doom (or Wrath) shall overwhelm them from above them and from beneath their feet, and He will say, "Taste that which you have done
O my servants who believe! Verily, My earth is spacious enough; therefore serve Me only
Every soul must taste of death, then unto Us shall you return
Those who believe and act right, We will surely house them in lofty (or upper) chambers of the Garden beneath which rivers flow; to dwell therein secure (or for ever) - an excellent reward for the toilers (workers of good)
Those who persevere and put their trust in (or rely on) their Lord
How many a beast cannot carry its own provision! Allah provides for it and for you; He is the Hearer, the Knower
And if you should ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth, and subjected the sun and the moon?" they will surely say, "Allah!" how then can they turn away
Allah extends provision to whomsoever He will of His servants, or restricts it; verily, Allah is aware of all things
And if you should ask them, "Who causes water to come down from the sky and revives therewith the earth after its death?" they will surely say, "Allah!" Say, "And praise be to Allah!" But most of them have no sense
This life of the world is nothing but a pastime and game (or a sport and a play); but, verily, the abode of the Hereafter, that is life, if they did but knew
And when they ride in the ship they call upon Allah, making their religion seem sincere to Him; but when He delivers them safely to the shore, behold, they associate others with Him
Disdaining ungratefully Our gifts; and that they may have some worldly enjoyment: but soon they shall come to know
Have they not seen that We have made a Safe Sanctuary whilst people are being snatched away around them? Is it then that they believe in falsehood, and disbelieve the bounty of Allah
But who is more unjust than he who devises against Allah a lie, or rejects the truth when it comes to him? Is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers
But those who strive in Our cause, We will surely guide them into Our Way, for, verily, Allah is with those who do right
Alif Lam Mim
The Romans are vanquished
In a near land, and they, after being vanquished, shall be victorious
Within a few years. - Allah´s is the command before and after; and on that day the believers shall rejoice
With the help of Allah; He helps whom He pleases; and He is the Mighty, the Merciful
It is Allah´s promise! Allah will not fail His promise, but most of mankind know not
They know only the outward (appearance) in the life of this world, but of the Hereafter they are heedless
Do they not reflect within themselves: Allah did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them but with Truth, and for an appointed term (or destined end)? But truly most of the people are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord
Have they not travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of those before them? They were stronger than these were in power and prowess, and they dug up the earth, and built on it in greater abundance than these have built. There came to them their me
Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected the revelations of Allah and used to mock them
Allah originates creation, then reproduces it, then to Him will you be returned
In the Day when the Hour shall come the guilty shall be in despair
And they shall not have any intercessors from among their gods they have joined with Allah, and they shall be deniers of their associate-gods
In the Day when the Hour shall come, at that Day they shall be separated
Then as to those who believed and did good works, they shall be made happy in a Garden
And as to those who disbelieved and rejected Our revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter, these shall be brought to the chastisement
Therefore glory be to Allah when you enter the night and when you enter morning
Unto Him belongs praise in the heavens and the earth, and at the sun´s decline and in the midday
He brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living, and He revives the earth after its death, and even so shall you be brought forth
And one of His signs is this, that He created you from dust, then lo! You are mortals, scattered widely
And one of His signs is this that He created mates for you from yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love and compassion; herein, indeed, are signs for a people who reflect
And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your tongues and colours; herein, indeed are signs for the learned (men who have knowledge)
And one of His signs is your sleeping by night and your seeking of His Bounty (livelihood, benefits and treasures) by day; herein, indeed, are signs for a people who heed (pay attention, are aware or conscious)
And one of His signs is this, that He shows you the lightning for fear and for hope, and sends down water from the clouds thereby quickens the earth after its death; herein, indeed, are signs for a people who understand
And one of His signs is this that the heaven and the earth subsist by His command, then when He calls you with a single call, lo! From out of the earth, you emerge
And His is whoever is in the heavens and the earth; all are obedient to Him
And He it is Who originates the creation, then reproduces it, and it is easy for Him; and His is the Sublime Similitude (or the most exalted attributes) in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
He sets forth to you a similitude (parable) relating to yourselves (and your own experience): Have you among those whom your right hands possess (slaves) partners in what We have given you for sustenance, to share as equals; do you fear them as you fear e
Nay! Those who are unjust follow their low desires without any knowledge; so who can guide him whom Allah causes to err? And they shall have no helpers
Then set your purpose for religion as a man upright by nature - the nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there is no altering (the laws of) Allah´s creation; that is the right religion, but most people do not know
Turning to Him only, and be careful of your duty to Him and keep up prayer and be not of those who ascribe partners to Him (polytheists)
Of those who split their religion and became schismatic, every sect rejoicing in its own tenets
And when harm afflicts men, they call upon their Lord, turning to Him, then when He makes them taste of mercy from Him, lo! Some of them begin to associate (others) with their Lord
So as to be ungrateful for what We have given them; (unto such it is said) "Enjoy yourselves for a while, for you shall soon come to know (the truth)
Or, have We sent down upon them an authority so that it speaks of that which they associate with Him
And when We make people taste of mercy they rejoice in it, and if an evil befall them for what their hands have already wrought, lo! They are in despair
Do they not see that Allah makes ample provision for whom He pleases, or restricts it? Herein, indeed, are signs for a people who believe
Then give to the near of kin his due, and to the needy and the wayfarer; this is best for those who desire Allah´s countenance (presence, pleasure), and these it is who are successful
And whatever you lay out as usury, so that it may increase in the property of men, it has no increase with Allah; but that which you give in charity, desiring Allah´s countenance (presence, pleasure) has increase manifold
Allah is He Who created you, then gave you sustenance, then He causes you to die, then brings you to life. Is there any of your associate-gods who does aught of it? Glory be to Him, and exalted be He above what they associate (with Him)
Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what the hands of men have wrought, that He may make them taste a part of that which they have done, so that they may return
Say: Travel in the land, then see how was the end of those before you; most of them were idolaters
So set your purpose resolutely to the right religion, before there come from Allah the day which cannot be averted (or is inevitable). On that day they will be sundered
Whoever disbelieves, must bear the consequences for his disbelief, and whoever does good makes provision for his own soul
That He may reward those who believe and do good out of His Bounty; surely He loves not the disbelievers
And one of His signs is this, that He sends forth the winds bearing good news, and that He may make you taste of His mercy, and that the ships may run by His command, and that you may seek of His favour, and that you may be grateful
Verily We sent before you messengers to their own people. They came to them with clear arguments. Then We gave the punishment to those who were guilty; and helping believers is ever incumbent on Us
Allah is he Who sends forth the winds so they raise a cloud, then He spreads it forth in the sky as He pleases, and He breaks it up so that you see the rain coming forth from within it; then when He causes it to fall upon whom He pleases of His servants
Though they were before this, even before it was sent down upon them, in sure despair
Look then at the signs of Allah´s mercy, how He gives life to the earth after its death; most surely He will raise the dead to life; and He has power over all things
And if We send a wind and they see it to yellow (scorch the crop), they would after that certainly continue in their disbelief
For surely you can not make the dead to hear and you can not make the deaf to hear the call when they have turned away (or their backs to flee)
Nor can you lead away the blind out of their error. you can not make to hear any but those who believe in Our revelations so that they Surrender (in Islam)
Allah is He Who created you from a state of weakness then He gave strength after weakness, then ordained weakness and grey hair after strength. He creates what He will, and He is the Knower, the Mighty
And on the day when the Hour shall come, the guilty shall swear that they did not tarry but an hour - thus are they ever deceived
And those who are given knowledge and faith will say, "Certainly (indeed, in truth) you tarried according to the ordinance of Allah till the Day of Resurrection, so this is the Day of Resurrection, but you were not aware
But on that day their excuse shall not profit those who were unjust, nor shall they be allowed to make amends
Verily, We have set forth for men every kind of similitude (parable, example) in this Quran; and, indeed, if you should bring them a miracle, those who disbelieve would certainly say: You are naught but false claimants
Thus does Allah set a seal on the heart of those who know not
Therefore be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true and let not those who have no certainty of faith shake your firmness
ALIF LAM MIM
These are the verses (revelations) of the Wise Book
A guidance and a mercy to those who do good
Those who establish regular prayer and give charity, and who are sure of the Hereafter
These are in true guidance from their Lord, and these are the Successful
But amongst men are those who purchase (pay for) idle tales without knowledge (or meaning), to lead astray men from the path of Allah, and to make a jest of it; for them is shameful woe
And when Our signs are recited to such a one, he turns away in arrogance as though he heard them not, as if there was deafness in both his ears. Announce to him a grievous penalty
Verily, those who believe and do right, for them are Gardens of Bliss
Wherein they will abide; it is a promise of Allah in truth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
He created the heavens without supports that you can see, and He placed upon the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with you; and He dispersed therein all kinds of beasts; and We send down from the heavens water, and We caused plants of every noble
This is the Creation of Allah; show me that which others beside Him have created. Nay, the unjust are in obvious error
Verily, We did give unto Luqman wisdom, saying, "Thank Allah; for he who thanks Allah is only thankful for his own soul; and he who is ungrateful - verily, Allah is Absolute (Independent, Self-sufficient), Owner of all praise
And (remember) when Luqman said to his son while admonishing him, "O my boy! Associate none with Allah, for, verily, such association is a mighty wrong
For We have commended his parents to men - his mother bore him with travail upon travail; and it took two years to wean him - "Be thankful to Me and to your parents; for unto Me is the journeying
But if they strive with you to make you ascribe unto Me partners of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not. Consort with them in the world with kindness, and follow the way of him who turns repentant unto Me. Then unto Me is your return, an
(Said Luqman) "O my dear son! Verily, if there were the weight of a grain of mustard seed and it were hidden in the rock, or in the heaven, or in the earth, Allah would bring it forth. Verily, Allah is Subtle, Aware
O my dear son! Establish worship, and enjoin what is just and forbid iniquity; be patient (constant) whatever befalls you, verily, that is of the steadfast heart of affairs
And twist not your cheek in scorn towards folk, nor walk haughtily (or insolently) in the land; verily, Allah loves not any arrogant boaster
But be modest in your bearing and subdue your voice; lo! The harshest of all voices is the voice of the ass
Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and has poured down upon you His favours, outwardly and inwardly? But amongst men are those who wrangle about Allah, without knowledge, and without guidance
And when it is said to them, "Follow what Allah has sent down;" they say, "Nay! We will follow wherein we found our fathers." - What! Even if Satan calls them to the torment of the blaze
But he who Surrenders his purpose unto Allah (i.e. becomes a Muslim), and does good, he has grasped the firm handle; with Allah rests the issue of all affairs
But he who disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you; to Us is their return, and We will inform them of what they did; for, verily, Allah is aware of what is in the heart of men
We will let them enjoy themselves a little; then We will force them to the unrelenting doom
And if you should ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will surely say, "Allah." Say, "Praise be to Allah!" but most of them know not
Unto Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and that is in the earth; verily, Allah, He is the Absolute, the Owner of praise
And were the trees that are in the earth pens, and the sea ink with seven more seas to swell it, the Words of Allah would not be exhausted; verily, Allah is Mighty, Wise
Your creation and your rising again are but as that of a single soul; verily, Allah is Hearer, Seer
Have you not seen that Allah joins the night to the day, and joins the day to the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon, each running unto an appointed time? And that Allah is well informed of what you do
That is because Allah, He is Truth (or the only Reality), and because what you call on beside Him is the False, and because Allah, He is the Sublime, the Great
Do you not see that the ship rides on in the sea by the favour of Allah, that He may show you of His wonders? Verily, in that are signs to every grateful heart
And when a wave like a shadow covers them, they call on Allah, being sincere in their religion; and when He saves them to the shore, then amongst them are some who halt between two opinions. But none denies Our signs save every perfidious disbeliever
O mankind! Fear (keep your duty to) your Lord and dread the Day when the parent shall not be able to avail the child in aught, nor shall the child avail aught for its parent. Lo! the promise of Allah is true! Say, "Let not the life of this world begu
Verily, Allah, with Him is the knowledge of the Hour; He sends down the rain; and He knows that which is in the wombs. No soul knows what it is that it shall earn to-morrow; and no soul knows in what land it will die. Verily, Allah is Knower, Aware
Alif Lam Mim
The revelation of the Book, wherein there is no doubt, is from the Lord of the Worlds
Or do they say, "He (Muhammad) has invented it? Nay! It is the truth from your Lord that you may warn a people to whom no Warner has come before you, that they may follow the right direction
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six Days (periods), and He mounted the Throne (of authority); you have not besides Him any guardian or any intercessor, will you not then remember
He directs the ordinance (regulates all affairs) from the heaven to the earth; then shall it ascend to Him in a Day the measure of which is a thousand years of what you count
This is the Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Mighty the Merciful
Who made good everything that He has created, and He began the creation of man from dust
Then He made his progeny of an extract, of a fluid held in low esteem
Then He fashioned him and breathed into him of His spirit, and made for you the faculties of hearing, and sight and heart; little is it that you give thanks
And they say: What! When we have become lost in the earth, shall we then certainly be a new creation? Nay! They are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord
Say: The angel of death who is given charge of you shall cause you to die, then to your Lord you shall be returned
And could you but see when the guilty shall hang down their heads before their Lord: (saying) "Our Lord! We have seen and we have heard, therefore send us back, we will work righteousness; surely (now) we are certain
And if We had pleased We would certainly have given to every soul its guidance, but the word (which had gone forth about evil-doers) from Me was just this: "I will certainly fill hell with the jinn and men together
So taste (the evil of your deeds), because you neglected the meeting of this day of yours; surely We forsake you; and taste the abiding chastisement for what you used to do
Only they believe in Our revelations who, when they are reminded of them, fall down prostrate (in obeisance) and celebrate the praise of their Lord, and they are not proud
Their sides draw away from their beds, they call upon their Lord in fear and in hope, and they spend (benevolently) out of what We have given them
No soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh the eyes (give them joy); a reward for what they did
Is he then who is a believer like him who is an evil-liver (transgressor)? They are not alike (equal)
As for those who believe and do good, the Gardens are their homes - a hospitable welcome for what they did
And as for those who transgress, their abode is the Fire; whenever they desire to go forth from it they shall be brought back into it, and it will be said to them, "Taste the chastisement of the fire which you called a lie
And most certainly We will make them taste of the Lesser (or Nearer) Chastisement (i.e. in this life) before the Greater Chastisement (in the Hereafter) that per chance (or possibly) they may turn
And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the revelations of his Lord, then he turns away from them? Surely We will requite the guilty
And certainly We gave the Book to Moses, so be not in doubt concerning the receiving of it, and We made it a guide for the children of Israel
And We made of them Imams (religious or spiritual leaders) to guide by Our command when they were patient, and they were certain of Our revelations
Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they differ
Does it not point out to them the right way, how many of the generations, in whose abodes they go about, did We destroy before them? Most surely there are signs in this; will they not then hear
Do they not see that We drive the water to a land having no herbage, then We bring forth thereby crops of which their cattle and they themselves eat; will they not then see
And they ask: "When will this judgment take place, if you are truthful
Say: "On the Day of Judgment the faith of those who (now) disbelieve will not profit them, nor will they be reprieved
Therefore turn away from them and wait: surely they too are waiting
O Prophet! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and do not comply with the wishes of the disbelievers and the hypocrites; surely Allah is Knower, Wise
And follow that which is inspired (revealed) to you from your Lord; surely Allah is Aware of what you do
And rely on (or trust in) Allah; and Allah is sufficient for a Protector
Allah has not made for any man two heart within him; nor has He made your wives, whose backs you liken to the backs of your mothers (whom you have divorced) as your mothers, nor has He made those whom you assert to be your sons your real sons; these are t
Proclaim their real relationship to their fathers; this is more equitable with Allah; but if you do not know their fathers, then they are your brethren in faith and your friends; and there is no blame on you concerning that in which you make mistakes, but
The Prophet is closer to (has a greater claim on) the faithful than they have on themselves, and his wives are (as) their mothers; and the possessors of (genetic) relationship have the better claim in the ordinance of Allah to inheritance, one with respec
And when We made a covenant with the prophets and with you (Muhammad), and with Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus, son of Mary, We made with them a strong (solemn) covenant
That He may question the Custodians of Truth about the truth (or the Loyal about loyalty), and He has prepared for the unfaithful a painful doom
O you who believe! Call to mind the favour of Allah to you when there came down upon you hosts, so We sent against them a strong wind and hosts that you saw not, and Allah is Seer what you do
When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when the eyes turned dull, and the heart rose up to the throats, and you began to think vain thoughts of Allah
There the believers were sorely tried and they were shaken with severe shaking
And when the hypocrites and those in whose heart was a disease began to say, "Allah and His Apostle did not promise us nothing but delusion
And when a party of them said, "O people of Yathrib! there is no place to stand for you (here), therefore go back"; and a party of them asked permission of the Prophet, saying. "Surely our houses are exposed"; and they were not exposed
And if the enemy had entered upon them from the outlying parts of it, and they had been exhorted to treachery, they would certainly have done it, and they would have hesitated but little
And certainly they had made a covenant with Allah before, that they would not turn their backs; and Allah´s covenant shall be answered for
Say, "Flight shall not avail you if you flee from death or slaughter, and then you dwell in comfort but a little
Say, " Who is it that can withhold you from Allah if He intends to do you harm, or He intends to show you mercy? And they will not find for themselves besides Allah any friend or helper
Allah knows indeed those among you who hinder others and those who say to their brethren, "Come to us"; and they come not to the fight but a little
Being niggardly in their help to you; but when fear comes, you will see them looking to you, their eyes rolling like one swooning unto death; but when the fear is gone they smite you with sharp tongues, being covetous of the goods (spoils of war). These h
They think the confederates (enemy clans) have not gone, and if the confederates should come (again) they would fain be in the deserts with the wandering Arabs (Bedouins) asking for news about you, and if they were among you they would not fight save a li
Verily, you have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent example for him who hopes in Allah and the Last Day and remembers Allah much
And when the believers saw the Confederates, they said, "This is what Allah and His Apostle promised us, and Allah and His Apostle spoke the truth"; and it only increased them in faith and surrender (or obedience)
Of the believers are men who are true to the covenant which they made with Allah: so of them is he who accomplished his vow, and of them is he who yet waits, and they have not changed in the least
That Allah may reward the truthful for their truth, and punish the hypocrites if He please or relent towards them (mercifully); surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
And Allah turned back the disbelievers in their rage; they did not obtain any advantage, and Allah sufficed the believers in their fight. Allah is Strong, Mighty
And He brought down those of the People of the Book (Jews) who supported them, from their fortresses and He cast panic into their heart; some you killed and some you took captive
And He made you heirs to their land and their dwellings and their property, and to a land which you have not yet trodden, and Allah has power over all things
O Prophet! Say to your wives, "If you desire this world´s life and its adornment, then come, I will give you a provision and allow you to depart in a goodly manner
And if you desire Allah and His Messenger and the abode of the Hereafter, then surely Allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward
O wives of the prophet! Whoever of you commits an open indecency, the punishment shall be increased to her doubly; and this is easy to Allah
And whoever of you is obedient to Allah and His Messenger and does good, We will give to her a double reward, and We have prepared for her an honourable sustenance
O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women; If you will be on your guard, then be not soft in your speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease yearn for you; and utter goodly (just, polite) speech
And stay in your houses and do not display your finery like the displaying of the ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and pay the poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah only desires to keep away uncleanness from you, O people of the Househo
And keep in mind what is recited in your houses of the revelations of Allah and the wisdom. Verily, Allah is Subtile, Aware
Verily, men who surrender and the women who surrender, and the believing men and the believing women, and the obeying men and the obeying women, and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the patient men and the patient women and the humble men and
And it behoves not a believing man and a believing woman that they should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Messenger have decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he surely goes astray in manifest error
And when you said to him to whom Allah had shown favour and to whom you had shown a favour, "Keep your wife to yourself and be careful of (your duty to) Allah"; and you concealed in your soul what Allah would bring to light, and you feared men
There is no harm in the Prophet doing that which Allah has ordained for him; such has been the course of Allah with respect to those who have gone before; and the command of Allah is a decree that is made absolute
Those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and do not fear any one but Allah; and Allah is sufficient to take account
Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Messenger of Allah and the Last of the prophets; and Allah is Aware of all things
O you who believe! Remember Allah, remembering frequently
And glorify Him morning and evening
He it is Who sends His blessings on you, and so do His angels, that He may bring you forth out of utter darkness into the light; and He is Merciful to the believers
Their salutation on the day that they meet Him shall be, "Peace", and He has prepared for them an honourable reward
O Prophet! Surely We have sent you as a witness, and as a bearer of good news and as a Warner
And as one inviting to Allah by His permission, and as a light-giving Lamp
And give to the believers the good news that they shall have a great bounty from Allah
And incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Disregard their annoying talk, and rely on Allah; and Allah is sufficient as a Trustee
O you who believe! When you marry the believing women, and then divorce them before you touch them, then you have in their case no term (of waiting) to reckon; so make some provision for them and send them forth in a goodly manner
O Prophet! Surely We have made lawful to you your wives whom you have given their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses out of those whom Allah has given to you as prisoners of war, and the daughters of your paternal uncles and the daughters o
You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you whom you please, and whom you desire of those whom you had separated provisionally; no blame attaches to you; this is most proper, so that their eyes may be cool and they may not grieve, and
It is not lawful to you to marry more women afterwards, nor that you should change them for other wives, though their beauty be pleasing to you, except what your right hand possesses and Allah is Watchful over all things
O you who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without waiting for the proper time, unless permission is given to you. But if you are invited, enter, and when the meal is ended, then disperse. Linger not for vain conversation; surely
If you do a thing openly or do it in secret, then surely Allah is Aware of all things
There is no blame on them in respect of their fathers, nor their brothers, nor their brothers´ sons, nor their sisters´ sons nor their own women, nor of what their right hands possess; and be careful of your duty to Allah; surely Allah is a wi
Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe! Call for Divine blessings on him and salute him with a becoming salutation
Surely, those who speak evil things of Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and the Hereafter, and He has prepared for them a humiliating chastisement
And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the believing women undeservedly, they are guilty indeed of a false accusation and a manifest sin
O Prophet! Say to your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers that they let down upon them their over-garments (cloaks); this will be more proper, that they may be known, and not be molested; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
If the hypocrites and those in whose heart is a disease and the agitators in the city do not desist, We shall most certainly set you over them, then they shall not be your neighbours in it but for a little while
Cursed: wherever they are found they shall be seized and slain without mercy
(Such has been) the course of Allah with respect to those who have gone before; and you shall not find any change in the course of Allah
Men ask you about the hour; say, "The knowledge of it is only with Allah, and what will make you understand?" - The Hour may be nigh
Surely Allah has cursed the disbelievers and has prepared for them a blazing Fire
Wherein they will abide forever (or a long time); they shall find no protecting friend or helper
On the day when their faces shall be turned back into the fire, they shall say, "O would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger
And they shall say, "O our Lord! Surely we obeyed our leaders and our great men, so they led us astray from the path
O our Lord! Give them a double punishment and curse them with a great curse
O you who believe! Be not like those who spoke evil things of Moses, but Allah cleared him of what they said, and he was worthy of regard with Allah
O you who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah and speak straight to the point
He will put your deeds into a right state (correctly adjust, harmonise, make whole) for you, and forgive you your faults; and whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, he indeed achieves a mighty success
Verily, We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to undertake it, being afraid of it; but man undertook it. Lo! He has proved a tyrant and a fool
So Allah will chastise the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women and the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, and Allah will turn to (forgive and help) the believing men and women, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
All praise is due to Allah, unto Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and His is the praise in the Hereafter; and He is the Wise, the Aware
He knows that which goes down into the earth and that which comes out of it, and that which comes down from the heaven and that which goes up to it; and He is the Merciful, the Forgiving
And those who disbelieve say, "The hour shall not come upon us." Say, "Yea! By my Lord, the Knower of the Unseen, it shall certainly come upon you; not the weight of an atom becomes absent from Him, in the heavens or in the earth, and neith
That He may reward those who believe and do good; these it is for whom is forgiveness and a most generous sustenance
And those who strive hard in opposing Our revelations, these it is for whom is a painful and humiliating chastisement
And those to whom knowledge has been given see that which has been revealed unto you from your Lord, that it is the truth, and it guides into the path of the Mighty, the Owner of Praise
And those who disbelieve say, "Shall we point out to you a man who informs you that when you have disintegrated into dust and become scattered, even then you shall be created anew
He has forged a lie against Allah or there is madness in him. "Nay! Those who do not believe in the Hereafter are in torment and in great error
Do they not then consider what is before them and what is behind them of the heaven and the earth? If We will We can make them disappear in the land or bring down upon them a portion from the heaven; most surely in this is a sign for every servant who tur
And certainly We gave David grace from Us, saying, "O mountains! Echo his psalms of praise with him, and you birds also; and We made the iron pliant unto him
Saying, "Make ample (coats of mail), and measure (balance well) the links, and do right; surely I am Seer of what you do
And We made the wind (subservient) unto Solomon, which made a month´s journey in the morning and a month´s journey in the evening, and We made a fountain of molten copper to flow out for him, and of the Jinn (foreigners or ingenious skilled wo)
They made for him what he pleased of temples and images, and bowls (large) as watering-troughs and cooking-pots that will not move from their place; give thanks, O family of David! Few of My servants are grateful
But when We decreed death for him, naught showed them his death but a creature of the earth that ate away his staff; and when he fell down, the Jinn came to know plainly that if they had known the unseen, they would not have continued in abasing toil
Certainly there was a sign for Sheba in their abode; two gardens on the right and the left; (as if to say) "Eat of the provisions of your Lord and give thanks to Him - a good land and an Indulgent Lord
But they turned away, so We sent upon them a flood from Dams, and We converted their two gardens into two gardens yielding bitter fruit and tamarisk and a few lote-trees
We requited them with this because they were ungrateful; do We ever punish any but the ungrateful
And We set between them and the towns which We had blessed, other towns to be easily seen (in prominent positions), and for the journey between then We appointed proportional stages, (saying) "Travel through them secure by nights and days
And they said, "O our Lord! Make the spaces longer between our journeys.". They were unjust to themselves (wronged themselves) so We made them as stories (by words, legends) and dispersed them with an utter scattering; most surely there are sign
And certainly Satan found true his calculations concerning them, so they follow him, except a party of the believers
And he has no authority over them, but that We may distinguish him who believes in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it; and your Lord is the Watcher (Preserver) of all things
Say, "Call upon those whom you assert (or set up) besides Allah; they do not control the weight of an atom in the heavens or in the earth nor have they any partnership in either, nor has He among them any one to help Him
And intercession will not avail at all with Him save of him whom He permits. Until when fear shall be removed from their heart, they shall say, ´What is it that your Lord said?´ They shall say, ´The truth.´ And He is the Most
Say, "Who gives you the sustenance from the heavens and the earth?" Say, "It is Allah. And most surely we or you are on a right way or in manifest error
Say, "You will not be questioned as to what we are guilty of, nor shall we be questioned as to what you do
Say, "Our Lord will gather us together, then will He judge between us with the truth; and He is the greatest Judge, the All-knowing
Say, "Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners; by no means (can you do it). Nay! He is Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
And We have not sent you (Muhammad) but to all mankind (or as a Universal Messenger) as a bearer of good news and as a Warner, but most men know not
And they say, "When will this promise be (fulfiled) if you are truthful
Say, "You have the appointment of a Day which you cannot hold back for an hour, nor can you bring it forward
And those who disbelieve say, "By no means will we believe in this Quran, nor in that which is before it "Could you but see when the unjust shall be made to stand before their Lord, casting blame one another! Those who were reckoned weak (or des)
Those who were proud shall say to those who were deemed weak (or despised), "Did we turn you away from the guidance after it had come to you? Nay, you (yourselves) were guilty
And those who were deemed weak (despised) shall say to those who were proud, "Nay, it was your scheming night and day when you told us to disbelieve in Allah and to set up rivals with Him." And they shall declare repentance when they see the pen
And We never sent a Warner to a town but those who led lives in ease in it said, "We are surely disbelievers in what you are sent with
And they say, "We have more wealth and children, and we shall not be punished
Say, "Surely my Lord amplifies the means of subsistence for whom He pleases and restricts it (for whom He pleases), but most men know not
It is not your wealth nor your children which bring you near Us in station, but whoever believes and does good, these it is for whom is a double reward for what they do, and they shall be secure in the highest places
And as for those who strive in opposing Our revelations, they shall be brought to the chastisement
Say, "Surely my Lord amplifies the means of subsistence for whom He pleases of His servants and restricts them (for whom He wills). And whatever you spend, He replaces it, and He is the best of Providers
And on the Day when He will gather them all together, then will He say to the angels, "Did these people worship you
They shall say, "Glory be to Thee! Thou art our Guardian, not they; nay! they worshipped the Jinn; most of them were believers in them
So on that day one of you shall not control profit or harm for another, and We will say to those who were unjust, "Taste the chastisement of the Fire which you denied
And when Our clear communications are recited to them, they say, "This is naught but a man who desires to turn you away from that which your fathers worshipped." And they say, "This is naught but a lie that is forged." And those who di
And We have not given them (Arabs) any Books (Scripture) which they read, nor did We send to them before you a Warner
And those before them rejected the truth, and these have not yet attained a tenth of what We gave them, yet they rejected My messenger, how terrible, then, was My rejection (abhorrence of them)
Say, "I exhort you only to one thing that you awake for Allah´s sake (or stand up before Allah) in twos or singly, then ponder: there is no madness in your companion (or comrade, fellow-citizen); he is only a Warner to you before a severe doom
Say, "I ask no reward for myself (Or whatever reward I have asked of you, is yours or is only for yourselves); my reward is only with Allah, and He is a witness of all things
Say, "Surely my Lord utters the truth (or castes the truth (over His servants)), He is the Knower of the unseen (or hidden)
Say, "The truth has come, and the falsehood shall vanish and shall not return (or falsehood neither creates nor restores)
Say, " If I err, I err only against my own soul, and if I follow a right direction, it is because of what my Lord reveals to me; surely He is Hearing, Nigh
Could you but see when they are terrified with no escape and are seized upon from near at hand
And they shall say, "We believe in it (now)." But how can they reach faith from a position so far away from it
(Seeing) they disbelieved in it before. And they aim at the unseen from afar off (with far out conjectures)
And a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire, as was done with the likes of them before: surely they are in hopeless (disquieting, distressing) doubt
All praise is due to Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, the Maker of the angels, messengers flying on wings, two, and three, and four (pairs); He increases in creation what He pleases; surely Allah has power over all things
Whatever Allah grants to men of His mercy, there is none to withhold it, and what He withholds there is none to send it forth after that, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
O men! Call to mind the favour of Allah on you; is there any creator besides Allah who gives you sustenance from the heaven and the earth? There is no God but He; whither are you then turned
And if they call you a liar, truly messengers before you were called liars, and to Allah are all affairs returned
O men! Surely the promise of Allah is true, therefore let not the life of this world deceive you, and let not the arch deceiver deceive you respecting Allah
Surely Satan is your enemy, so take him for an enemy; he only invites his party to be inmates of the flaming Fire
As for those who disbelieve, they shall have a severe punishment, and as for those who believe and do good, they shall have forgiveness and a great reward
What! Is he whose evil deed is made fair-seeming to him so that he considers it good (other than Satan´s dupe)? Now surely Allah sends astray whom He will and guides aright whom He will, so let not your soul waste away in grief (expire in sighing) f
And Allah is He Who sends the winds so they raise a cloud, then We drive it on to a dead country, and therewith We give life to the earth after its death; even so is the Resurrection
Whoever desires power (or honour), then to Allah belongs the power (or honour) wholly. Unto Him do ascend good words, and good deeds does He exalt; and as for those who plan evil deeds, they shall have a severe chastisement; and their plans shall fail
And Allah created you of dust, then of the life-germ, then He made you pairs; and no female bears, nor does she bring forth, except with His knowledge; and no one whose life is lengthened has his life lengthened, nor is aught diminished of one´s lif
And the two seas are not alike: the one fresh, sweet, pleasant to drink; and the other salt, that burns by its saltiness; yet from each of them you eat fresh flesh and bring forth ornaments which you wear; and you see the ships cleave through it that you
He causes the night to enter in upon the day, and He causes the day to enter in upon the night, and He has made subservient the sun and the moon; each one follows its course to an appointed time; this is Allah, your Lord, His is the kingdom; and those who
If you call on them they shall not hear your call, and even if they could hear they shall not answer you; and on the Day of Resurrection they will deny your associating them (with Allah); and none can inform you like the One Who is Aware
O men! You are they who are poor (stand in need of Allah), and Allah is He Who is the Self-sufficient (Absolute), the Owner of Praise
If He will, He can remove you, and bring, instead a new creation
And this is not hard for Allah
And no burdened soul can bear the burden of another and if one weighed down by burden should cry (for help) to another, not aught of it shall be lifted, even though he be near of kin. You warn only those who fear their Lord in secret and keep up prayer; a
And the blind and the seeing are not alike
Nor the darkness and the light
Nor the shade and the heat
Neither are the living and the dead alike. Surely Allah makes whom He pleases hear, and you cannot make those hear who are in the graves
You (Muhammad) are naught but a Warner
Surely We have sent you (Muhammad) with the truth as a bearer of good news and a Warner; and there is not a people but a Warner has gone among them
And if they call you a liar, so did, indeed, those before them (call their messengers a liar); their Messengers had come to them with clear arguments, and with scriptures, and with the illuminating book
Then did I punish those who disbelieved, so how intense was My disapproval
Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the cloud, then We bring forth therewith fruits of various colours; and in the mountains are streaks, white and red, of various hues and (others) intensely black
And of men and beasts and cattle are likewise of various hues (or species). Only those of His servants who are possessed of knowledge fear Allah alone; surely Allah is Mighty, Forgiving
Surely they who recite the Book of Allah and keep up prayer and spend out of what We have given them secretly and openly, hope for a gain which will not perish
That He may pay them back fully their rewards and give them more out of His grace: surely He is Forgiving, Responsive (or Appreciative)
And that which We have revealed to you of the Book, that is the Truth, confirming (verifying) that which was revealed before it; verily, Allah is Aware, Seer of His servants
Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose from among Our servants; but of them is he who makes his soul to suffer a loss, and of them is he who takes a middle course, and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allah&ac
Gardens of Eternity, they shall enter; they shall be made to wear therein bracelets of gold and pearls, and their dress therein shall be silk
And they shall say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made grief to depart from us; most surely our Lord is Forgiving, Bountiful
Who has settled (established) us in Mansions of Eternity by His grace; toil touches us not therein, nor can fatigue afflict us
And as for those who disbelieve, for them is the Fire of hell; it shall not finish them entirely so that they die, nor shall the chastisement thereof be lightened to them: even thus do We recompense every ungrateful one
And they shall cry therein for succour, "O our Lord! Take us out, we will do good deeds, not the wrong which we used to do." Did We not preserve you alive long enough for him who reflected to reflect? And (also) Warners came to you; therefore ta
Verily, Allah is the Knower of what is unseen in the heavens and the earth; surely He is Aware of what is in the heart
He it is Who made you regents (inheritors and vicegerents) in the land; therefore whoever disbelieves, his disbelief is against himself; and their disbelief does not increase the disbelievers with their Lord in anything but hatred; and their disbelief doe
Say, "Have you considered the associates which you call upon besides Allah? Show me what part of the earth they have created, or have they any share in the heavens; or, have We given them a book so that they follow a clear argument thereof? Nay, the
Surely Allah sustains the heavens and the earth lest they fail (deviate, collapse); and if they should fail, there is none who can uphold them after Him; surely He is the Forbearing, the Forgiving
And they swore by Allah with the strongest of their oaths that if there came to them a Warner they would be better guided than any other nations; but when a Warner came to them, it increased them in nothing but aversion
(Shown in their) behaving arrogantly in the land and in evil planning; and the evil plans beset none save the authors of it. Then should they wait for anything except the way of the former people? You will not find any alteration in the treatment of Allah
Have they not travelled in the land and seen how was the end of those before them while they were stronger than these in power? And Allah is not such that any thing in the heavens or in the earth should escape Him; surely He is Knowing, Powerful
And were Allah to punish men for what they deserve, He would not leave any creature on the surface of the earth, but He reprieves them till an appointed term; so when their doom shall come, then surely Allah is Seer of His servants
Ya Seen
I swear by the Quran full of wisdom
Most surely you are one of the Messengers
On a Straight Way
A revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful
That you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned, and so they are heedless
Already has the word proved true of most of them, for they do not believe
Surely We have placed chains on their necks, and these reach up to their chins, so they are stiff-necked
And We have made before them a barrier and a barrier behind them, then We have covered them over so that they see not
And it is alike to them whether you warn them or warn them not: they believe not
You can only warn him who follows the Reminder (the Quran) and fears the Beneficent Allah in secret; so announce to him forgiveness and an honourable reward
Surely We give life to the dead, and We write down what they have sent before and their footprints, and We have recorded everything in a Clear Record
And set out to them a similitude: The ´Companions of the City´, when the messengers came to it
When We sent to them two, they rejected both of them, then We strengthened (them) with a third, and they said, "Surely we are messengers to you
They said, "You are naught but mortals like ourselves, nor has the Beneficent Allah revealed anything; you only lie
They said, "Our Lord knows that we are most surely messengers to you
And nothing devolves on us but a clear deliverance (of the message)
They said, "Surely we augur (fear) evil from you; if you do not desist, we will certainly stone you, and there shall certainly afflict you a painful chastisement from us
They said, "Your evil omen (expectation, foreboding) is with yourselves. What! Is it because you are reminded? Nay, you are a people that transgress all bounds
And from the remote part of the city there came a man running, he said, "O my people! Follow the messengers
Follow him who does not ask you for reward, and who are the followers of the right course
And what reason have I that I should not serve Him Who brought me into existence? And to Him you shall be brought back
What! Shall I take besides Him gods whose intercession, if the Beneficent Allah should desire to afflict me with harm, shall not avail me aught, nor shall they be able to deliver me
Then truly I shall manifest (clear, obvious) error
Verily, I believe in your Lord, therefore hear me
It was said (unto him), "Enter the garden." He said, "O would that my people knew
Of that on account of which my Lord has forgiven me and made me of the honoured ones
And We sent not down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven, nor do We need to send
It was naught but a single Shout, and lo! They were still and silenced (extinct)
Alas for the servants! There comes not to them a messenger but they mock at him
Do they not consider how many of the generations have We destroyed before them, because they do not turn to them (the messengers) (or which return not unto the people)
And all of them shall surely be brought before Us
And a sign to them is the dead earth: We give life to it and bring forth from it grain so they eat of it
And We make therein orchards of palms and grapevines and We make springs to flow forth in it
that they may eat of the fruit thereof, and their hands did not make it; will they not then be grateful
Glory be to Him Who created pairs of all things, of what the earth grows, and of their kind and of what they know not
And a sign to them is the night: We draw forth from it the day, then lo! They are in the dark
And the sun runs on to a term appointed for it; that is the ordinance of the Mighty, the Knowing
And as for the moon, We have ordained for it stages till it becomes again as an old dry palm leaf
Neither is it allowable to the sun that it should overtake the moon, nor can the night outstrip the day; and all float on in their own orbits
And a sign to them is that We bear their offspring in the laden vessels (or their race in an ark through the flood)
And We have created for them the like of it, in which they ride
And if We please, We can drown them, then there shall be no helper for them, nor shall they be rescued
Unless by mercy from Us and for enjoyment for a time
And when it is said to them, "Guard against what is before you and what is behind you, that per chance (or possibly) you may find mercy.... (they are heedless)
And there comes not to them a sign from among the signs of their Lord but they turn away from it
And when it is said to them, "Spend of that which Allah has given you", those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "Shall we feed him whom, if Allah please, He could feed? You are in naught but clear error
And they say, "When will this threat come to pass, if you are truthful
They wait not for aught but a single Shout (or Blast) which will surprise them while they yet dispute with one another
So they shall not be able to make a bequest, nor shall they return to their families
And the trumpet shall be blown, when lo! From their graves they shall hasten on to their Lord
They shall say, "O woe to us! Who has raised us up from our sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent Allah promised and the messengers told the truth
It will be naught but a single Shout (or Blast), when lo! They shall all be brought before Us
So this day no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and you shall not be rewarded aught but that which you did
Surely the Companions of the Garden shall on that day be in happy occupation
They and their wives (companions) shall be in shades, reclining on thrones of dignity
They shall have fruits therein, and they shall have whatever they desire
Peace" - a word from a Merciful Lord
And get you hence this Day, O guilty ones
Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! That you should not serve Satan? Verily, he is your open enemy
And that you should serve only Me; this is the Straight Way
And he certainly led astray a multitude of people from among you. What! Could you not then understand
This is the hell of which you were oft warned
Enter into it this day because you persisted in disbelief
On that Day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands shall speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they earned
And if We please We would certainly put out their eyes, then they would run about groping for the way, but how should they see
And if We please We would surely transform them in their place, then they would not be able to go on, nor will they return (after error)
And whomsoever We cause to live long, We reduce him to an abject state in constitution; do they not then understand
And We have not taught him poetry, nor is it meet for him; it is nothing but a reminder and a plain (clarifying) Quran
That it may warn him who would have life, and that the word may prove true against the disbelievers
Do they not see that We have created cattle for them, out of what Our hands have wrought, so they are their masters
And We have subjected them to them, so some of them they have to ride upon, and some of them they have for food
And therein they have advantages and drinks; will they not then be grateful
And they have taken gods besides Allah that they may be helped
But they shall not be able to assist them, and they shall be a host brought up before them
Therefore let not their speech grieve you; surely We know what they do in secret and what they do openly
Does not man see that We have created him from a small seed? Then lo! He is an open disputant
And he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets his own creation. Says he, "Who will give life to the bones when they have decomposed
Say, "He will give life to them Who brought them into existence in the first place, and He is Knower of all (modes of) creation
He Who has made for you the fire from the green tree, so that with it you kindle (your own fire)
Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them? Yea! And He is the Creator (of all), the Knower
His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it, " Be", and it is
Therefore glory be to Him in Whose hand is the kingdom of all things, and to Him you shall be brought back
I swear by those who draw themselves out in ranks
Then those who drive away (evil or the wicked) with reproof (or strength)
Then those who recite (proclaim), with mindfulness
Verily, verily your God is One
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, and Lord of the Easts (i.e. all the sun´s rising point)
Surely We have adorned the nearest heaven with an adornment, the stars
And (there is) a safeguard against every rebellious Satan
They cannot listen to the exalted assembly and they are thrown at from every side
Being driven off, and for them is a perpetual chastisement
Except him who snatches a fragment by stealth, then there follows him a brightly shining flame
Then ask them whether they are stronger in creation or those (others) whom We have created. Surely We created them of plastic (malleable) clay
Nay! You wonder while they mock
And when they are reminded, they mind (heed) not
And when they see a sign they incite one another to scoff
And they say, "This is nothing but clear magic
What! When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then certainly be raised
Or our fathers of past times (ancestors)
Say, "Aye! And you shall be abject (humiliated)
So it shall only be a single Shout, when lo! They shall see
And they shall say, "O woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment
(A voice will say,) "This is the Day of the Judgment which you called a lie
Gather together those who were unjust and their associates, and what they used to worship
Besides Allah, then lead them to the way to hell
And stop them, for they must be questioned
What ails you that you do not help each other
Nay! On that day they shall be submissive
And some of them shall advance towards others, questioning each other
They shall say, "Surely you used to come to us from the right hand side
They shall say, "Nay, you (yourselves) were not believers
And we had no authority over you, but you were a wayward people
So the sentence of our Lord has come to pass against us: we shall surely taste (punishment)
We led you astray, for we were ourselves erring
So they shall on that day be sharers in the chastisement one with another
Surely thus do We deal with the guilty
Surely they used to behave arrogantly when it was said to them, "There is no God but Allah
And said, "What! Shall we indeed give up our gods for the sake of a mad poet
Nay, he has come with the truth and verified the (messages of) the Messengers sent before him
Most surely you will taste the painful punishment
And you shall not be punished except for what you did
Save the servants of Allah, the purified ones
For them is a determined sustenance
Fruits, and they shall be highly honoured
In Gardens of Felicity
On Thrones (of Dignity), facing each other
A bowl shall be made to go round them from water running out of clear springs
Crystal-white, delicious to those who drink
There shall be no distress in it, nor shall they be exhausted therewith
And with them shall be those of modest gaze with large beautiful eyes
As if they were delicate eggs carefully protected
Then shall some of them turn to others, questioning each other
A speaker from among them shall say, "Surely I had a comrade on earth
Who said, ´What! are you indeed of those who bear witness to (the truth)
´What! When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then, indeed, be brought to judgment?´
(A voice) Will say, "Will you look down
Then he looked down and saw him in the midst of hell
He shall say (to the sceptic), "By Allah! You had almost caused me to perish
And had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those brought there
Is it then true that we shall not die
Except our previous death? And that we shall not be chastised
Most surely this is the supreme achievement
For the like of this then let the workers work
Is this better as an entertainment or the tree of Zaqqum (having bitter fruit)
Surely We have made it to be a trial to the unjust
Surely it is a tree that grows in the bottom of hell
Its produce is as it were the heads of the serpents (or devils)
Then verily, they shall eat of it and fill (their) bellies with it
Then afterwards they shall drink a mixture prepared in boiling water
Then most surely their return shall be to hell
Certainly, they found their fathers going astray
So in their footsteps they hasten on
And certainly most of the ancients went astray before them
And certainly We sent among them Warners
Then see what was the end of those who were warned
Except the servants of Allah, the purified ones
And Noah did certainly call upon Us, and the most gracious of Hearer of prayer are We
And We delivered him and his followers from the mighty distress
And We made his offspring the survivors
And We perpetuated to him praise among the later generations
(This blessing) "Peace and salutation to Noah among the nations
Thus do We surely reward the doers of good
Surely he was of Our believing servants
Then did We drown the others
And most surely Abraham followed his way
When he came to his Lord with a whole (sound, pure) heart
When he said to his father and his people, " What is it that you worship
Is it lies - gods besides Allah - that you desire
What is then your idea about the Lord of the Worlds
Then he looked at the stars, looking up once
Then he said, "Verily, I am sick (at heart of your worshipping these)
So they turned their backs and went away
Then he turned to their gods secretly and said, "What! Do you not eat
What is the matter with you that you do not speak
Then he attacked them, smiting them with his right hand
So they (people) advanced towards him, hastening
Said he, "Worship you what you yourselves carve out
When Allah has created you and what you make
They said, "Build for him a furnace, then cast him into the burning fire
And they designed a plot against him, but We brought them low
And he said, "Surely I flee to my lord; He will guide me
My Lord! Grant me those who do good deeds
So We gave him the good news of a gentle son
And when his son was old enough to work with him, he said, "O my son! Surely I have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice you; consider then what do you think." He said. "O my father! Do what you are commanded; if Allah wills, you will fi
So when they had both Surrendered (unto Allah in Islam) and he threw him down upon his face
And We called out to him saying, "O Abraham
You have indeed fulfiled the vision; surely thus do We reward the doers of good
Most surely this is a manifest trial
And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice
And We perpetuated to him among the later generations
(This blessing) "Peace be on Abraham
Thus do We reward the doers of good
Surely he was one of Our believing servants
And We gave him the good news of Isaac, a prophet among the righteous
And We showered Our blessings on him and on Isaac; and of their offspring are some who do good, and also some who are clearly unjust to their own souls
And certainly We conferred a favour on Moses and Aaron
And We delivered them both and their people from the mighty distress
And We helped them, so they became the victors
And We gave them both the Book that clarifies
And We guided them both on the Straight Way
And We perpetuated to them among the later generations
(This blessing) "Peace be on Moses and Aaron
Even thus do We reward the doers of good
Surely they were both of Our believing servants
And Elias was most surely one of those sent
When he said to his people, "Do you not guard (against evil)
What! Do you call upon Baal and forsake the best of Creators
Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of past times (ancestors)
But they called him a liar, therefore they shall most surely be brought forth (to the doom)
But not the servants of Allah, the purified ones
And We perpetuated to him among the later generations
(This blessing) "Peace be on Elias
Even thus do We reward the doers of good
Surely he was one of Our believing servants
And Lot was most surely one of those sent
When We delivered him and his followers, everyone
Except an old woman who was amongst those who lingered behind
Then We destroyed the others
And most surely you pass by their (ruins) in the morning
And at night; do you not then understand
And Jonah was most surely of those sent
When he ran away to a ship completely laden
Then he drew lots, but was of those rejected
And the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy
But had it not been that he was of those who glorify (Us)
He would certainly have tarried in its belly to the day when they are raised
Then We cast him on to the desert shore while he was sick
And We caused a gourd plant to grow above him
And We sent him to a hundred thousand folk or more
And they believed; therefore, We gave them provision for a time
Now ask them (O Muhammad) has your Lord daughters while they have sons
Or did We create the angels females while they were witnesses
Verily, it is of their own lies that they say
Allah has begotten"; and most surely they are liars
Has He chosen daughters in preference to sons
What ails you, how is it that you judge
Will you not then reflect
Or have you a clear authority
Then bring your book (writ, record), if you are truthful
And they assert a relationship between Him and the Jinn; and certainly the Jinn do know that they shall surely be brought forth
Glory be to Allah from all that they attribute (unto Him)
But not so the servants of Allah, the purified ones
So surely you and what you worship
Cannot lead into temptation anyone against Him
Save him who will go to hell
(The angels or those who are ranged in ranks say,) "And there is none of us but has an assigned place
Verily, we, even we, are they who draw out in ranks
Verily, we, even we, are they who declare the glory (of Allah)
And there are those who used to say
Had we a reminder from those of yore
We would certainly have been the single-minded servants of Allah
But (now that it is come) they disbelieve in it; but they will come to know
And certainly Our word has already gone forth before this unto Our servants sent
That most surely they shall be helped
And most surely Our host alone shall be the victorious ones
Therefore, turn away from them till a time
And watch, for they will soon come to see
What! Would they then hasten Our chastisement
But when it descends on them, evil will then be the morning for those who have been warned
And turn away from them for a time
And watch, for they will soon come to see
Glorified be your Lord, the Lord of Majesty, above all that which they attribute (unto Him)
And peace be unto those who are sent
And all praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
Sad. (I swear) By the Quran, full of Zikr (remembrance in reverence and praising Allah, admonition, reciting, teaching, giving the message)
Nay! But those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation (pride) and separatism (schism)
How many generations did We destroy before them, then they cried when there was no longer time to escape
And they marvel that there has come to them a Warner from among themselves, and the disbelievers say: "This is an enchanter, a liar
What! Makes he a single God out of the many gods? A strange thing is this, to be sure
And the leaders among them go about exhorting, "Go and remain constant to your gods; for this is most surely a thing designed against you
We never heard of this in the former faith; this is nothing but an invention
Has the reminder been revealed to him alone from among us?" Nay! They are in doubt as to My reminder. Nay! They have not yet tasted My chastisement
Or is it that they have the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Mighty, the Bestower
Or is it that theirs is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is between them? Then let them ascend by ropes
But there they shall be put to flight, even as a confederated host
The people of Noah before them denied the messengers and so did the people of A´ad, and Pharaoh, the Lord of Stakes (of stability)
And the people of Thamud and the people of Lot and the Companions of the Woods; these were the factions
There was none of them but denied the messengers, therefore, just was My retribution
These wait aught but a single Shout, which brooks no delay
And they say, "Our Lord! Hasten on to us our portion before the Day of Reckoning
Bear patiently what they say, and remember Our servant David, the possessor of power; surely he was frequent in turning (to Allah)
Surely We made the mountains sing the glory (of Allah) in unison with him at nightfall and sunrise
And the birds gathered together; all joined in singing with him
And We strengthened his kingdom and We gave him wisdom and a clear judgment
And has there come to you the story of the Disputants (litigants), when they made an entry into the private chamber by ascending over the walls
When they entered in upon David and he was frightened by them, they said, "Fear not; we are two litigants, of whom one has acted wrongfully towards the other, therefore decide between us with justice, and do not act unjustly, and guide us to the righ
Lo! This is my brother; he has ninety-nine ewes and I have but one; but he said, ´Give to me´, and he has prevailed against me in discourse
He said, "Surely he has been unjust to you in demanding your ewe (to add) to his own ewes. Lo! Many partners act wrongfully towards one another, except those who believe and do good, and very few are they." And David was sure that We had tried h
Therefore, We rectified for him this lapse, and most surely he had nearness to Us and an excellent journey´s end (return)
O David! Surely We have made you a Vicegerent in the land; so judge between men with justice and follow not desire, lest it should lead you astray from the path of Allah. Lo! Those who go astray from the path of Allah, they shall surely have a sever
And We create not the heaven and the earth and that which is between them in vain; that is the opinion of those who disbelieve; then woe to those who disbelieve because of the Fire
Shall We treat those who believe and do good like the mischief-makers in the earth? Or shall We make those who guard (against evil) like the wicked
(It is) a Book We have revealed to you abounding in good that they may ponder over its verses, and that those endowed with understanding may reflect
And We bestowed on David, Solomon, a most excellent servant! Surely he was frequent in turning (to Allah)
Lo! There were brought to him. in the evening, horses still when standing, swift when running
And he said, "Surely I have preferred the good things (of the world) over (or because of) the remembrance of my Lord." - until they were taken out of sight behind a veil (or the sun was hidden behind the veil of night)
(Then he said,) "Bring them back to me"; and he began to slash (or stroke) their legs and necks
And certainly We tried Solomon, and We put on his throne a mere (soulless) body; then did he repent
He said, "My Lord! Do you forgive me and grant me a kingdom which (may be) suits not anyone after me; for you are the Bestower of Bounties
Then We made the wind subservient to him; it made his command to run gently wherever he desired
And the devils (the unruly), every builder and diver
And others fettered in chains
(Saying,) "These are Our Bounties (gift), therefore give freely or withhold, without reckoning
And most surely he had a nearness to Us and an excellent journey´s end (return)
And remember Our servant Job, when he called upon his Lord saying, "The devil has afflicted me with distress and torment
(It was said unto him) "Strike with your foot; here is a cool, refreshing washing-place and a drink
And We gave him back his people and doubled their number, as a mercy from Us, and as a reminder to those possessed of understanding
And (It was said,) "Take in your hand a green branch (or grass) and beat her (his rebellious wife gently) with it (rather than with cruelty), and break not your oath. Surely We found him patient; a most excellent servant! Surely he was frequent in tu
And remember Our servants Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, men of power and vision
Surely, We purified them with a pure thought, the remembrance of the Home of the Hereafter
And most surely they were, in Our sight, of the company of the elect, the excellent
And remember Ishmael and Elisha and Zul-Kifl - all were of the Company of the Good (or Chosen)
This is a reminder; and most surely there is an excellent destination for those who guard (against evil)
The Gardens of Eternity, whose doors are opened for them
Wherein reclining, they call for many fruits and cool drink therein
And with them shall be those restrained (modest) eyes, companions equal in age
This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning
Verily, this in truth is Our provision which will never fail
This (shall be so for the righteous). And lo! There is an evil destination for the transgressors
Hell; they will burn in it, an evil resting-place
This (shall be so); then shall they taste it, boiling and intensely cold
And other (punishment) of similar kind in pairs (of the two extremes)
Here is an army plunging in without consideration along with you; no welcome for them; surely they shall burn in the Fire
They shall say, "Nay! Thee too! No welcome for you: it is you who have brought this upon us; evil is this resting-place
They shall say, "Our Lord! Whoever prepared it first for us, add you to him a double chastisement in the Fire
And they shall say, "What ails us that we do not see men whom we used to count among the wicked
Was it that we took them wrongly in scorn, or have our eyes missed them
Verily, this is the truth - the mutual wrangling of the inmates of the fire
Say, "I am only a Warner, and there is no God but Allah, the One, the Absolute (or Supreme and Irresistible)
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and that which is between them, the Mighty Enforcer, the most Forgiving
Say, "It is a message of great importance
From which you are turning away
had no knowledge of the Exalted Chiefs (in heaven) when they discussed (affairs)
Naught is revealed to me save this, that I am a plain Warner
Behold, your Lord said to the angels; Surely I am going to create a mortal from dust (or clay)
So when I have fashioned him in due proportions and breathed into him of My spirit, then fall down making obeisance unto him
And the angels did obeisance, all of them
But not Iblis: he was too proud and became one of the disbelievers
He said, "O Iblis! What prevented you from doing obeisance to him whom I created with My two hands? Are you too proud or are you of the Exalted Ones
He said, "I am better than he; Thou hast created me of Fire, and him Thou did create of dust (or clay)
He said, "Then get you hence, for lo! you are outcast
And surely My curse is on you till the Day of Judgment
He said, "My Lord! then reprieve me till the day that they are raised
He said, "Surely you are of the reprieved ones
Until the Day of the time appointed
He said, "Then by Thy Might I will surely beguile (tempt them to evil), every one
Except Thy single-minded servants from among them, the purified ones
He said, "The Truth Is, and the Truth I speak
That I will most certainly fill hell with you and with those among them who follow you, every one
Say (O Muhammad unto mankind), "I do not ask you for any reward for it; nor am I of the impostors
Lo! It (the Quran) is nothing but a reminder for all peoples (nations)
And you will, in time, come to know the truth thereof
The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
Surely We have revealed to you the Book with the truth, therefore serve Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience (or making religion pure for Him only)
Now, surely, sincere obedience (or pure religion) is due to Allah alone and those who take guardians besides Him, say, "We serve them only that they may bring us nearer to Allah". Surely Allah will judge between them in that in which they differ
If Allah desire to take a son to Himself, He will surely choose those He pleases from what He has created. Glory be to Him: He is Allah, the One, the Absolute
He has created the heavens and the earth with Truth; He makes the night cover the day and makes the day overtake the night, and He has made the sun and the moon subservient; each one runs on to an assigned term; now surely is He not the Mighty, the great
He has created you from a single being, then made its mate of the same (kind), and He has made for you eight of the cattle in pairs. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, a creation after a creation, in triple darkness; that is Allah your Lord, His
If you are ungrateful, then surely Allah is Independent (or self-sufficient) above all need of you; though He does not like ungratefulness in His servants; and if you are grateful, He is pleased with you; and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of a
And when distress afflicts a man he calls upon his Lord turning to Him frequently; then when He makes him possess a favour from Him, he forgets that for which he called upon Him before, and sets up rivals to Allah that he may cause (men) to stray off His
What! Is he who is obedient during hours of the night, prostrating himself and standing, takes heed of the Hereafter and hopes for the mercy of his Lord (like one who does not)! Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike? But only the men of
Say, "O my servants who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) your Lord; for those who do good in this world there is good, and Allah´s earth is spacious; only the patient will be paid a reward without measure
Say, "I am commanded that I should worship (serve) Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience (or making religion pure for Him only)
And I am commanded that I shall be the foremost of those who Surrender (in Islam)
Say, "I would, if I disobey my Lord, indeed fear the chastisement of a grievous Day
Say, "Allah (it is Whom) I serve, being sincere to Him in my exclusive devotion
Serve you what you like besides Him." Say, "The losers surely are those who shall have lost their own souls and their people on the Day of Resurrection; now surely that is the real (or manifest) loss
They shall have coverings (layers) of fire above them and coverings (layers) beneath them; with this, Allah appals His servants, so be careful of (your duty to) Me, O My servants
And as for those who put away false gods, lest they should worship them and turn to Allah, they shall have good news. Therefore give good news to My servants
Those who listen to the Word (or advice) then follow the best (meaning) of it; those are they whom Allah has guided, and those it is who are the men of understanding
What! Is he against whom the sentence of chastisement is justly due (equal to one who avoids evil): What! Can you save him who is in the Fire
But those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord, they shall have high places, above them are built higher places, beneath which rivers flow - (this is) the promise of Allah: Allah will not fail in (His) promise
Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the cloud, then makes it go along in the earth in springs, then brings forth therewith herbage of various colours, then it withers so that you see it becoming yellow, then He makes it dry up and crumble? Mos
What! Is he whose heart Allah has opened to the Surrender (Islam) so that he is in a light from his Lord (like him who is hard-hearted)? Nay, woe to those whose heart are hard against the remembrance of Allah; those are in clear error
Allah has revealed the best of announcements (messages), a Scripture self-consistent in its various parts, repeating, whereat do shudder (or thrill) the skins of those who fear their Lord, so that their skins and their heart soften (or become pliant) to t
Is then he who has to face the awful doom on the Day of Resurrection (as he who does right)? And it will be said to the unjust, "Taste what you earned
Those before them (also) denied (the prophets or the revelation, the message), therefore there came to them the chastisement from whence they perceived not
So Allah made them taste disgrace (or humiliation) in the life of this world, and certainly the punishment of the Hereafter is greater; did they but know
And certainly We have set forth to men in this Quran similitudes of every sort that they may reflect
A Lecture (Quran) in Arabic, without any crookedness, that they may guard (against evil)
Allah sets forth a similitude: There is a slave who belongs to several partners, differing (or quarrelling) with one another, and there is another slave wholly owned by one man. Are the two alike in condition? (All) praise is due to Allah. Nay! most of th
Surely you shall die and they too shall surely die
Then lo! On the Day of Resurrection your disputes will be settled before your Lord
Who is then more unjust than he who utters a lie against Allah and he who gives the lie to the truth when it comes to him; is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers
And he who brings the truth and he who accepts it as the truth, these are they that guard (against evil)
They shall have with their Lord what they please; that is the reward of the doers of good
So that Allah will do away with the worst of what they did and give them their reward for the best of what they do
Is not Allah sufficient for His servant? And they seek to frighten you with those besides Him; and whomsoever Allah sends astray, there is no guide for him
And whom Allah guides, there is none that can lead him astray; is not Allah Mighty, the Lord of Retribution
And should you ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth?", they would most certainly say, "Allah". Say, "Have you then considered that what you call upon besides Allah, would they, if Allah desire to afflict me with harm
Say: O my people! Work in your manner (or work as and how you can), surely I too am working. But soon you will come to know
Who it is to whom there shall come a punishment which will disgrace him and to whom will be due an enduring punishment
Verily, We have revealed to you the Book with the truth for the sake of mankind; so whoever follows the right way, it is for the good of his own soul and whoever errs, he errs only to its injury; and you are not a custodian over them
Allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those that die not during their sleep; then He withholds those on whom He has passed the decree of death and sends the others back till an appointed term; most surely there are signs in this for a peop
Or have they taken intercessors besides Allah? Say, "What! Even though they did not ever have control over anything, nor do they understand
Say, "To Allah belongs all intercession; His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, then to Him you shall be brought back
And when Allah, the One and Only, is mentioned, the heart of those who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink, and when those besides Him are mentioned, lo! They are joyful
Say, "O Allah! Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the seen! Only Thou judgest between Thy servants as to that wherein they differ
And had those who are unjust all that is in the earth and the like of it with it, they would certainly offer it as ransom (to be saved) from the pain of the punishment on the Day of Resurrection; and what they never thought of shall become plain to them f
And the evil (consequences) of what they wrought shall become plain to them, and the very thing they mocked at shall beset them
Now when harm afflicts a man he calls upon Us; then, when We give him a favour from Us, he says, "I have been given it only by means of knowledge." Nay, it is a trial, but most of them know not
Those before them did indeed say this, but what they earned availed them not
But there befell them the evil (consequences) of what they earned; and those who are unjust from among this generation, there shall also befall them the evil (consequences) of what they earn, and they shall not escape
Do they not know that Allah enlarges the means of subsistence to whom He wills, and He restricts; most surely there are signs in this for a people who believe
Say, "O my servants! Who have acted extravagantly (transgressed) against their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives all faults; surely He is the Forgiving the Merciful
And return to your Lord time after time and submit to Him before there come unto you the punishment when you cannot be helped
And follow the best of that which has been revealed to you from your Lord before the punishment comes suddenly while you do not even perceive
Lest a soul should say, "O woe to me! For what I fell short of my duty to Allah, and I was indeed among the scoffers
Or should say, "Had Allah guided me, I would certainly have been of those who are dutiful
Or should say when it sees the punishment, "O, if I only had another chance that I might be among the righteous
(But the answer will be,) "Nay! For My revelations came to you, but you rejected them, and were haughty and you were among the unbelievers
And on the Day of Resurrection you shall see those who lied against Allah; their faces shall be blackened. Is there not in hell an abode for the haughty
And Allah shall deliver those who guard (against evil) with their achievement; evil shall not touch them, nor shall they grieve
Allah is the Creator of all things and He is the Guardian and Disposer of all things
His are the keys of the heavens and the earth; and those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah, these it is that are the losers
Say, "What! Do you then bid me serve others than Allah, O you ignorant (or stupid) ones
And certainly, it has been revealed to you and to those before you, "Surely if you ascribe partners (with Allah), your work would certainly come to naught and you would certainly be of the losers
Nay! But serve Allah alone and be of the thankful
And they have not honoured Allah with the honour that is due to Him; and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the Day of Resurrection and the heavens rolled up in His right hand; Glorified is He, and High Exalted above all that they ascribe as partners
And the trumpet shall be blown, and all those that are in the heavens and all those that are in the earth shall swoon away (or become unconscious), except such as Allah wills; then it shall be blown again, then lo! They shall stand up waiting
And the earth shall beam with the light of its Lord, and the Book (Record) shall be laid open, and the prophets and the witnesses shall be brought up, and judgment shall be given between them with justice, and they shall not be dealt with unjustly
And every soul shall be paid back full for what it has done, and He knows best what they do
And those who disbelieve shall be driven to hell in companies; until, when they come to it, its doors shall be opened, and the keepers of it shall say to them, "Did not there come to you messengers of your own, reciting to you the revelations (or com)
It shall be said, "Enter the gates of hell to abide therein; so evil is the abode of the haughty
And those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord shall be conveyed to the Garden in companies; until when they come to it, and its doors are opened, the keepers of it shall say to them, "Peace be on you, you have done well; therefore enter in
And they shall say, "All praise is due to Allah, Who has made good to us His promise, and He has given us this land as a heritage; we may dwell in the Garden where we please; so goodly is the reward of the workers
And you shall see the angels going round about the throne glorifying the praise of their Lord; and judgment shall be given between them with justice, and it shall be said, "All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds
Ha Mim. (Two Arabic letters)
The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Knower
The Forgiver of the faults and the Acceptor of repentance, Severe in punishment, Who has a Long Reach; there is no God but He; to Him is the journeying (the Final Goal)
None dispute concerning the revelations (or Signs) of Allah but those who disbelieve, therefore, let not their strutting in the cities deceive you
The people of Noah and the parties after them rejected (Prophets) before them, and every nation purposed against their Messengers to destroy him, and they disputed by means of falsehoods that they might thereby render null the truth, therefore I destroyed
And thus did the word of your Lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the Fire
Those who bear the Throne and those around Him celebrate the praise of their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who believe, saying, "Our Lord! Thou embracest all things (have a Long Reach) in mercy and knowledge, therefore grant pr
Our Lord! And make them enter the Gardens of Eternity which Thou hast promised to them and the righteous among their fathers and their wives and their offspring. Surely Thou art the Mighty, the Wise
And keep them from evil deeds, and whom Thou keepest from evil deeds this day, Thou hast indeed taken into Thine mercy, and that is the supreme triumph
Surely those who disbelieve shall be addressed, "Verily, Allah´s abhorrence is more terrible than your abhorrence one to another, when you were called unto the faith and you refused
They shall say, "Our Lord! Twice didst Thou makest us die, and twice hast Thou givestn us life, so we do confess our faults; is there then a way to get out
(The reply is,) "This is because when Allah alone was called upon, you disbelieved, and when associates were given to Him, you believed; but the Command belongs only to Allah, the Sublime, the Majestic
He it is Who shows you His signs and sends down for you sustenance from heaven. None pays heed but he who turns (to Him)
Therefore call upon Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience (or making Religion pure for Him), however much the unbelievers are averse
The Exalter of Ranks (or Exalted above all Ranks and degrees), Lord of the Throne (of Power and Authority): He casts (or sends) the Spirit by His command upon whom He wills of His servants, that he may warn (men) of the Day of Meeting
The Day when they shall come forth, nothing concerning them being hidden from Allah, to whom belongs the kingdom this day? To Allah, the One, the Almighty (or the Irresistible)
This day every soul shall be rewarded for what it has earned; no injustice (shall be done) this day; Lo! Allah is swift in reckoning
And warn them of the day that draws near, when heart shall rise up to the throats to choke them; the wrongdoers shall have no compassionate friend nor any intercessor who will be heard
He knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts conceal
Allah judges with truth; but those whom they call upon besides Him cannot judge aught; surely Allah is the Hearer, the Seer
Have they not travelled in the earth and seen the nature of the consequences for those who disbelieved before them? Mightier than these were they in strength, and in the traces they made in the earth. Yet Allah destroyed them for their sins; and they had
That was because there came to them their messengers with clear arguments, but they rejected (them), therefore Allah destroyed them; surely He is Strong, Severe in retribution
And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations (message, communications) and a clear authority
To Pharaoh and Haman and Korah, but they said, "A lying sorcerer
So when he brought to them the truth from Us, they said, "Slay the sons of those who believe with him and keep their women alive." But the plots of unbelievers come to nothing but errors (and delusions)
And Pharaoh said, "Leave me to slay Moses and let him call upon his Lord; surely I fear that he will change your religion or that he will make mischief to appear in the land
And Moses said, "Surely I take refuge with my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant scorner who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning
And a believing man of Pharaoh´s people who hid his faith said, "What! Will you slay a man because he says, ´My Lord is Allah, and indeed he has brought to you clear arguments from your Lord? And if he be a liar, on him will be (the conse)
´O my people! Yours is the kingdom this day, being masters in the land, but who will help us against the wrath of Allah if it come to us? ´ Pharaoh said, "I do not show you aught but that which I see myself, and I do not make you fo
And he who believed said, "O my people! Surely I fear for you the like of what befell the parties of old
A plight the like of what befell the people of Noah and A´ad and Thamud and those after them, and Allah wills no injustice for His servants
And, O my people! I fear for you the Day of Summoning
The day on which you will turn back retreating; there shall be no saviour (or defender) for you from Allah, and whomsoever Allah causes to err, there is no guide for him
And verily Joseph came to you before with clear arguments, yet you ceased not to be in doubt as to what he brought; until when he died, you said, ´Allah will never raise a messenger after him.´ Thus does Allah cause him to err who is extravaga
Those who dispute concerning the revelation (signs or communications) of Allah without any authority that He has given them; greatly hated is it by Allah and by those who believe. Thus does Allah set a seal over the heart of every proud, haughty one
And Pharaoh said, "O Haman! Build for me a tower that I may attain the ways and means
The ways and means of access to the heavens that I might look upon the God of Moses, and I surely think him to be a liar. And thus the evil of his deed was made fair-seeming unto Pharaoh, and he was debarred from the Way. The plot of Pharaoh was not to en
And he who believed said, "O my people! Follow me; I will guide you to the Right Way
O my people! This life of the world is only a passing enjoyment, and surely the Hereafter is the enduring home
Whoever does an evil, he shall be recompensed with the like of it, and whoever does good, whether male or female, and is a believer, these shall enter the Garden, in which they shall be given sustenance without measure
And, O my people! How (strange) is it that I call you to salvation and you call me to the fire
You call on me that I should disbelieve in (or blaspheme against) Allah and associate with Him that of which I have no knowledge, and I call you to the Mighty, the most Forgiving
Assuredly that to which you call me to has no claim to be called to in this world, nor in the Hereafter, and that our return is to Allah, and the extravagant (or transgressors, those who go beyond the limits) will be inmates of the Fire
And you will remember what I say unto you, and I entrust my cause to Allah. Verily, Allah is Seer of his servants
So Allah protected him from the evil of what they planned, and the most evil punishment overtook Pharaoh´s people
The Fire, they shall be brought before it morning and evening and on the Day when the Hour (of Judgment) shall come to pass, (it will be said,) "Make Pharaoh´s people enter the severest penalty
And when they shall contend one with another in the Fire, then the weak shall say to those who were proud, "Surely we were your followers; will you then avert from us a portion of the fire
Those who were proud shall say, "Surely we are all in it: surely Allah has judged between His servants
And those who are in the fire shall say to the keepers of Hell, "Call upon your Lord that He may lighten to us one day of this punishment
They shall say, "Did not your messengers come to you with clear arguments?" They shall say, "Yea." They shall say, "Then pray." But the prayer of those without faith is only futile (wandering in) error
Most surely We help Our messengers, and those who believe, in the life of this world and on the Day when the witnesses arise
The day on which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust, and for them is a curse and for them is the abode of misery
And certainly We gave Moses the guidance, and We caused the children of Israel to inherit the Book
A guidance and a reminder to the men of understanding
Therefore, be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true; and ask protection for your fault and sing the praise of your Lord in the evening and the morning
Surely those who dispute about the revelations (signs, communications) of Allah without any authority that has come to them, there is naught in their breasts but (a desire) to become great which they shall never attain. Therefore, seek refuge in Allah, su
Certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of the men, but most of mankind know not
And the blind and the seeing are not alike, nor those who believe and do good and the evildoer; little is it that you reflect
Most surely the hour is coming, there is no doubt therein, but most people believe not
And your Lord has said, "Call upon Me, I will answer you; surely those who are too proud for My service shall soon enter Hell abased
Allah is He Who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see; most surely Allah is Gracious to men, but most men do not give thanks
That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of everything; there is no God but He; How then are you perverted (turned or deluded)
Thus were turned away those who denied the Signs (revelations, communications) of Allah
Allah is He Who made the earth a resting-place for you and the heaven a canopy, and He formed you, then made goodly your forms, and He provided you with goodly things; that is Allah, your Lord; blessed then is Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
He is the Living One. There is no God but He, therefore call on (pray to) Him, being sincere to Him in obedience (or making Religion pure for Him or Surrendering to Him in Islam); All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds
Say, "I am forbidden to serve those whom you call upon besides Allah when clear arguments have come to me from my Lord, and I am commanded that I should Surrender (in Islam) to the Lord of the Worlds
He it is Who created you from dust, then from a small germ-cell, then from a clot, then He brings you forth as a child, then that you may attain your maturity, then that you may be old - though some of you are caused to die before - and that you may reach
He it is Who gives life and brings death, so when He decrees an affair, He only says to it, "Be", and it is
Have you not seen those who dispute with respect to the Signs (or revelations) of Allah: how are they turned away
Those who reject the Book and that with which We have sent Our Messenger; but they shall soon come to know
When the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks; they shall be dragged
Into boiling water, then in the Fire shall they be burned
Then shall it be said to them, "Where is that which you used to set up (for worship)
Besides Allah?" They shall say, "They have failed us. Nay, we used not to pray to anything before." Thus does Allah confound the unbelievers
(It is said,) "That is because you exulted in the earth unjustly and because you behaved insolently
Enter the gates of hell to abide therein, evil then is the abode of the scornful (arrogant)
So be patient (O Muhammad), verily the promise of Allah is true. Whether We let you see part of what We promise them, or whether We cause you to die, to Us shall they be returned
And certainly We sent messengers before you: there are some of them that We have mentioned to you and there are others whom We have not mentioned to you; and it was not meet for a messenger that he should bring a sign except with Allah´s permission
Allah is He Who made the cattle for you that you may ride on some of them, and some of them you eat
And there are many benefits for you in them, and that you may attain through them a want which is in your breasts, and are borne upon them as upon the ships
And He shows you His signs: which then of Allah´s signs will you deny
Have they not then journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of those before them? They were more numerous than these and greater in strength and in the traces they made in the earth, but what they earned availed them not
Then when their messengers came to them with clear arguments, they exulted in what they had with them of knowledge, and there beset them that which they used to mock
But when they saw Our punishment, they said, "We believe in Allah alone and we deny what we used to associate with Him
But their belief could not avail them when they had seen Our punishment; this is Allah´s law, which has indeed held true for His servants, and then the disbelievers perished (or were ruined)
Ha Mim
A revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful
A Book (Scripture) whereof the verses are expounded, an Arabic Quran (Lecture) for a people who understand
Giving good news and a warning, but most of them turn aside so they hear not
And they say, "Our heart are under veils from that to which you call us, and there is a deafness in our ears, and a screen hangs between us and you. So do you (as you will), we too are doing (what we will)
Say (O Muhammad), "I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your God is one Allah, therefore follow the right way to Him and ask His forgiveness". And woe unto the idolaters (those who join gods with Allah)
Those who give not regular charity and who deny the Hereafter
Those who believe and do good, they shall surely have a reward unfailing
Say, "What! Do you indeed disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in two Days (periods), and do you set up rivals with Him? He (none else) is the Lord of the Worlds
And He made in it firm mountains rising above its surface, and He blessed the earth and measured therein the sustenance for all things in four Days (periods), alike (or in accordance with their needs) for all seekers
He directed Himself to the heaven when it was smoke (or gas), so He said unto it and unto the earth, "Come you together (or both), willingly or unwillingly." They both said, " We come in willing obedience
So He ordained them seven heavens in two periods, and revealed in every heaven its affairs (duties and functions); and We adorned the lower heaven with brilliant stars and made it inviolable (guarded); that is the decree of the Mighty, the Knower
But if they turn aside, then say: "I have warned you of a scourge like the scourge of A´ad and Thamud
When their messengers came to them from before them and from behind them, saying, "Serve nothing but Allah", they said, "If our Lord had pleased He would certainly have sent down angels, so we are surely unbelievers in that with which you a
Then as to A´ad, they were unjustly arrogant in the land, and they said, "Who is mightier in strength than we?" Did they not see that Allah Who created them was mightier than they in strength? But they denied Our Signs
So We sent on them a furious wind in disastrous days, that We may make them taste the torment of abasement in the life of the world. But verily, the chastisement of the Hereafter is much more shameful, and they shall not be helped
And as to Thamud, We showed them the right way, but they chose blindness (of heart) above guidance, so there overtook them the stunning (like a bolt of lightening) punishment of humiliation for what they earned
And We delivered those who believed and did their duty to Allah
And on the day that the enemies of Allah shall be gathered into the fire, they will be marched in ranks
Until when they come to it, their ears and their eyes and their skins shall bear witness against them as to what they did
And they shall say to their skins, "Why have you borne witness against us?" They shall say, "Allah Who gives speech to all things has given us speech, and He Who created you at first, unto Him you are returning
And you did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you, but you thought that Allah did not know most of what you did
And that it was your own thought which you entertained about your Lord that have brought you to ruin (or destruction, perdition), so you find yourselves this day among the lost
Then though they are resigned, still the fire is their abode, and if they ask for favour, yet are they not of those unto whom favour can be shown
And We have appointed for them comrades (in the world) who made fair-seeming to them what is before them and what is behind them (in their future and their past). And the sentence concerning the nations of jinn and men that have passed away before them is
And those who disbelieve say, "Do not listen to this Quran and do make a noise in the midst of its reading that you may overcome it
Therefore, We will certainly make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment, and We will certainly requite them for the evil deeds they used to do
That is the reward of the enemies of Allah - the Fire. Therein is their eternal home; the payment for denying Our signs
And those who disbelieve will say, "Our Lord! Show us those who led us astray from among the jinn and men that we may trample them under our feet so that they may be of the lowest
As for those who say, "Our Lord is Allah", then continue steadfast in righteousness, the angels descend upon them, saying, "Fear not, nor be grieved, and receive good news of the Garden which you were promised
We are your guardians in the life of this world and in the Hereafter, and you shall have therein what your souls desire and you shall have therein all you ask for
A provision from the Forgiving, the Merciful
And who speaks better than he who calls to Allah while he himself does good, and says, "I am of those who Surrender (in Islam)
And not alike are the good and the evil. Repel evil with what is best, when lo! He between whom and you was enmity would be as if he were an intimate friend
And none are granted this power but those who possess patience and self-restraint, and none are granted it but the owners of great happiness
And if a whisper (incitement or interference) of the Satan should cause you mischief, then seek refuge in Allah; surely He is the Hearer, the Knower
And among His signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon. Make not obeisance to the sun nor to the moon; but make obeisance to Allah Who created them, if Him it is that you serve
But if they are too proud, yet those who are with your Lord glorify Him night and the day, and tire not
And among His signs is this, that you see the earth barren and desolate, but when We send down on it the rain, it stirs to life and swells into growth: verily He Who gives it life is the Quickener of the dead; surely He has power over all things
Surely they who distort Our revelations are not hidden from Us. What! Is he, then, who is cast into the Fire better, or he who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you like, surely He is Seer of what you do
Surely those who disbelieve in the Reminder when it comes to them (are losers, for most surely it is a Book of exalted power)
Falsehood shall not come to it from before it nor from behind it, a revelation from the Wise, the Owner of Praise
Naught is said unto you (O Muhammad) but what was said unto the messengers before you; surely your Lord is the Lord of Forgiveness and the Lord of dire Retribution
And if We had made it a Lecture (Quran) in a foreign tongue, they would certainly have said, "Why have not its verses been explained clearly? What! A foreign (tongue) and an Arab (messenger)!" Say, "It is to those who believe, a guidance an
And certainly We gave the Book to Moses, but dispute arose therein. Had not a word already gone forth from your Lord, judgment would certainly have been given ere now between them (the disputers); and lo! They are in hopeless doubt about it
Whoever does good, it is for the good his own soul, and whoever does wrong, it is against it; and your Lord is not in the least unjust (or tyrannical) to His servants
To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour (of Judgment), and no fruits comes forth from their coverings, nor does a female bear or give birth, but with His knowledge. And on the Day when He shall call unto them, "Where are (those whom you called)
And away from them shall go what they called upon before, and they shall know for certain that there is no escape for them
Man is never tired of praying for good, and if evil touch him, then he is despairing, hopeless
And verily, if We make him taste mercy from Us after distress that has touched him, he would say, "This is of me, and I do not think the Hour will come to pass, and if I am sent back to my Lord, I shall have with Him sure good." But We will most
And when We show favour to man, he turns aside and withdraws himself; and when evil touches him, he makes lengthy supplications
Say, "Bethink you: if it is from Allah and you reject it, who is in greater error than he who is in open feud (or schism or opposition)
We will soon show them Our signs on the horizons (in the Universe) and within themselves (or their own souls), until it become manifest unto them that it is the truth. Is not your Lord sufficient , since He is Witness over all things
What! Are they still in doubt about the meeting with their Lord? What! Does He not encompass (surround and penetrate) all things
Ha Mim. (Two mystical letters in Arabic)
Ain Sin Qaf. (Three more mystical letters)
Thus does Allah, the Mighty, the Wise, reveal to you, as to those before you
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and that is in the earth, and He is the Most High, the Most Great (or the Sublime, the Tremendous)
The heavens may almost be rent asunder from above them (by His Glory) while the angels sing the praise of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth; verily Allah is the Forgiving, the Merciful
And as for those who take guardians besides Him, Allah watches over them, and you are not in charge over them
And thus have We revealed to you an Arabic Lecture (Quran), that you may warn the Mother City (Mecca) and those around it, and that you may give warning of the Day of Gathering wherein is no doubt; when some will be in the Garden and some in the burning F
And if Allah had willed He would surely have made them a single community, but He makes whom He wills enter into His mercy, and the unjust it is that shall have no guardian or helper
Or have they taken guardians besides Him? But Allah, He is the Guardian, and He gives life to the dead, and He has power over all things
And in whatever thing you disagree, the judgment thereof is in the hands of Allah; such is Allah, my Lord, on Him do I trust and to Him do I turn
The Originator of the heavens and the earth, He made pairs for you from among yourselves, and pairs of the cattle too, multiplying you thereby. There is no thing like unto Him; and He is the Hearer, the Seer
His are the treasures of the heavens and the earth; He expands or restricts the means of subsistence for whom He wills; verily, He is Aware of all things
He has ordained for you the religion which He enjoined upon Noah and that which We have revealed to you (Muhammad) and that which We enjoined upon Abraham and Moses and Jesus, saying, "Establish religion (obedience) and be not divided therein. Dreadf
And they did not become divided until after knowledge had come to them out of rivalry among themselves; and had not a Word already gone forth from your Lord for an appointed term, certainly judgment would have been given between them; and those who were m
Therefore, unto this (scripture) then go on inviting, and be you upright and steadfast as you are commanded, and follow not their vain desires, and say, "I believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book, and I am commanded to do justice between you
And as for those who dispute about Allah after that obedience has been rendered to Him, their dispute is futile with their Lord, and upon them is wrath, and for them is a terrible penalty
Allah it is Who revealed the Book with truth, and the Balance, and what shall make you realise that perhaps the Hour be nigh
Those who do not believe in it would hasten it on, and those who believe are in awe of it, and they know that it is the truth. Now most surely those who dispute obstinately concerning the Hour are in a great error
Gracious is Allah to His servants; He gives sustenance to whom He pleases, and He is the Strong, the Mighty
Whoever desires the tilth (means of harvest, gain) of the Hereafter, We will give him increase in it; and whoever desires the tilth (means of harvest, gain) of this world, We give him of it, and in the Hereafter he has no portion
Or have they partners for Allah who have prescribed for them a religion that Allah permits not? Had it not been for the Word of Decision judgment would have certainly been given between them; but verily the wrong-doers shall have a painful doom
you see the wrong-doers fearful on account of what they have earned, and it must necessarily befall them; and those who believe and do good shall be in the luxurious meadows of the Gardens; they shall have what they please with their Lord: that is the gr
That is of which Allah gives the good news to His servants, those who believe and do good deeds. Say (O Muhammad), "I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives"; and whoever earns good, We give him more of good therein
Or do they say, "He has forged a lie against Allah"? But if Allah pleased, He would seal your heart; and Allah will blot out the falsehood and confirm the truth with His words; verily, He is Aware of what is in the breasts
And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons the evil deeds and He knows all that you do
And He answers those who believe and do good deeds, and gives increase unto them of His bounty; and as for the unbelievers, they shall have a severe punishment
And if Allah were to enlarge (increase, improve, enrich) the provision for His servants they would certainly transgress beyond bounds through the earth; but He sends it down in due measure as He pleases; surely He is Aware of, a Seer (Watchful) of His ser
And He it is Who sends down the saving rain after they have despaired, and He unfolds (scatters) His mercy; and He is the Guardian, the Praiseworthy
And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the living creatures He has spread forth through them; and He has all power to gather them together when He wills
And whatever affliction befalls you, it is on account of what your hands have wrought, and yet He pardons much
And you cannot escape in the earth, and you shall not have a guardian or a helper besides Allah
And among His signs are the ships in the sea, tall as mountains
If He pleases, He causes the wind to become still so that they lie motionless on its back; most surely there are signs in this for every patient, grateful one
Or He may make them perish for what they have earned, though He forgives much
And that those who dispute about Our revelations may know that they have no refuge
So whatever thing you are given, that is only a provision of the life of this world, and that which is with Allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
And those who. shun the great sins and indecencies, and whenever they are angry they forgive
And those who respond to their Lord and establish prayer, and whose conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and who spend out of what We have given them
And those who, when great wrong afflicts them, defend themselves
And the recompense of evil is punishment like it, but whoever forgives and amends, he shall have his reward from Allah; surely He does not love the unjust
And whoever defends himself after he has been wronged (or been oppressed), for such there is no blame against them
The blame is only against those who oppress men and revolt (insolently exceed all bounds) in the earth unjustly; these shall have a painful punishment
And whoever is patient and forgiving, these most surely are actions of courage and resolution
And whomsoever Allah makes err, he has no guardian after Him; and you shall see the unjust, when they see the punishment, saying, "Is there any way to return
And you shall see them brought before it (the Fire) humbled by disgrace, looking with veiled eyes (or furtively). And those who believe shall say, "Surely the true losers are they who have lost themselves and their followers on the Day of Resurrectio
And they shall have no friends to help them instead of Allah; whomsoever Allah sends astray, for him there is no road
Hearken to your Lord before there comes the Day from your Lord which there is no averting; you shall have no refuge on that Day, nor shall there be room for denial
But if they turn away, We have not sent you as a warder over them; yours is only to deliver (the message). Surely when We make man taste mercy from Us, he rejoices there at; and if an evil afflicts them on account of what their hands have already done, th
Unto Allah belongs the sovereignty (or kingdom) of the heavens and the earth; He creates what He wills; He bestows daughters to whom He will and bestows sons to whom He will
Or He mingles them, male and female; and He makes barren whom He wills; verily, He is the Knower, Powerful
And it is not for any mortal that Allah should speak to them unless it be by revelation or from behind a veil, or He sends a messenger to reveal what He will by His leave. Lo, He is Exalted, Wise
And thus did We reveal to you (Muhammad) an inspired Book by Our command. You did not know what the Book was, nor what the faith was, but We made it a light, guiding thereby whom We will of Our servants; and most surely you guide unto the Straight Way
The Way of Allah, to Whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth; now surely to Allah do all affairs eventually come
Ha Mim. (two mystical letters)
By the Book that makes things clear
Surely We have made it an Arabic Lecture (Quran) that you may understand
And surely it is in the Mother of the Books with Us, truly sublime, full of wisdom
What! Shall We, then, turn away the Reminder (Quran) from you altogether because you are a wanton (transgressing) people
And how many a prophet have We sent among the ancients
And there came not to them a prophet but they mocked at him
Then We destroyed those who were stronger than these in prowess, and the case of the ancients has gone before them
And if you should ask them, "Who created the heavens and the earth?" they would most certainly say, "The Mighty, the Knower, has created them
Yea, He Who made the earth a resting-place for you, and made in it ways for you that you may go aright
And Who sends down water from the cloud according to a measure, then We raise to life thereby a dead land, even thus shall you be brought forth
And He Who created pairs of all things, and made for you of the ships and the cattle that you ride on
That you may firmly sit on their backs, then remember the favour of your Lord when you are firmly seated thereon, and say, "Glory be to Him Who made this subservient to us, for we could not do it by ourselves
And surely to our Lord we are returning
And yet they attribute to His servants a share in the Godhead; truly man is ungrateful
What! Has He taken daughters to Himself out of what He Himself creates and chosen you to have sons
And when one of them is given news (of the birth) of that of which he sets up as a likeness for the Beneficent Allah (i.e. daughters), his face becomes black and he is full of rage
What! (Liken they Allah to) that which is bred among ornaments and which in disputes cannot make itself plain (or give an account of itself)
And they make the angels, who are the servants of the Beneficent Allah, female (divinities). What! Did they witness their creation? Their evidence shall be recorded and they shall be questioned
And they say, "If the Beneficent Allah had pleased, we should never have worshipped them." They have no knowledge of this; they only lie
Or have We given them a book before it (the Quran) so that they hold fast to it
Nay! They say, "We found our fathers in a religion, and surely we are guided by their footsteps
And even so, We did not send before you (Muhammad) any Warner into any town, but those who led easy lives in it (the wealthy or leisured) said, "Surely we found our fathers in a religion, and surely we will follow in their footsteps
He (The Warner) said, "What! Even if I bring to you a better guide than that in which you found your fathers?" They said, "Lo! We deny that you are sent (or that with which you are sent)
So We inflicted retribution on them, then see how was the end of the rejecters
And when Abraham said to his father and his people, "Surely I am innocent of what you worship
Save Him Who created me, for surely He will guide me
And he left it as a word to endure in his posterity that they may return (to Allah)
Nay! I let them and their fathers enjoy life until there came to them the Truth and a Messenger making things clear
And when the Truth came to them they said, "This is magic, and lo! We are disbelievers in it
And they say, "Why was not this Quran revealed to a man of importance in the two towns
Will they distribute (portion out, administer) the mercy of your Lord? We distribute among them their livelihood in the life of this world, and We have exalted some of them above others in degrees, that some of them may take others in subjection (or take)
And were it not that all mankind might have become of a single (evil) community (or way of life), We might well have assigned to those who blaspheme against the Beneficent silver for the roofs of their houses and the stairs by which they ascend
And for the doors of their houses and the couches on which they recline
And also ornaments of gold. But all this is naught but provision of the life of this world, and the Hereafter with your Lord is only for the righteous (or those who guard against evil)
And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the Beneficent (Allah), We appoint for him a devil (or a Satan), who becomes his comrade
And most surely they turn them away from the path, and they think that they are guided aright
Until when he comes to Us, he says (to his devil), "O would that between me and you there were the distance of the two Easts"; evil, indeed, is the companion
And since you were wrong-doers, it will not profit you this day that you are sharers in the chastisement
What! Can you (O Muhammad) make the deaf to hear or guide the blind and him who is in clear error
But if We should take you away, still We shall inflict retribution on them
Or We will show you that which We have promised them; for surely We are the possessors of full power over them
Therefore hold fast to that which has been revealed to you; surely you are on the Straight Way
And most surely it (the Quran) is a Reminder for you and your people, and you shall soon be questioned
And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before you: Did We ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Beneficent
And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations to Pharaoh and his chiefs, so he said, "Surely I am the Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds
But when he came to them with Our signs, lo! They laughed at them
And every sign that We showed them was greater than its predecessor, and We overtook them with chastisement that they may turn (to Us)
And they said, "O sorcerer! Call on your Lord for our sake, by the covenant He has made with you; we shall surely become followers of the right way
But when We removed from them the chastisement, lo! They broke the pledge
And Pharaoh proclaimed amongst his people, saying, "O my people! Is not the sovereignty of Egypt mine? And these rivers which flow beneath me; do you not then see
Nay! I am surely better than this fellow, who is a contemptible wretch, and who can hardly speak distinctly (or plainly)
But why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him, or why have there not come with him angels as companions
So he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him: surely they were a transgressing people
Then when they displeased Us, We inflicted a retribution on them, so We drowned them every one
And We made them a precedent and example to the later generations
And when the example of the son of Mary (Jesus) is given, lo! Your people raise a clamour (of ridicule) there at
And they say, "Are our gods better, or is he?" They raise not the objection save by way of disputation; nay, they are a contentious people
He was naught but a servant on whom We bestowed favour, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel
And if We please, We could make among you angels to be vicegerents (or successors) in the land
And most surely it is (the above events or the Quran or he, Jesus) is a sign of the knowledge of coming of the Hour (of Resurrection and Judgment), therefore have no doubt about it and follow Me: this is the Straight Way
And let not the Satan prevent you; surely he is your open enemy
And when Jesus came with clear arguments he said, "I have come unto you with wisdom, and that I may make clear to you some of that wherein you differ; so be careful of your duty to Allah and obey me
Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this is the right path." (See John)
But parties from among them differed, so woe to those who do wrong because of the chastisement of a painful day
Do they wait for aught but the Hour, that it should come upon them all of a sudden while they perceive not
The friends shall on that day be enemies one to another, except those who guard (against evil)
O My servants! There is no fear for you this day, nor shall you grieve
Those who believed in Our revelations and Surrendered (in Islam)
Enter you the Garden, you and your wives, rejoicing
There shall be sent round to them golden plates and cups and therein shall be all that their souls desire, and delights the eyes, and you shall abide therein
Such will be the Garden which you are given as an inheritance for what you did
For you therein are abundant fruits of which you shall eat with full satisfaction
Surely the guilty shall abide in the chastisement of hell
It shall not be abated from them and they shall despair therein
It is not We who are unjust to them, but it is they who were unjust to themselves
And they shall call out, "O Malik! Let your Lord make an end of us." He shall say, "Verily, here you must remain
Certainly We have brought you the Truth, but most of you are averse to the Truth
Or have they settled affairs? But it is We who are the Settlers
Or do they think that We do not hear what they conceal and their secret discourses? Indeed We do, and Our messengers are with them, recording
Say, "If the Beneficent has a son, I am the foremost of those who serve him
Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne (of Authority), from what they describe
So leave them flounder in false discourses and sporting until they meet their Day which they are promised
And He it is Who is God in the heavens and God in the earth; and He is the Wise, the Knower
And blessed is He Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, and with Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and to Him shall you be returned
And those whom they call upon besides Him have no power of intercession, except he who bears witness unto the Truth with sure knowledge (or they know him -i.e. Muhammad)
And if you should ask them who created them, they would certainly say, "Allah." Whence are they then turned away
Consider his (the Prophet´s) cry, "O my Lord! Surely they are a people who do not believe
So turn away from them and say, "Peace", for they shall soon come to know
Ha Mim
By the Book that makes plain
Lo! We revealed it on a blessed night - Lo! We are ever warning (against evil and its consequences)
Therein (the blessed night) every wise affair is made clear
A command from Us; surely We are ever the senders (of revelations)
As a mercy from your Lord. Surely He is the Hearer, the Knower
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, if you would be sure (in faith)
There is no God but He; He quickens and causes death, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
Nay, but they make sport in doubt
Therefore, keep waiting for the day when the heaven shall bring evident smoke (or mist)
That shall overtake men; this is a painful punishment
(They pray,) "Our Lord! Remove from us the punishment; surely we are believers
How can they remember (or understand Allah or the message), when a Messenger making clear (the truth) had already come to them
Butt they had turned their backs on him and said, "He is one taught by others, a madman
Lo! We remove the punishment a little, (but) you will surely return (to evil)
On the day when We will seize them with a mighty seizing, We will indeed exact retribution
And certainly We tried before them the people of Pharaoh, and there came to them a noble Messenger
Saying, "Deliver to me the servants of Allah; surely I am a trustworthy messenger unto you
And be not arrogant against Allah, for I come with clear authority
And surely I have taken refuge with my Lord and your Lord against your stoning me to death
And if you put no faith in me, then let me go
Then he called upon his Lord, "These are a guilty people
(The reply came,) "So go forth with My servants by night; for surely you will be pursued
And leave the sea divided (as a furrow); surely they are a host that shall be drowned
How many are the gardens and springs they have left behind
And corn fields and noble places
And goodly things wherein they rejoiced
Thus it was, and We gave them as a heritage to another people
So the heaven and the earth did not weep for them, nor were they respited
And certainly We delivered the children of Israel from the abasing chastisement
From Pharaoh; surely he was haughty, (and) one of those who committed excesses
And certainly We chose them, knowingly (or purposely), above all the nations
And We gave them signs wherein was a clear trial
Lo! These (the pagan Arabs) say
There is naught but our first death and we shall not be raised again
Bring back our fathers, if you are truthful
What! Are they better than the people of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them, for surely they were guilty
And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them in sport
We create them both not, except with truth, but most of them know not
Assuredly the Day of Decision (or of Sorting) is the term appointed for all of them
The day on which friend can in naught avail friend, nor can they be helped
Save those on whom Allah has mercy; surely He is the Mighty the Merciful
Behold the tree of Zaqqum
Is the food of the sinful
Like molten brass, it shall boil in (their) bellies
Like the seesing of boiling water
(It will be said,) "Seize him, then drag him down into the midst of hell
Then pour above his head of the torment of the boiling water
Saying, ´Taste; lo! You were forsooth the mighty, the noble
´Surely this is what you used to doubt!´
Surely the righteous are in a secure place
Amidst Gardens and springs
Attired in fine silk and rich brocade, face to face
Thus shall it be, and We will join them with Houris (pure and beautiful companions) with wide, lovely eyes
They shall call in safety therein for every fruit
They taste not death therein except the first death (i.e. in this physical life), and He will have saved them from the doom of hell
A grace from your Lord; this is the supreme achievement (or triumph)
Verily We have made it (the Quran) easy in your tongue that they may be mindful
Therefore wait (O Muhammad); they too are waiting
Ha Mim
The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
Most surely in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the believers
And in your own creation and in what He spreads abroad of animals there are signs for a people that have faith
And in the variation of the night and the day, and in the sustenance Allah sends down from the clouds, then gives life thereby to the earth after its death, and in the changing of the winds, there are signs for a people who understand
These are the Signs of Allah which We recite to you with Truth; then in what explanations would they believe after (rejecting) Allah and His Signs
Woe to every sinful dealer in falsehood
Who hears the Signs of Allah recited to him, then persists proudly as though he had not heard them; so announce to him a grievous punishment
And when he comes to know of any of Our revelations, he takes it for a jest; these it is that shall have abasing doom
Before them is Hell, and there shall not avail them aught of what they earned, nor those whom they took for guardians besides Allah, and they shall have an awful doom
This is guidance; and as for those who disbelieve in the revelations of their Lord, they shall have a painful penalty because of their abominations
It is Allah Who has made subservient to you the sea that the ships may run therein by His command, and that you may seek of His grace, and that you may give thanks
And He has subjected to you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, all from Himself; most surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect
Tell those who believe that they should forgive those who fear (or hope) not the days of Allah, that He may reward a people for what they earn
Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it is against it; then you shall be brought back to your Lord
And certainly We gave the Book and the Wisdom and the Prophecy to the children of Israel, and We gave them of the goodly things, and We made them excel over other nations
And We gave them clear commandments in (religious) affairs, but they did not differ until after knowledge had come to them, through rivalry among themselves; surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they
And now have We set you on a clear course in (religious) affairs, therefore follow it, and do not follow the low desires of those who know not
Surely they shall not avail you in the least against Allah; and surely the unjust are friends of each other, and Allah is the guardian of those who guard (against evil)
These are clear proofs for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy for a people who have sure faith
What! Do those who have wrought evil deeds think that We will make them like those who believe and do good - that their life and their death shall be equal? Ill is their judgment
And Allah created the heavens and the earth with Truth and that every soul may be rewarded for what it has earned and they shall not be wronged
Have you then considered him who takes his vain desire for his God, and Allah has made him err purposely (or knowingly) and has set a seal upon his ear and his heart (understanding) and put a covering upon his eye. Who can then guide him after Allah? Will
And they say, "There is nothing but our life in this world; we live and die and nothing destroys us but time", and they have no knowledge of that; they only conjecture
And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, their argument is no other than that they say, "Bring our fathers back if you are truthful
Say, "Allah gives you life, then He makes you die, then will He gather you to the Day of Resurrection wherein is no doubt", but most people know not
And Allah´s is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and on the Day when the Hour shall come to pass, on that Day shall those who follow falsehoods (illusions) perish
And you shall see every people (sect, community or nation) kneeling down; every nation shall be called to its Book (or Record, or will be judged by its scripture): this day shall you be requited for what you did
This is Our book that speaks against you with truth (or justice); surely We cause to be recorded all what you do
Then as to those who believed and did good, their Lord will make them enter into His mercy; that is the manifest achievement (or triumph)
As to those who disbelieved (it will be said,) "What! Were not Our revelations recited unto you? But you were proud and became a guilty people
And when it was said, "Surely the promise of Allah is true and as for the Hour, there is no doubt about it", you said, "We do not know what the Hour is; we do not think that it will come to pass save a passing thought, and we are not convin
And the evil consequences of what they did shall become manifest to them and that which they mocked shall encompass them
And it shall be said, "Today We forsake you as you neglected the meeting of this Day of yours and your abode is the Fire, and there are not for you any helpers
That is because you took the Signs of Allah for a jest and the life of this world deceived you." So on that Day they shall not be brought forth from it, nor shall they be granted Grace
Therefore to Allah is due all praise, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, the Lord of all worlds
And unto Him alone belongs Majesty in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
Ha Mim
The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise
We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them two save with Truth and for an appointed term; and those who disbelieve turn aside from what they are warned of
Say, "Have you considered what you call upon besides Allah? Show me what they have created of the earth, or have they a share in the heavens? Bring me a Book before this or traces of knowledge (confirming this), if you are truthful
And who is in greater error than he who calls besides Allah upon those that will not answer him till the Day of Resurrection and they are heedless of their call
And when mankind are gathered together they shall be their enemies, and shall be deniers of having been worshipped
And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who disbelieve say of the truth when it comes to them, "This is mere magic (or sorcery)
Nay! They say, "He has forged (invented) it." Say, "If I have forged (invented) it, still you do not control anything for me from Allah; He knows best what you utter concerning it; He is enough as a witness between me and you, and He is the
Say, "I am not the first of (or new thing among) the Messengers, and I do not know what will be done with me or with you: I do not follow anything but that which is revealed to me, and I am nothing but a plain Warner
Say, "Have you considered :- if it is from Allah, and you disbelieve in it, and a witness from among the Children of Israel testifies to its similarity with earlier Scriptures, and he believed, while you are inflated with pride; surely Allah does not
And those who disbelieve say concerning those who believe, "If it had been good, they would not have accepted it ahead of us." And as they do not seek to be rightly directed thereby, they say, "It is an old lie
And before it the Book of Moses was a guide and a mercy: and this is a Book verifying it in the Arabic language that it may warn those who are unjust and as good news for the doers of good
Surely those who say, "Our Lord is Allah, then they continue on the right way, they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve
These are the dwellers of the Garden, abiding therein: a reward for what they did
And We have enjoined on man kindness (doing of good) to his parents; with trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble did she bring him forth; and the bearing of him and the weaning of him was thirty months; until when he attains his maturity and rea
These are they from whom We accept the best of what they have done and pass over their evil deeds; (they are) among the dwellers of the Garden; the promise of truth which they were promised
And he who says to his parents, "Fie on you! Do you threaten me that I shall be brought forth when generations have already passed away before me?" And they both (parents) call for Allah´s aid, (rebuking their son) "Woe to you! Have f
These are they against whom the word has proved true among nations of the jinn and mankind that have already passed away before them; surely they are losers
And for all are degrees according to what they did, and that He may pay them back fully their deeds and they shall not be wronged
And on the Day when those who disbelieve shall be brought before the Fire, (it will be said,) "You did squander your good things in the life of the world and you enjoyed them for a while; now this day you shall be rewarded with the punishment of abas
And mention the brother of A´ad; when he warned his people in the wind-curved sand-hills - and indeed Warners came before him and after him - saying, "Serve none but Allah; surely I fear for you the punishment of a grievous day
They said, "Have you come to us to turn us away from our gods; then bring upon us that wherewith you threaten us, if you are of the truthful
He said, "The knowledge is only with Allah, and I deliver to you the message with which I am sent, but I see you are an ignorant people
So when they saw it (the threat) as a cloud in the sky advancing towards their valleys, they said, "This is a cloud which will give us rain." "Nay! It is (the calamity) which you sought to hasten on, a blast of wind in which is a painful pu
Destroying everything by the command of its Lord." Then by the morning they became such that naught could be seen except (the ruins of) their dwellings. Thus do We reward the guilty people
And certainly We had established (empowered, blessed) them in what We have not established (empowered, blessed) you (the Arabs) in, and We had given them (the faculties of) hearing and seeing and feeling, but neither their hearing, nor their seeing, nor t
And certainly We destroyed the towns which are around you, and We repeat the revelations that they might turn (towards Allah)
Why did not then those help them whom they took for gods besides Allah to draw them nigh (to Him)? Nay! They were lost to them; and this was their lie and what they forged
And when We turned towards you (O Muhammad) a party of the jinn listened to the Quran; so when they came in its presence (or influence), they said, "Be silent"; then when it was finished, they turned back to their people warning (them)
They said, "O our people! We have listened to a Book revealed after Moses verifying that which is before it, guiding to the truth and to a Straight Way
O our people! Accept the Divine Caller and believe in Him, He will forgive you of your faults and protect you from a painful punishment
And whoever does not accept the Divine Caller, he shall not escape in the earth and he shall not have guardians besides Him, these wander in manifest error
See they not that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and was not tired by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Aye! He has surely power over all things
And on the day when those who disbelieve shall be brought before the Fire, (they will be asked,) "Is it not true?" They shall say, "Aye! By our Lord!" He will say, "Then taste the punishment, because you used to deny (the Truth)
Therefore persevere patiently (O Muhammad) as did the messengers endowed with constancy, and do not seek to hasten for them (their doom). On the day that they shall see what they are promised they shall be as if they had not waited save an hour of the day
Those who disbelieve and turn away (people) from Allah´s way; He shall render their works ineffective
And as for those who believe and do good, and believe in what has been revealed to Muhammad - and it is the very truth from their Lord - He will remove their evil from them and improve their condition
That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, and because those who believe follow truth from their Lord. Thus Allah makes their similitudes for mankind
So when you meet in battle those who disbelieve, then smite their necks until when you have overcome them, make them prisoners, and afterwards either set them free as a favour or let them ransom themselves until the war terminates. That is the command. An
He will guide them and improve their condition
And cause them to enter the Garden which He has made known to them
O you who believe! If you help (the cause of) Allah, He will help you and make firm your feet
And as for those who disbelieve, for them is destruction and He has made their deeds ineffective
That is because they hated what Allah revealed, so He rendered their actions fruitless
Have they not then journeyed in the land and seen what was the end of those before them? Allah brought down destruction upon them, and the disbelievers shall have the like of it
That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, and because the rejecters (unbelievers) have no protector
Surely Allah will make those who believe and do good enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow; and those who disbelieve enjoy this life and eat even as the beasts eat, and the Fire is their abode
And how many a town which was far more powerful than your town (Mecca) which has driven you out, did We destroy, so there was no helper for them
What! Is he who has a clear argument (or relies on clear proof) from his Lord like him to whom the evil of his work is made fair-seeming when they follow their own lusts (or low desires)
A similitude of the Garden which those guarding their duty (to Allah against evil) are promised: therein are rivers of water unpolluted (or incorruptible), and rivers of milk the taste whereof never changes, and rivers of wine delicious to those who drink
And there are those of them who seek to listen to you, until when they go forth from you, they say to those who have been given the knowledge, "What was it that he said just now?" These are they upon whose heart Allah has set a seal and they fol
And as for those who follow the right direction, He increases them in guidance and bestows on them their piety and restraint (against evil)
Do they then wait for aught but the Hour that it should come to them of a sudden? But already have come some tokens of it, but how can they take warning when it comes on them
So know that there is no God but Allah, and, ask protection for your fault and for the believing men and the believing women; and Allah knows the place of your returning and the place of your abiding (or how you move about and how you live)
And those who believe say, "Why has not a chapter been revealed?" But when a decisive chapter is revealed, and fighting is mentioned therein, you see those in whose heart is a disease look at you with the look of one fainting because of (fear or)
Obedience and just (or civil, appropriate) words would be proper; but when the affair becomes settled, then if they remain true to Allah it would certainly be better for them
But if you held command, would you make mischief in the land and cut off the ties of kinship
These it is whom Allah has cursed so He has made them deaf and blinded their eyes
Do they not then meditate on the Quran or are there locks on the heart
Surely those who turn their backs after guidance has become manifest to them, Satan has seduced them, and He gives them reign (or Satan gives them false hopes)
That is because they say to those who hate what Allah has revealed, "We will obey you in only some matters." and Allah knows their secrets
But how will it be when the angels take their souls in death and smite their faces and their backs
That is because they follow what is displeasing to Allah and are averse to His pleasure, therefore, He has made null their deeds
Or do those in whose heart is a disease think that Allah will not bring forth their secret faults
And if We willed We could have made you (Muhammad) know them so that you would certainly have recognised them by their marks. And you shall certainly recognize them by the intent (tone) of their speech; and Allah knows your deeds
And most certainly We will try you until We have tested those among you who strive hard, and the steadfast, and made your case manifest
Surely those who disbelieve and turn away from Allah´s way and oppose the Messenger after that guidance has become clear to them cannot harm Allah in any way, and He will make null their deeds
O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle, and do not make your actions vain
Surely those who disbelieve and turn away from Allah´s way, then they die while they are disbelievers, Allah will by no means forgive them
And be not faint-hearted, crying for peace, when you should be uppermost, and Allah is with you, and He will not bring your deeds to naught
The life of this world is only idle sport and pastime, and if you believe and guard (against evil) He will give you your wages, and will not ask of you your possessions
If He should ask you for it and urge you, you will be niggardly, and He will bring forth your ill feelings
Behold! You are those who are called upon to spend in Allah´s way, but among you are those who are niggardly (or hoard), and whoever is niggardly is niggardly against his own soul; and Allah is the Rich (Self-sufficient) and you are the poor (having)
Surely We have given to you a clear victory
That Allah may forgive your community their past faults and those to come, and complete His favour to you and keep you on a Straight Way
And that Allah might help you with powerful help
He it is Who sent down tranquillity into the heart of the believers that they might have more of faith added to their faith - for Allah´s are the hosts (forces) of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Knowing, Wise
That He may cause the believing men and the believing women to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow to abide therein, and remove from them their evil; and that, in the sight of Allah, is the supreme achievement (or triumph)
And that He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, who entertain evil thoughts about Allah. For them is the evil turn of fortune, and Allah is wroth with them and has cursed them and pr
Allah´s are the hosts (or forces) of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is Mighty, Wise
Surely We have sent you (O Muhammad) as a witness and as a bearer of good news and as a Warner
That you (mankind) may believe in Allah and His Messenger and may aid Him and revere Him; and that you may declare His glory, morning and evening
Surely those who swear allegiance unto you (O Muhammad) do but swear allegiance to Allah; the hand of Allah is above their hands. Therefore, whoever breaks his faith, he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul, and whoever fulfils what he has covenan
Those of the dwellers of the desert who were left behind will say to you, "Our property and our families kept us busy, so ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in their heart. Say, "Then who can control anything f
Nay! You rather thought that the messenger and the believers would not ever return to their families, and this was made fair-seeming to your heart, and you thought an evil thought and you were a worthless people
And whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger - Lo! We have prepared a blazing Fire for the disbelievers
And Allah´s is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Those who are left behind will say when you set forth to capture booty, "Allow us to follow you." They fain would change the verdict of Allah. Say, "By no means shall you follow us; thus did Allah say before." But they will say
Say to those of the dwellers of the desert who were left behind: "You shall soon be invited to fight against a people possessing mighty prowess; you will fight against them or they will submit; then if you obey, Allah will grant you a good reward; an
There is no blame for the blind, nor is there any blame for the lame, nor is there any blame for the sick if they do not go forth to war; and whoever obeys Allah and His Apostle, He will cause him to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow, and whoever tu
Certainly Allah´s Good Pleasure was on the believers when they swore allegiance unto you under the tree, and He knew what was in their heart, so He sent down peace (or tranquillity) on them and rewarded them with a near victory
And many gains which they will acquire; and Allah is Mighty, Wise
Allah promised you many gains which you will acquire, then He has given you this one as a foretaste and restrained the hands of men from you, that it may be a sign for the believers and that He may guide you on a Straight Way
And other gains which are not yet within your power (or have not been able to achieve), Allah will encompassed them, and Allah has power over all things
And if those who disbelieve fight with you, they would certainly turn their backs, then they would not find any protector or helper
Such has been the course (or practice or law) of Allah that has indeed run also in the past, and you shall find no power to change this course (or law) of Allah
And He it is Who held back their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of Mecca after He had given you victory over them; and Allah is Seeing what you do
It is they who disbelieved and turned you away from the Sacred Mosque and prevented the offering from reaching its destined place. Were it not for the believing men and the believing women (in Mecca), whom you knew not that you were trampling, thereby inc
When those who disbelieved harboured in their heart feelings of agitation and disdain - the agitation and disdain of the Days of Ignorance - Allah sent down His tranquillity on His Messenger and on the believers, and made them adhere to the Word (or comma)
Truly Allah had shown to His Messenger the vision: you shall most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills, in security, some with shaved heads and others with cut hair, fearless. But He knows what you do not know, and He has given you a near vic
He it is Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true religion that He may make it prevail over all the religions; and Allah is enough for a witness
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are firm of heart against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves; you will see them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace from Allah and His Good Pleasure; their marks are in the
O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His Apostle, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing
O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one another, lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive
Surely those who lower their voices before Allah´s Messenger are they whose heart Allah has proved for righteousness (or guarding against evil); they shall have forgiveness and a great reward
As for those who call out to you from behind the private apartments, surely most of them understand not
And if they wait patiently until you come out to them, it would certainly be better for them, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
O you who believe! If an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look carefully into it (do not ignore it because he is evil), lest you harm a people in ignorance, then be sorry for what you have done
And know that among you is Allah´s Messenger; should he obey you in many a matter, you would surely fall into distress, but Allah has endeared the faith to you and has made it seemly in your heart, and He has made hateful to you disbelief and transg
It is a grace and a favour from Allah; and Allah is Knowing, Wise
And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them; but if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the other, then fight you all against the one which transgresses until it returns to the commands of Allah; then if it returns, mak
The believers are naught else but brethren, therefore make peace between your brethren and be careful of your duty to Allah that mercy may be had on you
O you who believe! Let not one people deride (or ridicule) another people perchance they may be better than they, nor let women deride other women, perchance they may be better than they; and do not find fault with (or defame) your own people nor insult o
O you who believe! Avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it; and be careful of (your duty to) Alla
O mankind! Surely We have created you male and female (or from a single pair), and made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the most noble of you with Allah is the one among you most righteous (careful of his duty to Allah); surel
The dwellers of the desert (or desert Arabs) say, "We believe". Say, "You believe not, but rather say, ´We submit´; for faith has not yet entered into your heart; and if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not diminish aug
Only they are the believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger, then afterwards they doubt not and struggle hard with their wealth and their lives in the way of Allah; they are the truthful (sincere or righteous) ones
Say, "What! Will you teach Allah about your religion?" Allah knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth; and Allah is Aware of all things
They think that they do you (Muhammad) a favour by their Surrender (by becoming Muslims). Say, "Deem not your Surrender (Islam) a favour unto me; nay, It is Allah who has conferred a favour unto you, in as much as He has led you to the Faith, if you
Lo! Allah knows the unseen things of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is Seer of what you do
Qaf. I swear by the glorious Quran (that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah)
Nay! They wonder that there has come to them a Warner from among themselves, so the unbelievers say, " This is a wonderful thing
What! When we are dead and have become dust (shall we live again)? That is a far return (or far from probable or from our understanding)
We know indeed what the earth diminishes (or takes) from them (excreta or dead bodies), and with Us is a Preserved Record (or the record is preserved)
Nay, they rejected the truth when it came to them, so they are now in a state of confusion
Do they not then look up to heaven above them how We have made it and adorned it and it has no gaps (rifts or flaws)
And the earth, We have made it plain and cast in it mountains and We have made to grow therein of all beautiful kinds
As a vision (observation or spectacle) and a reminder to every penitent servant (for his delight or awe and instruction)
And We send down from the cloud water abounding in good (or blessings), then We cause to grow therewith gardens and the grain that is reaped
And the lofty palm-trees with fruit spikes closely set one above another
A sustenance for the servants (of Allah), and We give life thereby to a dead land; thus is the Resurrection
Others before them rejected (these ideas or the Prophets): the people of Noah and the dwellers of Ar-Rass and Thamud
And A´ad and Pharaoh and Lot´s brethren
And the dwellers of the Wood (Midian) and the people of Tubba; all rejected the messengers. Therefore, My threat came to pass
Were We then fatigued with (did We need rest after) the first creation? Yet are they in doubt with regard to a new creation
And certainly We created man, and We know what his soul suggests to him, and We are nearer to him than his life-vein (Jugular and Carotid)
When the two Receivers receive him, sitting on the right and on the left
He utters not a word but there is by him a watcher (sentinel, one who censors) at hand
And the stupor of death will bring truth; that is what you were trying to escape
And the Trumpet shall be blown; that is the day about which warning had been given
And every soul shall come, with it a Driver and a Witness
Certainly you were heedless of it, but now We have removed from you your veil, and piercing is your sight this day
And his companions (the Driver and the Witness) shall say, "Here (his Record) is ready with me
So cast into Hell every ungrateful, rebellious one
Forbidder of good, exceeder of limits, doubter
Who sets up another God with Allah; cast him into severe chastisement
His companion will say, "Our Lord! I did not lead him into transgression but he himself was in great error
He will say, "Do not quarrel in My presence, and indeed I gave you the warning beforehand
My word shall not be changed, nor am I in the least unjust to My servants
On the day that We will say to Hell, "Are you filled up?" And it will say, "Are there any more
And the Garden shall be brought near to those who guard against evil, not far off
This is what you were promised, (it is) for every one who turned (to Allah or was repentant), and kept His limits (or Law)
Who fears the Beneficent One in secret (or unseen or inwardly) and comes with a penitent (or devoted) heart
Enter you therein in peace, this is the day of Eternal Life (or Immortality)
They have therein all that they wish and with Us is even more
And how many a generation did We destroy before them who were mightier in prowess than they. Then they wander through (or overrun) the land; but was there for them a place of refuge (when the Judgment came)
Most surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or he gives ear and is a witness (or understands intelligently)
And certainly We created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six periods and there touched Us not any fatigue (Allah required no rest)
Therefore be patient of what they say, and sing the praise of your Lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting
And glorify Him in the night and after the prescribed prostrations
And listen for the Day when the Caller shall cry from a near place
The Day when they shall hear the Call (or Cry or Blast) in truth; that is the day of coming forth
Surely We give life and cause to die, and to Us is the final destination (or goal)
The day on which the earth shall be rent asunder from under them, they will hasten forth; that will be a gathering together easy to Us
We know best what they say, and you (O Muhammad) are not one to compel them; but admonish by means of the Quran him who fears My warning
(I swear) By the wind that scatters far and wide
And those that lift and bear heavy loads
And those that flow with ease and gentleness
And those that distribute and apportion by Our command
That of which you are warned is most surely true
And the judgment must most surely come about
Swear by the heaven (sky) full of paths (orbits)
Most surely you are in doctrines (opinions, teachings, ideologies) discordant (or inconsistent or contradictory)
He is turned away by them from truth, who would be (or wishes to be) turned away
Cursed be the conjecturers (or lie-mongers)
Who flounder heedless in an abyss (of ignorance and confusion)
They ask, "When will be the day of judgment
It is the day on which they shall be tried at the Fire
Taste you your torment! This is what you sought to hasten
Surely those who guard (against evil) shall be in Gardens and Springs
Taking joy in what their Lord gives them; surely they were before that, the doers of good
They used to sleep but little in the night
And in the morning they prayed for forgiveness
And in their wealth a portion was allotted for him who asked (the needy) and to him who was denied (the outcast, the deprived person or the one who could not ask)
And in the earth there are signs for those who have sure faith
And also in your own souls; will you not then see
And in the heaven is your sustenance and that which you are promised
And by the Lord of the heavens and the earth! It is most surely the truth, even as you speak
Has there come to you information about the honoured guests of Abraham
When they entered his presence they said, "Peace. Peace." Said he, "What a strange people
Then he turned aside to his family secretly and brought a fat (roasted) calf
And placed it before them. He said, "What! Will you not eat
(When they did not eat) he conceived in his mind a fear of them. They said, "Fear not." And they gave him the good news of a son endowed with knowledge
Then his wife came up in great grief, and she struck her face and said, "An old barren woman
They said, "Thus says your Lord: Surely He is the Wise, the Knowing
He said, "What is your errand then, O Messengers
They said, "Surely we are sent to a guilty people
That we may send down upon them stone of clay (or brimstones)
Sent forth from your Lord for the extravagant (those who transgress beyond bounds)
Then We brought forth such believers as were therein
But We found not therein but one house of those who had Surrendered (Muslims)
And We left therein a sign for those who fear the grievous penalty
And in Moses (was another sign). When We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority
But he turned away with his forces and said, "A sorcerer or a mad man
So We seized him and his hosts and hurled them into the sea and his was the blame
And in A´ad (was another sign). When We sent upon them the destructive wind
It spared naught on which it blew, but made it like dust
And in Thamud (was another sign). When it was said to them, "Enjoy yourselves for a while
But they revolted against the commandment of their Lord, so the rumbling (thunderbolt or stunning noise of an earthquake) overtook them while they looked
And they were not able to rise up, nor could they defend themselves
And the people of Noah (were also a sign) before that, surely they were a transgressing people
And the heaven, We raised it high with power, and it is We that expand the vastness of space (or We are the expanders of it)
And the earth, We have spread it out; how gracious was the Spreader thereof
And of all things have We created pairs, that you may reflect (or receive instruction)
Therefore flee unto Allah, surely I am a plain Warner to you from Him
And set not up with Allah another God: surely I am a plain Warner to you from Him
Thus there did not come to those before them a messenger but they said, "(He is) A sorcerer or a mad man
Is this the legacy (or tradition) they have transmitted to each other? Nay! They are a people extravagant (transgressing beyond bounds)
Then turn your back upon them for you are not to blame
And continue to teach (or remind), for surely the reminder profits the believers
And I have not created the jinn and mankind except to worship (serve) Me
No sustenance do I require from them, nor do I require that they should feed Me
Surely it is Allah Who is the Bestower of sustenance, the Lord of Power, the ever Steadfast
And lo! Those who do wrong shall have a portion like the portion of those of earlier generations, therefore let them not ask Me to hasten
Woe to those who disbelieve because of their Day which they are promised
(I swear) By the Mount
By a Decree inscribed
On a fine parchment, unrolled
And the much visited House
And the canopy exalted
And the swollen sea
Most surely the doom of your Lord will come to pass
There shall be none to avert it
On the day when the heaven shall heave with awful commotion
And the mountains shall move with awful movement
Then woe on that Day unto the deniers (of the truth)
Those who sport in vain discourses
The Day on which they shall be driven irresistibly to the Fire of Hell
This is the Fire which you used to deny
Is it magic then, or do you not see
Burn you therein, and whether you bear it patiently or not, it makes no difference; you shall be requited only what you did
Surely those who guard (against evil) shall be in Gardens of Bliss
Rejoicing because of what their Lord gave them, and their Lord saved them from the punishment of the burning Fire
Eat and drink with profit and health because of what you did
Reclining on thrones set in ranks, and We will unite them to large-eyed beautiful ones (Houri)
And as for those who believe and whose offspring follow them in faith, We will unite with them their offspring and We will not deprive them of naught of their work; each individual is a pledge for his own deeds
And We will provide them with fruit and flesh such as they desire
They shall pass from one to another a cup wherein there shall be nothing vain nor any sin
And round them shall serve youth devoted to them, handsome as well-guarded (preserved or hidden) pearls
And some of them shall draw near unto others, inquiring
Saying, "Surely in the past we feared for our families
But Allah has been gracious to us and He has saved us from the punishment of the Scorching Wind
Surely we called upon Him before: Surely He is the Benign, the Merciful
Therefore continue you (O Muhammad) to remind (or warn), for by the grace of your Lord, you are not a soothsayer, or a madman
Or do they say, " (he is) A poet, for whom we await a calamity of (or an accident of or caused by) time
Say, "Wait (expect) ye! I too with you am waiting (expecting)
Nay! Do their understandings bid them this? Or are they a people transgressing beyond bounds
Or do they say, "He has forged it." Nay! They will not believe
Then let them bring an announcement (or recital) like it if they are truthful
Or were they created out of nothing, or are they themselves the creators
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Nay! They have no certainty
Or have they the treasures of your Lord with them? Or have they been set in absolute authority
Or have they a ladder (unto heaven) the means by which they listen? Then let their listener bring a clear authority
Or has He daughters while you have sons
Or do you ask them for a reward, so that they are overburdened by a debt
Or have they the unseen so that they write it down
Or do they desire to plot (or ensnare)? But those who disbelieve shall be the vanquished in their plot
Or have they a God other than Allah? Glory be to Allah from what they set up (with Him)
And if they should see a portion of the heaven coming down, they would say, "Piled up clouds
Leave them then till they meet that Day of theirs wherein they shall be made to swoon (with terror)
The day on which their struggle shall not avail them aught, nor shall they be helped
And surely those who are unjust shall have a punishment besides that (in the world), but most of them understand not
And wait patiently for the decree (command, judgment) of your Lord, for verily you are in Our eyes; and hymn the praise of your Lord when you rise
And in the night, give Him glory too, and at the retreat of the stars
(I swear) By the star when it sets
Your companion (Muhammad) does not err, nor is he deceived (or astray or is misled)
Nor does he speak out of (his own) desire
It (the Quran) is naught but revelation that is inspired (sent down to him)
Taught by one of mighty power, (The Archangel Gabriel)
Endowed with wisdom; for he appeared in clear vision
While he was in the highest part of the horizon
Then he drew near, and descended
Until he was two bows distant or closer still
And He revealed to His servant what He revealed
The heart (of the Prophet) lied not in (making him see) what he saw
What! Do you then dispute with him as to what he saw
And certainly he saw him in another descent
At the Lote-tree of the furthest boundary
Near which is the Garden of Abode (or Presence)
When that which shrouds (in mystery) covered the Lote-tree
The eye did not swerve, nor did it exceed the limit (or was over bold or went wrong)
Certainly he saw of the Greatest Signs of his Lord
Have you seen Lat and Uzza
And Manat, the third, the last
What! For you the males and for Him the females
This indeed is an unjust division
They are naught but names which you have named, you and your fathers; Allah has not sent for them any authority. They follow naught but conjecture and the low desires which their souls incline to, even though true guidance has come to them from their Lord
Or shall man have whatever whims he wishes
Nay! To Allah belongs the after and the former life (or the End and the Beginning)
And how many so ever angels are in the heavens, their intercession does not avail at all except after Allah has given permission to whom He wills and chooses to accept
Most surely they who do not believe in the Hereafter name the angels with female names
And they have no knowledge of it; they do not follow anything but conjecture, and surely conjecture does not avail against the truth at all
Therefore, turn aside from him who turns his back upon Our reminder (or remembrance) and does not desire anything but the life of this world
That is their sum of knowledge; surely your Lord knows best him who goes astray from His path and He knows best him who follows the right direction
And to Allah belongs that which is in the heavens and that which is in the earth, that He may reward those who do evil according to what they do, and that He may reward those who do good with goodness
Those who keep aloof from the great sins and the indecencies, except the passing idea (or the unwilling or small offence); surely your Lord is liberal in forgiving. He knows you best when He brings you forth from the earth and when you are embryos in the
Have you then seen him who turns his back
And gives a little and then withholds
Has he the knowledge of the unseen so that he can see (the future or the hidden)
Or, has he not been informed of what is in the scriptures of Moses
And of Abraham who fulfilled (the commandments or duties)
That no bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another
And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for
And that his striving shall be seen
Then shall he be rewarded for it with the fullest reward
And that your Lord is the final goal
And that He it is Who makes men laugh and makes them weep
And that He it is Who causes death and gives life
And that He created pairs, the male and the female
From the small seed when it is placed (or lodged)
And that on Him depends (or He has ordained) the bringing forth a second time
And that He it is Who enriches and gives satisfaction (or fulfilment)
And that He is the Lord of Sirius
And that He did destroy the A´ad of old
And Thamud He spared not
And the people of Noah before them; surely they were most unjust and insolent transgressors
And He destroyed the Overthrown Cities (of Sodom and Gomorrah)
So that they were covered with that which covers
Then about which of your Lord´s gifts will you dispute
This is a Warner of (the series or like) the Warners of old
The threatened event (or Hour) draws nigh
There is none besides Allah to disclose (or actualise) it
Marvel you then at this announcement
And will you laugh and not weep
While you are indulging in vanities
So make obeisance (or prostrations) to Allah and serve Him
The hour drew nigh (or is nigh) and the moon was rent in twain (or is rent)
And if they see a Sign they turn aside and say, "Transient magic
And they call it a lie, and follow their own low desires; but every affair has its appointed term
And certainly some narratives have come to them wherein is a deterrent
Consummate wisdom - but warnings avail not
So turn your back on them for the Day when the Summoner summons them unto a terrible affair
With downcast eyes, they come forth from their graves as if they were scattered locusts
Hastening towards the Summoner. The unbelievers shall say, "This is a hard day
Before them the people of Noah rejected, yea they reject Our servant and called him mad, and he was driven away
Therefore he called upon his Lord, "I am overcome, come you then to help
So We opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth
And We caused water to gush forth from the land in springs; so the waters gathered together and rose according to a measure already ordained
And We bore him on that (the Ark) which was made of planks and nails (or ties of palm-fibre)
Floating before Our eyes, a reward for him who was rejected
And certainly We left it as a sign, but is there anyone that remembers (or takes heed)
How great was then My punishment after My warning
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will heed
A´ad treated the truth as a lie, so how great was My punishment after My warning
Surely We sent on them a tornado in a day of violent disaster
Tearing men away as if they were the trunks of palm-trees uprooted
How great was then My punishment after My warning
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will heed
Thamud rejected the warning
So they said, "What! A single mortal from among us! Shall we follow him? Most surely we shall then be in sure error and madness
Can it be that the reminder has been sent to him of all the people among us? Nay! He is an insolent liar
Ah, tomorrow shall they know who is the liar, the insolent one
Surely We shall send them the she-camel as a trial; therefore, watch them and have patience
And inform them that the water is to be shared between them; every drinking shall be regulated
But they called their companion, who took (the sword) and hamstrung her
How great was then My punishment after My warning
Surely We sent upon them a single Shout (or Blast), so they became like the dry stubble which the maker of an enclosure collects
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will heed
The people of Lot treated the warning. as a lie
Surely We sent upon them a storm with stones, except Lot´s followers; We saved them a little before daybreak
A favour from Us; thus do We reward him who gives thanks
And certainly he (Lot) warned them of Our violent punishment, but they obstinately disputed the warning
And they endeavoured to snatch away his guests from him, but We blinded their eyes; "So taste you My chastisement and My warning
And early in the morning a lasting chastisement overtook them
So taste you My chastisement after My warning
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will heed
And certainly the warning came to Pharaoh´s people
They rejected all Our Signs, so We overtook them with such a penalty as comes from One Mighty, Powerful
Are the unbelievers of yours (O Quraish) better than these, or is there an exemption for you in the Sacred Books
Or do they say, "We are a host allied together to help each other
But soon shall the hosts be routed, and they shall flee
Nay, the Hour is their promised time, and the Hour shall be most grievous and bitter
Surely it is the guilty who are in error and madness
On the day when they shall be dragged upon their faces into the Fire, "Taste the touch of hell
Surely We have created everything according to a measure
And Our command is but one, as the twinkling of an eye
And certainly We have already destroyed the likes of you, but is there anyone who will heed
And everything they did is in the Scriptures (or the Record)
And everything small and great is recorded
Surely the righteous (who guard against evil) shall dwell among Gardens and Rivers
Established in the Assembly of Truth in the presence of an Omnipotent Sovereign
The Beneficent Allah
Taught (Has made known) the Quran
He created man
Taught him speech (language, modes of expression and communication)
The sun and the moon follow courses (exactly) reckoned (in space and time)
And the stars (or herds of animals) and the trees do adore (Him)
And the heaven, He raised it high, and He made the Balance (or set the measure)
That you may not exceed the measure (or transgress beyond limits)
But keep the measure strictly (with justice or equity) nor fall short of it (or be deficient in measuring)
And the earth, has He set out for (His) creatures
Therein is fruit and palms having sheathed clusters
And the grain with its husk and fragrant herbs
Which then of the bounties (favours, gifts)) of your Lord will you deny
He created man from dry clay like earthen vessels (as containers)
And He created the jinn of a flame of (or of smokeless) fire
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
He is the Lord of the two Easts and Lord of the two Wests
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
He has made the two seas (streams or bodies of water, salt and sweet) to flow freely so that they meet together
Between them is a barrier which they do not transgress
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
There come forth from them pearls and coral
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
And His are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
All that is therein (on earth) must pass away
And there remains naught but the Countenance of your Lord of Might and Glory (or of Majesty and Nobility (Bounty and Honour)
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
All those who are in the heavens and the earth entreat (or need) Him; every moment is He in a (new?) state of Glory (or wields universal power)
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Soon will We apply Ourselves to you, O you two worlds (men and jinn or outer and inner, manifest and hidden)
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
O assembly of the jinn and the men! If you are able to pass through the regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through; you cannot pass through but with authority
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
The flames of fire (to burn) and smoke (to choke) will be sent on you two, then you will have no defence
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
And when the heaven is rent asunder and then becomes red like red hide
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
So on that day neither man nor jinn shall be asked about his sin
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
The guilty shall be recognized by their marks, so they shall be seized by the forelocks and the feet
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
This is the hell which the guilty called a lie
They go circling between it and hot, boiling water
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
And for him who fears to stand before his Lord are two Gardens
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Containing in them various kinds (trees and delights)
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
In both of them are two fountains (or streams) flowing
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
In both of them are two pairs of every fruit
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Reclining on beds, the inner coverings of which are of silk brocade; and the fruits of the two gardens shall be within reach
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
In them shall be those who are chaste with restrained glances; whom neither man nor jinn shall have touched before them
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
As though they were rubies and corals (or pearls)
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Is the reward of goodness other than goodness
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
And besides these two are two other Gardens
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Both dark-green in colour (the colour of foliage well watered)
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
In both of them are two springs gushing forth
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
In both are fruits and date-palms and pomegranates
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
In them are goodly things and beautiful ones
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Pure ones confined to pavilions
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Man has not touched them before them nor jinn
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Reclining on green cushions and rich carpets of beauty
Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny
Blessed be the name of your Lord, Mighty and Glorious
When the Inevitable Event comes to pass
There is no denying that it will come
Abasing some, exalting others
When the earth shall be shaken to its foundations
And the mountains shall be crumbled
So that they shall be as scattered dust
And you shall be sorted into three classes
First the companions of the right hand - what will be the companions of the right hand
And then the companions of the left hand - what will be the companions of the left hand
And those foremost (in faith) will be the foremost (in the Hereafter)
These are they who are drawn nigh (to Allah)
In the Gardens of Bliss
A multitude of those of old
And a few of those of later times
On thrones decorated
Reclining on them, facing one another
Round about them shall serve youths of permanent freshness (immortal or never altering in age)
With goblets and ewers and a cup filled from a pure fountain
They shall not suffer with headache thereby, nor shall they get intoxicated (or exhausted)
And fruits such as they choose
And the flesh of fowl and any as they desire
And pure, beautiful companions
The like of the well-preserved pearls
A reward for what they used to do
They shall not hear therein vain or sinful discourse
Except the saying, "Peace! Peace
And the companions of the right hand; what of the companions of the Right Hand
Amid thornless Lote-trees
And tall trees with clusters of flowers (or fruits) one above another
And spreading shade
And water flowing constantly
And abundant fruit
Neither intercepted nor forbidden
And exalted thrones
Surely We have created them into a new creation
And made them virgins pure
Loving friends, equals in age
For the sake of the companions of the right hand
A multitude of those of old
And a multitude of those of later times
And those of the left hand; what of those of the Left Hand
In hot wind and boiling water
And the shade of black smoke
Neither cool nor honourable
Surely they were before this made to live in ease and plenty
And they persisted in the great violation (or great sin)
And they used to say, "What! When we die and have become dust and bones, shall we then indeed be raised
Or our fathers of yore
Say, "The first and the last
Shall most surely be gathered together for the appointed hour of a known day
Then shall you, O you who err and call it a lie
Most surely eat of a tree of Zaqqum
And fill your bellies therewith
Then drink over it boiling water
And drink as drinks the thirsty camel
This is their entertainment on the Day of Requital
We have created you, why do you not then assent
Have you considered the seed (or what you emit)
Is it you that create it or are We the creators
We have ordained death among you and We are not to be frustrated
That We may transfigure you and make you grow into what you know not
And certainly you know the first growth, why do you not then reflect
Have you considered what you sow
Is it you that cause it to grow, or are We the cause
If We willed, We could crumble it to powder, then would you lament
Surely we are burdened with debt
Nay! We are deprived
Have you considered the water which you drink
Is it you that send it down from the clouds, or are We the senders
If We willed, We could have made it salty; why do you not then give thanks
Have you considered the fire which you strike
Is it you that produce the trees for it, or are We the producers
We have made it a reminder and a convenience for the dwellers of the deserts
Therefore, glorify the name of your Lord, the Supreme
But nay! I swear by the setting (or falling or fading) of stars
And most surely it is a very great oath if you only knew
Most surely it is an honoured Quran
In a book that is protected
None shall touch it save the purified ones
A revelation by the Lord of the worlds
Do you then hold this announcement in contempt
And make denial of it your means of subsistence
Why then do you not (intervene) when the soul comes up to the throat (of a dying person)
And you the while look on
And We are nearer to it (the soul) than you, but you see not
Then why, if you are not under Our authority
Force back (the soul), if you are truthful (about your independence)
Then if he is one of those Near to Allah
(There is for him) Satisfaction and Bounty and a Garden of Bliss
And if he is one of those on the Right Hand
Then (the salutation) "Peace to you" from the companions of the Right Hand
And if he is one of the rejecters, the erring ones
He shall have an entertainment of boiling water
And burning in Hell
Most surely this is a certain truth (or the Truth of Certainty)
Therefore glorify the name of your Lord, the Supreme
Whatever is in the heavens and the earth declares the glory of Allah, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He gives life and causes death; and He has power over all things
He is the First and the Last and the Evident (or Outer) and the Imminent (or Hidden or Inner), and He is Aware of all things
He it is who created the heavens and the earth in six periods, then He firmly established Himself on the Throne (of authority); He knows that which goes deep down into the earth and that which comes forth out of it, and that which comes down from the heav
His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and to Allah are (all) affairs returned
He causes the night to enter in upon the day, and causes the day to enter in upon the night, and He is Aware of what is in the heart
Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and spend out of what He has made you heirs (or trustees); for those of you who believe and spend shall have a great reward
And what reasons have you that you should not believe in Allah? And the Messenger calls on you that you may believe in your Lord, and indeed He has made a covenant with you if you are believers
He it is who sends down clear revelations upon His servant, that he may bring you forth from darkness into light; and lo! For you Allah is most Kind, Merciful
And what reason have you that you should not spend in Allah´s way? For Allah´s is the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. Not alike among you are those who spent and fought before the victory (and those who did not): they are more exalte
Who is there that will offer to Allah a goodly loan that He may double it (or increase it many fold) for him, and he shall have an excellent reward
On that day you will see the faithful men and the faithful women, their light shining forth before them and on their right hand, (and it will be said,) "Good news for you this day: Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein," That is th
On the day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say to those who believe, "Wait for us, that we may borrow a light from your light"; it shall be said, "Turn back and seek a light." Then there will separate them a w
They will cry unto them, "Were we not with you?" They shall say, "Yea! But you caused yourselves to fall into temptation, and you waited and doubted, and vain desires deceived you till the ordinance (punishment) of Allah came, while the Arc
So today ransom shall not be accepted from you nor from those who disbelieved; your abode is the Fire; it is your patron and evil is the destination
Has not the time ripe for those who believe that their heart should submit to the remembrance (or the Reminder) of Allah and to what has been revealed of the truth? And that they should not become like those who were given the Book before, but the term wa
Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death; indeed, We have made the revelations clear to you that you may understand
Surely the charitable men and the charitable women and those who set apart for Allah a goodly portion, it shall be doubled for them and they shall have a noble reward
And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers, these it is that are the truthful and the faithful ones in the sight of their Lord: they shall have their reward and their light, and as for those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations, these are the
Know that the life of this world is only sport and play and idle talk and boasting among yourselves, and a rivalry in the multiplication of wealth and children; like the vegetation after rain, whereof the growth pleases the husbandmen; but then it withers
Hasten to forgiveness from your Lord and to a Garden the extensiveness of which is as the extensiveness of the heaven and the earth; it is prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers; that is the grace of Allah: He gives it to whom He wills
No evil (or disaster) befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is in a Book before We bring it into existence; surely that is easy to Allah
So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant at what He has given you; and Allah does not love any arrogant boaster
Those who are niggardly (or hoard) and enjoin niggardliness (or avarice) on men; and whoever turns back, then surely Allah is He Who is the Absolute (Self-sufficient), the Owner of Praise
Certainly We sent Our messengers with clear arguments, and sent down with them the Book and the Balance that men may conduct themselves with equity; and We have sent down Iron, wherein is mighty power (or War) and advantages to men, and that Allah may kno
And certainly We sent Noah and Abraham and We gave to their offspring the gift of prophecy and the Book; so there are among them those who go aright, but most of them are transgressors
Then We made Our Messengers to follow in their footsteps, and We sent Jesus, son of Mary afterwards, and We bestowed on him the Gospel, and We put in the heart of those who followed him kindness and mercy; but monkery (or monasticism), they invented it
O you who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah and believe in His Messengers: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and provide for you a Light with which you will walk, and forgive you, for Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
So that the followers of the Book may know that they do not control aught of the grace of Allah, and that Grace is in Allah´s hand. He gives it to whom He pleases; and Allah is the Lord of abundant Grace
Allah indeed knows the plea of her who pleads with you (Muhammad) about her husband and carries her complaint to Allah, and Allah knows the contentions of both sides; surely Allah is Hearing, Seeing
Those of you who divorce their wives by Zihar (likening them to the backs of their mothers), they are not their mothers; their mothers are no others than those who gave them birth; and most surely they utter a hateful word and a falsehood and lo! Allah is
But if those who divorce their wives by Zihar and then wish to recall what they said, they should free a captive (slave) before they touch each other; to this are you admonished to conform; and Allah is Aware of what you do
But whoever has not the means, let him fast for two successive months before they touch each other. And as for him who is unable to do so, let him feed sixty needy ones. This is in order that you may have faith in Allah and His Messenger. These are the li
Surely those who act in opposition to Allah and His Messenger shall be abased even as those before them were abased; and indeed We have revealed clear revelations, and the unbelievers shall have a shameful doom
On the day when Allah will raise them up all together, He will inform them of what they did: Allah has recorded it while they have forgotten it; and Allah is a witness of all things
Do you not see that Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth? Nowhere is there a secret counsel between three persons but He is the fourth of them, nor between five but He is the sixth of them, nor less than that nor more but He
Have you not seen those who are forbidden secret counsels, then they return to what they are forbidden, and they hold secret counsels for sin and revolt and disobedience to the Messenger, and when they come to you they greet you with a greeting with which
O you who believe! When you confer together in private, do not give to each other counsel of sin and revolt and disobedience to the Messenger, and give to each other counsel of goodness and self-restraint against evil; and be careful of your duty to Allah
Secret counsels are only the work of Satan that he may cause to grief to those who believe, and he cannot hurt them in the least except with Allah´s permission, and on Allah let the believers rely
O you who believe! When it is said to you, "Make room in your assemblies," then make ample room, Allah will give you ample, and when it is said, "Rise up," then rise up. Allah will exalt those of you who believe and those who are given
O you who believe! When you consult the Messenger, then offer something in charity before your consultation; that is better for you and purer; but if you find not the means, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Do you fear that you will not be able to give in charity before your consultation? Then, if you do it not and Allah has forgiven you (or been merciful to you), then (at least) keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey Allah and His Apostle; and Allah
Have you not seen those who befriend a people with whom Allah is wroth? They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear to falsehood knowingly
Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment; surely what they do is evil
They make their oaths to serve as a cover so they turn away from Allah´s way; therefore they shall have a shameful doom
Neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against Allah; they are the inmates of the Fire, therein they shall abide
On the day that Allah will raise them up all, then they will swear to Him as they swear to you, and they think that they have something (to stand upon); now surely they are the liars
The Evil One (Satan) has gained the mastery over them, so he has made them forget the remembrance of Allah; they are Satan´s Party; now surely the Satan´s Party are the losers
Lo! Those who oppose (or resist) Allah and His Messenger; they shall be among the most abased
Allah has decreed, "I will most certainly prevail, I and My Messengers"; surely Allah is Strong, Almighty
You shall not find a people who believe in Allah and the Last Day loving those who oppose (or resist) Allah and His Messenger, even though they were their own fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their kinsfolk; these are they into whose heart He
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of Allah, and He is the Mighty, the Wise
He it is Who caused those of the followers of the Book who disbelieved to go forth from their homes at the first exile. You did not think that they would go forth, while they were certain that their fortresses would defend them against Allah; but Allah ca
And had it not been that Allah had decreed for them the exile, He would certainly have punished them in this world, and in the Hereafter they shall have chastisement of the Fire
That is because they acted in opposition to Allah and His Messenger, and whoever acts in opposition to Allah, then surely Allah is severe in retribution
Whatever palm-tree you cut down or leave standing upon its roots, It is by Allah´s command, and that He may abase (or confound) the transgressors
And whatever Allah bestowed (as advantage or booty) on His Messenger from them, you did not press forward against it any horse or riding camel but Allah gives authority to His Messengers against whom He wills, and Allah has power over all things
Whatever Allah has bestowed (as advantage or booty) to His Messenger from the people of the towns, it is for Allah and for the Messenger, and for the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it may not be a thing taken by turns
It is for the poor who fled their homes and their possessions, seeking the grace of Allah and His good pleasure, and assisting Allah and His Apostle: these it is that are the sincere
And those, who had homes in the city (Madina) and in the faith before them, love those who have fled to them, and do not find in their heart a need of what they are given, and give them (the fugitives) preference before themselves, though poverty may affl
And those who came after them say, "Our Lord! Forgive us and those of our brethren who preceded us in the faith, and leave not in our heart any spite (or rancour) towards those who believe. Our Lord! Surely you are Kind, Merciful
Have you not seen those who have become hypocrites? They say to those of their brethren who disbelieve from among the followers of the Book (the Jews), "If you are driven forth, we shall certainly go forth with you, and we will never obey any one aga
Certainly, if these are driven forth, they will not go forth with them, and if they are fought against, they will not help them; and even if they help-them, they will certainly turn their backs, then they shall not be helped
Truly, You are a greater source of terror than Allah in their heart (or you are greater than them because of the terror in their heart sent by Allah); that is because they are a people who do not understand
They will not fight against you in a body save in fortified towns or from behind walls; strong is the conflict among themselves. You may think them one body, but their heart are divided; that is because they are a people devoid of sense
Like those who preceded them lately, they tasted the evil result of their affair, and theirs is a painful punishment
They are like the devil when he says to man, "Disbelieve." But when he disbelieves, he says, "I am surely free of you; surely I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds
Therefore the end of them both is that they are in the Fire to abide therein, and that is the reward of the wrongdoers
O you who believe! Fear (or be careful of your duty to) Allah, and let every soul consider what it has sent on for the morrow, and fear (or be careful of your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is Aware of what you do
And be not like those who forgot (or forsook Allah), so He made them forget (or forsake) their own souls: these it is that are the transgressors
Not alike are the inmates of the Fire and the dwellers of the Garden: the dwellers of the Garden are they that are the successful (or achievers or victorious)
Had We sent down this Quran on a mountain, you would certainly have seen it falling down (humbled), splitting asunder because of the fear of Allah, and We set forth these parables to men that they may reflect
He is Allah besides Whom there is no God; the Knower of the unseen and the seen; He is the Beneficent, the Merciful
He is Allah, besides Whom there is no God; the Sovereign King, the Holy, the Giver of Peace (Satisfaction and Perfection), the Keeper of Faith, The Guardian (or Preserver of Security), the Majestic (or Exalted in Might), the Compeller (or Irresistible), t
He is Allah the Creator, the Originator (or Maker out of naught), the Fashioner; His are the Most Beautiful Names; whatever is in the heavens and the earth declares His glory; and He is the Mighty, the Wise
O you who believe! Take not My enemy and your enemy for friends: would you offer them love (or friendship) while they deny what has come to you of the truth, driving out the Messenger and yourselves because you believe in Allah, your Lord? If you go forth
If they should get the upper hand over you, they will be your enemies, and will stretch forth towards you their hands and their tongues with evil intent, and they ardently desire that you may disbelieve
Your relationship would not profit you, nor your children on the Day of Resurrection; He will decide between you; and Allah sees what you do
Indeed, there is for you a good example in Abraham and those with him when they said to their people, "Surely we are clear of you and of what you serve besides Allah; we have rejected you, and enmity and hostility have appeared between us and you for
Our Lord! Do not make us a trial for those who disbelieve, and forgive us, our Lord! Surely you are the Mighty, the Wise
Certainly there is for you in them a good example, for him who fears Allah and the Last Day; and whoever turns back, then surely Allah is the Absolute (or Self-sufficient), the Praise-worthy
It may be that Allah will bring about friendship between you and those whom you now hold to be your enemies among them; and Allah is Powerful; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah does not forbid you respecting those who have not made war against you on account of your religion, and have not driven you forth from your homes, that you show them kindness and deal with them justly; surely Allah loves the doers of justice
Allah only forbids you respecting those who made war upon you on account of your religion, and drove you forth from your homes and backed up others in your expulsion, that you make friends with them, and whoever makes friends with them, these are the unju
O you who believe! When believing women come to you fleeing (as refugees), then examine (or test) them; Allah knows best their faith. If you find them to be believing women, do not send them back to the unbelievers. Neither are they lawful (wives) for the
And if any of your wives deserts you unto the disbelievers and afterwards you have your turn (the coming over of a woman from the other side), give to those whose wives have deserted them the equal of what they have spent (on their dower), and be careful
O Prophet! When believing women come to you giving you a pledge that they will not associate aught with Allah, and will not steal, and will not commit fornication, and will not kill their children, and will not bring a calumny which they have forged of th
O you who believe! Do not make friends with a people with whom Allah is wroth; indeed they despair of the Hereafter as the unbelievers despair of those in the graves
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of Allah; and He is the Mighty, the Wise
O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do not do
It is most hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do
Surely Allah loves those who fight (or strive) in His way in ranks as if they were a firm and compact wall
And when Moses said to his people, "O my people! Why do you vex me, though you know that I am the Messenger of Allah to you?" But when they turned away, Allah made their heart go astray, and Allah does not guide transgressing people
And when Jesus son of Mary said, "O children of Israel! Surely I am the messenger of Allah to you, verifying that which is before me in the Torah and giving the Good News (Gospel) of a Messenger who will come after me, his name being Ahmad." But
And who does greater wrong (or is more unjust) than he who forges a lie against Allah when he is invited to the Surrender (Islam), and Allah does not guide the unjust people
They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse
He it is Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the Religion of Truth, that He may make it overcome all religions, though the polytheists may be averse
O you who believe! Shall I lead you to an affair (or a transaction) which may deliver you from a painful doom
You shall believe in Allah and His Messenger, and strive hard in Allah´s way with your property and your lives; that is better for you, did you but know
He will forgive you your faults and cause you to enter into Gardens, beneath which rivers flow, and goodly Mansions in Gardens of Eternity; that is the supreme achievement (or triumph)
And yet another blessing (will He bestow) that you love: - help from Allah and a speedy victory; so give good news to the believers
O you who believe! Be helpers of Allah, as Jesus son of Mary said to his disciples, "Who are my helpers of Allah?" The disciples said, "We are helpers of Allah." So a party of the children of Israel believed and another party disbeliev
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of Allah, the King, the Holy, the Mighty, the Wise
He it is Who raised among the Unlettered ones a Messenger from among themselves, who recites to them His revelations and makes them grow (or purifies or sanctifies them), and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, although they were before certainly in cle
And others from among them who have not yet joined them (future converts); and He is the Mighty, the Wise
That is Allah´s grace; He grants it to whom He pleases, and Allah is the Lord of mighty Grace
The similitude of those who were charged with the Law of Moses, then they did not observe it, is as the similitude of the ass bearing books. Evil is the likeness of the people who reject the revelations of Allah; and Allah does not guide wrongdoing people
Say, "O you who are Jews, if you think that you are the favourites of Allah to the exclusion of other people, then invoke death if you are truthful
And they will never invoke it because of what their hands have sent before; and Allah is Aware of the unjust
Say, "The death from which you flee, that will surely overtake you, then you shall be sent back to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of that which you used to do
O you who believe! When the call is made for prayer on Friday, then hasten to the remembrance of Allah and abandon trading; that is better for you, if you know
But when the prayer is ended, then disperse abroad in the land and seek the Bounty of Allah, and remember Allah much, that you may be successful
And when they see merchandise (bargains or business) or sport (amusement) they break up for it, and leave you standing. Say, "That which is with Allah is better than sport and better than merchandise, and Allah is the best of Sustainers
When the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you are most surely Allah´s Messenger; Allah knows that you are most surely His Messenger, and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are liars
They make their oaths a screen (for their misdeeds), and thus turn away from Allah´s way; surely evil is that which they do
That is because they believe, then disbelieve, so a seal is set upon their heart so that they do not understand
And when you see them, their persons will please you, and if they speak, you will listen to their speech; they are like big pieces of wood clad with garments. They think every cry to be against them. They are the enemy, therefore beware of them; the curse
And when it is said to them, "Come, the Messenger of Allah will ask forgiveness for you", they turn back their heads and you may see them turning away while they are inflated with pride
It is alike to them whether you beg forgiveness for them or do not beg forgiveness for them; Allah will never forgive them; surely Allah does not guide the transgressing people
They it is who say, "Do not spend upon those who are with the Messenger of Allah." hoping that they will disperse (or break up). But to Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, and the hypocrites understand not
They say, "If we return to Medina, the mighty will surely drive out the weaker there from; but Might belongs to Allah, and to His Messenger and to the believers, but the hypocrites know not
O you who believe! Let not your wealth, or your children, divert you from the remembrance of Allah; and whoever does that, these are the losers
And spend out of what We have given you before death comes to any of you, lest he should say, "My Lord! Why did you not respite me for a little while longer, so that I could have given alms and been of the doers of good deeds
But Allah grants not respite to a soul when its appointed term has come and Allah is Aware of what you do
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of Allah; to Him belongs the kingdom, and to Him is due all praise, and He has power over (or to do) all things
He it is Who created you, but one of you is an unbeliever and another of you is a believer; and Allah sees what you do
He created the heavens and the earth with Truth, and He formed you, then made goodly your forms, and to Him is the final goal
He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you manifest; and Allah is Aware of what is in the heart
Has there not come to you the story of those who disbelieved in olden times, then tasted the evil consequences of their conduct, and they had a painful doom
That is because there came to them their messengers with clear arguments, but they said, "Shall mortals guide us? So they disbelieved and turned their backs; but Allah is independent of them, and Allah is Absolute (Self-sufficient), the Owner of Prai
Those who disbelieve think that they shall never be raised up (for Judgment). Say, "Aye! By my Lord! You shall most certainly be raised; then you shall most certainly be informed of what you did; and that is easy to Allah
Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messenger and the Light which We have revealed; and Allah is Aware of what you do
On the day that He will gather you on the Day of Gathering, that is the day of loss and gain; and whoever believes in Allah and does good, He will remove from him his evil and cause him to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein forever
And those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations, they are the inmates of the fire, to abide therein and evil is the destination
No affliction comes about but by Allah´s permission; and whoever believes in Allah, He guides aright his heart; and Allah is Aware of all things
And obey Allah and obey the Messenger, but if you turn back, then the duty of Our Messenger is only to deliver the Message openly and clearly
Allah! There is no Allah but He; and upon Allah, then, let the believers put their trust
O you who believe! Surely from among your wives and your children there are some who are enemies to you; therefore beware of them; but if you forgive and forbear and efface, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Your possessions and your children are only a trial, and Allah it is with Whom is a great reward
Therefore, keep your duty to Allah as much as you can, and hear and obey and spend, it is better for your souls; and whoever is saved from the greediness of his soul, these it is that are the successful
If you set apart for Allah a goodly portion, He will double it for you and forgive you; and Allah is the Responsive, Forbearing
The Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Wise
O Prophet! When you divorce women, divorce them at their prescribed time, and calculate the number of the days prescribed, and be careful of your duty to Allah, your Lord. Do not drive them out of their houses, nor should they themselves go forth, unless
So when they have reached their prescribed time, then take them back with kindness or part with them with kindness; and call to witness two men of justice from among you, and give upright testimony for Allah. With that is admonished he who believes in All
And give him sustenance from whence he thinks not; and whoever puts his trust in Allah, He is sufficient for him. Surely Allah attains His purpose; Allah has appointed a measure for all things
And as for those of your women who have despaired (passed the age) of menstruation, if you have a doubt, their prescribed time shall be three months, and of those too who have not had their courses. As for the pregnant women, their prescribed time is that
That is the command of Allah which He has revealed to you, and whoever is careful of his duty to Allah, He will remove from him his evil and give him a big reward
Lodge them where you lodge according to your means, and do not injure them in order that you may harass (or distress) them; and if they are pregnant, spend on them until they lay down their burden (give birth); then if they suckle for you, give them their
Let him who has abundance spend out of his abundance and whoever has his means of subsistence restricted, let him spend out of that which Allah has given him; Allah does not lay on any soul a burden beyond that which He has granted it; Allah brings about
And how many a community rebelled against the commandment of its Lord and His Messengers, so We called it to account severely and We chastised it with a stern chastisement
So it tasted the evil result of its conduct, and the end of its affair was perdition
Allah has prepared for them severe chastisement, therefore be careful of your duty to Allah, O men of understanding who believe! Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder
A Messenger who recites to you the clear revelations of Allah so that he may bring forth those who believe and do good deeds from darkness into light; and whoever believes in Allah and does good deeds, He will cause him to enter Gardens beneath which rive
Allah is He Who created seven heavens, and of the earth the like of them. The Commandment continues to descend among them slowly, that you may know that Allah has power over all things and that Allah indeed encompasses all things in knowledge
O Prophet! Why do you ban (or forbid) that which Allah has made lawful for you, seeking to please your wives; but Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
Allah has ordained for you the dissolution of your oaths (under certain circumstances) and Allah is your Protector, and He is the Knowing the Wise
And the prophet communicated a piece of confidential information to one of his wives, but when she divulged it to another, Allah made it known to him. He confirmed part of it and denied part of it. Then when he informed her of it, she said, "Who told
If you both turn in repentance to Him, your heart are already inclined to this; and if you back each other up against him, then surely Allah it is Who is his Protector, and Gabriel and every righteous one among the believers, and furthermore, the angels
Maybe, if he divorce you, His Lord will give him in your stead wives better than you, who surrender their self-will (to Allah or His Messenger), who believe (or have faith), who are devoted (or pious, devout), who turn in repentance, who travel (or strive)
O you who believe! Save yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is men and stones; over it are angels stern and strong, they do not disobey Allah in what He commands them, and they do precisely as they are commanded
(It will be said,) "O you who disbelieve! Make no excuses this day; you shall be rewarded only according to what you did
O you who believe! Turn to Allah a sincere repentance; maybe your Lord will remove from you your evil and cause you to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow, on the Day on which Allah will not abase the Prophet and those who believe with him; their ligh
O Prophet! Strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be hard against them; and their abode is Hell; and evil is the destination
Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot: they were both under two of Our righteous servants, but they were false towards them so they (the husbands) availed them naught against Allah, and it was said, &quo
And Allah sets forth an example, to those who believe, in the wife of Pharaoh when she said, "My Lord! Build for me a house near Thee in the Garden and deliver me from Pharaoh and his doing, and save me from the evil doing people
And Mary, the daughter of Imran, whose body was chaste (or who guarded her chastity), so We breathed into her of Our Spirit and she testified the truth of the Words of her Lord and His revelations, and she was of the obedient
Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Sovereignty, and He has power to do all things
Who created death and life that He may try you as to which of you is best in conduct; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving
Who created the seven heavens one above the other in harmony; you see no incongruity in the creation of the Beneficent Allah; then look again, can you see any flaw
Then turn back your eye again and again; your sight will return unto you weak and fatigued
And certainly We have adorned this lower heaven with lamps and We have made these missiles for Satan, and We have prepared for them the chastisement of burning
And for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the punishment of hell, and evil is the destination
When they shall be cast therein, they shall hear a loud gasp as it swells
Almost bursting for fury. Whenever a group is cast into it, its keeper shall ask them, "Did there not come to you a Warner
They shall say, "Yea! Indeed there came to us a Warner, but we rejected him and said, ´Allah has not revealed anything, you are only suffering from delusions.´
And they shall say, "Had we but listened or pondered (used our reason or intelligence), we should not have been among the inmates of the Blazing Fire
So they shall acknowledge their sins, but far will be forgiveness from the inmates of the Blazing Fire
Lo! Those who fear their Lord in secret (or unseen), they shall surely have forgiveness and a great reward
And whether you conceal your opinion or express it; surely He is Aware of what is in the heart
Should He not know, He Who created? And He is the Knower of the Subtleties, the Aware
He it is Who made the earth smooth (manageable) for you, therefore go about in the spacious paths thereof, and eat of His provisions, and to Him is the Resurrection after death
Have you taken security from Him Who is in heaven that He will not make the earth swallow you when it is shaken (convulsed)
Or have you taken security from Him Who is in heaven that He will not send down upon you a hurricane so that you shall know how terrible was My warning
And verily those before them rejected the truth, then how terrible was My wrath
Have they not seen the birds above them expanding (their wings) and contracting (them)? What is it that withholds them save the Beneficent? Lo! He is Seer of all things
Or who is it that will be an army to assist you besides the Beneficent? The unbelievers are in naught but delusion
Or who is it that will provide you if He should withhold His sustenance? Nay! They persist in disdain and aversion (from truth)
What! Is he who goes prone upon his face better guided or he who walks upright upon a Straight Way
Say, "He it is Who brought you into being and made for you the faculties of hearing and seeing and heart: little is it that you give thanks
Say, "He it is Who multiplied you in the earth and to Him you shall be gathered
And they say, "When shall this promise be (fulfilled) if you are truthful
Say, " The knowledge thereof is only with Allah and I am only a plain Warner
But when they shall see it nigh, the faces of those who disbelieve shall be sorry, and it shall be said, "This is that which you used to call for
Say (O Muhammad), "Have you considered if Allah should cause me and those with me to be destroyed or has mercy on us, still, who will protect the disbelievers from a painful doom
Say, "He is the Beneficent. We believe in Him and in Him do we put our trust. And you will come to know who it is that is in error manifest
Say, "Have you considered if all your water should some morning be lost down into the earth, who is it then that will supply you clear flowing water
NUN. I swear by the Pen and by that which they write
By the grace of your Lord you (Muhammad) are not mad (or stupid, deluded or possessed)
And most surely you shall have a reward unfailing
And most surely you have the most sublime (or exalted) character
Soon will you see, and they too shall see
Which of you is afflicted with madness (stupidity or delusion)
Surely your Lord best knows him who errs from His way, and He best knows the followers of the right guidance
So do not yield to the rejecters
They desire that you should be pliant (or compromise) so they too would be pliant (compromise)
And yield not to any mean swearer
Defamer, going about with slander
Hinderer (obstructer) of good, transgressor beyond limits, malefactor
Ignoble (violent, cruel and greedy), besides all that, base-born (inherently degenerate)
Because he possesses wealth and sons
When Our communications are recited to him, he says, "Stories of those of old
We will brand him on the snout
Surely We will try them as We tried the people of the garden, when they resolved to cut the produce in the morning
And were not willing to set aside a portion (for the poor)
Then there encompassed it (the garden) a visitation from your Lord while they were sleeping
So it became as black, barren land
And they called out to each other in the morning (unaware of what had happened)
Saying, "Go early to your tilth if you would cut the produce
So they went, while they murmured to each other secretly
Saying, "Let no poor man enter it today besides you
And in the morning they went, strong in this (evil) resolve
But when they saw it (the garden), they said, "Most surely we have gone astray
Nay! We are made to suffer privation
The best of them said, "Did I not say to you, ´Why not glorify (Allah)?´
They said, "Glory be to our Lord, surely we were unjust
Then some of them advanced against others, blaming each other
Said they, "O woe to us! Surely we were outrageous transgressors
Maybe, our Lord will give us instead a garden better than this; lo! We beseech (or turn in repentance to) our Lord
Such is the chastisement, and certainly the chastisement of the Hereafter is even greater, did they but know
Surely those who guard against evil shall have with their Lord Gardens of Delight
What! Shall We then treat those who have Surrendered (in Islam) as those who are guilty
What ails you? How do you judge
Or have you a Book wherein you learn
That you shall have through it whatever you choose
Or have you received from Us an agreement, confirmed by an oath, extending until the Day of Resurrection, that you shall have what you demand
Ask them which of them will vouch for that
Or have they associates (in the Godhead); then let them produce them if they are truthful
On the day when the Shin (the Hidden Mystery or Truth) shall be laid bare, and they shall be called upon to make obeisance, but they shall not be able
Their looks cast down, abasement shall overtake them seeing that they had been called upon to make obeisance indeed while yet they were safe
So leave Me and him who rejects this Announcement (The Message of Muhammad); We will overtake them by degrees, from whence they perceive not
Yet I do bear with them, for lo! My plan is firm
Or do you ask from them a reward, so that they are burdened with debt
Or have they the knowledge of the unseen, so that they write it down
So wait patiently for the judgment of your Lord, and be not like the Companion of the Fish (Jonah), when he cried while he was in distress
Were it not that favour from his Lord had reached him, he would certainly have been cast down upon the naked shore while he was blameworthy
Then his Lord chose him, and He made him of the righteous
And those who disbelieve would almost smite you with their eyes when they hear the Reminder (Quran), and they say, "Most surely he is mad (or possessed)
And it is naught but a reminder to creation (or all the worlds)
The sure Reality
What is the sure Reality
And what would make you realize what the sure Reality is
Thamud and A´ad called the Stunning Calamity (the Day of Judgment) a lie
But the Thamud, they were destroyed by the Storm of thunder and lightening
And the A´ad, they were destroyed by a roaring, violent wind
Which He made to prevail against them for seven nights and eight days unremittingly, so that you might have seen the people therein prostrate as if they were the trunks of hollow palms
Do you then see any of them remaining
And Pharaoh and those before him and the overthrown cities (Sodom and Gomorrah) continuously committed sins
And they disobeyed the Messengers of their Lord, so He punished them with a severe punishment
Surely We bore you (mankind) up in the Ark when the water rose high
So that We may make it a reminder to you, and that the retaining ear might retain it (in memory)
And when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
And the earth and the mountains are borne away and crushed with a single crushing
On that day shall the Great Event come to pass
And the heaven shall cleave asunder, so that on that Day it shall be frail
And the angels shall be on the sides thereof; and above them eight shall bear the Throne of their Lord that Day
On that day you shall be exposed to view, no secret of yours shall remain hidden
Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will say, "Here! Read my book
Surely I knew that I shall meet my account
So he shall be in a life of Bliss
In a lofty garden
The fruits of which are near at hand
Eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days gone by
And as for him who is given his book in his left hand he shall say, "O would that my book had never been given me
And I did not know how my account stood
O would that it (death) had made an end of me
My wealth has availed me nothing
My authority has perished away from me
(The command is given) "Seize him, and chain him
Then cast him into the burning Fire
Then march him tied to a chain the length of which is seventy cubits
Surely he did not believe in Allah, the Great
Nor did he urge the feeding of the poor
Therefore he has not here today a true friend
Nor any food except filth
Which none but the wrongdoers eat
But nay! I swear (or call to witness) by that which you see
And that which you do not see
Most surely, it is the Word brought by an honoured Messenger
And it is not the word of a poet; little is it that you believe
Nor the word of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind
It is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds
And if he had fabricated against Us some of the sayings
We would certainly have seized him by the right hand
Then We would certainly have severed his life-artery
And not one of you could have withheld Us from him
And verily, it is a reminder for those who guard against evil
And verily, We know that some of you are rejecters
And verily, it is a source of great grief to the unbelievers
And verily, it is the Truth of Certainty
Therefore-glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High
A questioner asked about the chastisement which must befall
The unbelievers, which none can avert
From Allah, the Lord of the Ascending Stairways
To Him ascend the angels and the Spirit in a Day the measure of which is fifty thousand years
Therefore endure with a goodly patience
Surely they think it to be far off
And We see it nigh
On the day when the heaven shall be as molten copper
And the mountains shall be as tufts of wool
And friend shall not ask of friend
Though they shall be given sight of each other. The guilty one would fain redeem himself from the chastisement of that day by sacrificing his children
And his wife and his brother
And the nearest of his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
And all those that are in the earth, hoping to be delivered
By no means! Surely it is a flaming Fire
Dragging him right to his skull
It calls him who turned and fled from truth
And amasses wealth then locks it up
Surely man is created anxious (or impatient)
Fretful when evil afflicts him
And niggardly when good befalls him
Except those who pray
Those who are constant (or devoted) at their prayer
And those in whose wealth there is a fixed portion
For him who begs and for him who is destitute
And those who accept the truth of the Day of Judgment
And those who are fearful of the displeasure of their Lord
Surely the displeasure of their Lord is a thing before which none can feel secure (or is the opposite of peace and tranquillity)
And those who guard their chastity
Except in the case of their wives or those whom their right hands possess - for on these surely is no blame
But he who seeks to go beyond this, these it is that transgress beyond bounds
And those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
And those who are upright in their testimonies
And those who keep guard (the sacredness of) their worship
Those shall be in Gardens, honoured
But what ails those who disbelieve that they rush around you (Muhammad) open-eyed (in mock amazement)
On the right hand and on the left, in sundry groups
Does every man of them desire that he should be made to enter the Garden of Bliss
By no means! Surely We have created them of what they know (earth and spirit)
But nay! I swear by (or call to witness) the Lord of all points of the rising and setting places East and West that We are certainly Able
To replace them with others better than them, and We shall not be overcome
Therefore leave them alone to go on with the false discourses and to sport until they come face to face with that Day of theirs with which they are warned
The Day on which they shall come forth from their graves in haste, as if they were racing to a goal
Their eyes cast down; disgrace shall overtake them; that is the Day which they were promised
Lo! We sent Noah to his people, saying, "Warn your people before there come upon them a painful doom
He said, "O my people! Surely I am a plain Warner to you
That you should serve Allah and be careful of your duty to Him and obey me
He will forgive you some of your faults and grant you a delay for an appointed term; surely the term of Allah when it comes is not postponed; did you but know
He said, "O my Lord! Surely I have called my people by night and by day
But my call has only increased their flight (from truth)
And whenever I have called them that you may forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears, cover themselves with their garments, grow obstinate and puffed up with pride
So I called to them aloud
And lo! I have made public proclamations unto them, and I have appealed to them in private
And I have said, ´Ask forgiveness of your Lord, surely He is the most Forgiving
´He will send down upon you an abundance of rain
´And help you with wealth and sons, and bestow on you gardens, and bestow on you rivers
´What ails you that you fear not the greatness of Allah
´Seeing that He has created you through various stages
´Do you not see how Allah has created the seven heavens, one above another (or in harmony)
´And made the moon therein a light, and made the sun a lamp
´And Allah has made you out of the earth as a gradual growth
´Then He returns you to it, and then will He bring you forth a new bringing forth
´And Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse
´ That you may go about in it in spacious paths (or valleys).´
Noah said, "My Lord! Surely they have disobeyed me and followed him whose wealth and children have added to him nothing but loss
And they devised a mighty plot
And they say (to each other), ´By no means leave your gods, abandon neither Wadd, nor Suwa, nor Yaghut, and Yauq and Nasr (their gods).´
And indeed they have led astray many, and do not increase the unjust in aught but error
Because of their wrongs they were drowned, then made to enter Fire, so they did not find any helpers besides Allah
And Noah said, "My Lord! Leave not upon the land any dweller from among the unbelievers
For surely if you leave them they will lead astray Thy servants, and will not beget any but immoral, ungrateful ones
My Lord! Forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house believing, and the believing men and the believing women; and do not increase the unjust in aught but perdition
Say, "It has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn listened, and they said, "Surely we have heard a wonderful Recital (Quran)
Guiding to the right way. So we believe in it, and we will not join any one with our Lord (in worship)
And that He, exalted be the majesty of our Lord, has not taken a consort, nor a son
The foolish amongst us used to invent extravagant things against Allah
And lo! We thought (or think) that men and jinn did not (or ought not to) utter a lie against Allah
And, indeed, persons from among men used to seek refuge with persons from among jinn, so they increased them in wrongdoing (or folly or revolt)
And they thought as you think, that Allah would not raise anyone (to be judged)
And we sought to reach heaven, but we found it filled with strong guards and flaming fires (or meteors)
And we used to sit in some high hidden places therein to steal a hearing, but he who would try to listen now would find a flame lying in wait for him
We know not whether evil is meant for those who are on earth or whether their Lord means to bring them good
And some of us are righteous and others of us are far from that: we are sects following different ways
But we know that we cannot escape (or frustrate) Allah in the earth, nor can we escape (or frustrate) Him by flight
And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it (or accepted it); whoever believes in his Lord, he neither fears loss nor oppression (injustice or disgrace)
Some of us are those who have Surrendered (to Allah), and some of us are deviators. Those who have Surrender have surely taken the right path purposefully
As for the deviators, they are the fuel of Hell
If they should keep to the right way, We would certainly give them to drink of abundant water
So that We might test them therewith. And whoever turns aside from the remembrance of his Lord, He will afflict him with a severe penalty
The places of worship are only Allah´s, therefore call not upon any one along with Allah
And yet when the servant of Allah stood up in prayer to Him, they crowded almost stifling him
Say, "I only call upon my Lord, and I do not associate any one with Him
Say, "I do not control for you evil or good
Say, "Surely no one can protect me against Allah, nor can I find besides Him any place of refuge
Unless I proclaim what I receive from Allah and His messages; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely he shall have the fire of Hell to abide therein for ever
Until when they see what they are promised, then shall they know who it is that is weaker in helpers and fewer in number
Say, "I do not know whether that which you are promised be nigh or whether my Lord will appoint for it a distant term
He is the Knower of the unseen! And He reveals unto none His secrets
Except messengers whom He has chosen; and then He makes a guard to go before him and after him
So that He may know that they have truly delivered the messages of their Lord. He encompasses what is with them and He keeps count of all things
O you wrapped up in your garment
Rise to pray in the night except a little (or but not all night)
Half of it, or lessen it a little
Or add to it, and recite the Quran as it ought to be recited
Surely We will make to light upon you (charge you with) a weighty Word (or message)
Surely the vigil of the night is the most potent for the soul (to receive impressions) and the best for framing speech (or the Words of prayer)
Surely you have in the daytime a long occupation (with ordinary affairs of life)
And remember the name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him with exclusive (and wholehearted) devotion
(He is) The Lord of the East and the West - there is no God but He - therefore, take Him for a protector
And bear patiently what they say and avoid them with a becoming avoidance (or leave taking)
And leave Me to deal with the rejecters, the possessors of ease and plenty, and bear with them a little
Surely with Us are heavy fetters and a raging fire
And food that chokes and a painful doom
On the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains shall become (as) heaps of running sand
Surely We have sent unto you a Messenger, a witness against you, as We sent a Messenger to Pharaoh
But Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger, so We seized him with a violent grip
How, then, will you guard yourselves, if you disbelieve, on the day which shall make children grey-headed (with stress)
The heaven shall rend asunder thereby; His promise is ever brought to fulfilment
Surely this is a reminder, let then him, who will, take the way to his Lord
Your Lord does know that you stand in prayer nearly two-thirds of the night, and sometimes half of it, and sometimes a third of it, and so also do a party of those with you; and Allah measures the night and the day. He knows that you are not able to keep
O you enveloped in your cloak
Arise and warn
And magnify your Lord
And your cloak do purify
And uncleanness do shun
And bestow not favours that you may receive again with increase
And for the sake of your Lord, be patient
For when the trumpet is sounded
That, at that time, shall be a Day of distress
Far from easy for the unbelievers
Leave Me alone to deal with him whom I created
And gave vast riches
And sons to be by his side
And I adjusted the affairs of life to go smoothly and appropriately for him
And yet he desires that I should add more
By no means! For lo! He stubbornly opposes Our revelations
Will impose on him a fearful doom
Surely he reflected and then plotted
But woe to him for how he plotted
Again, woe to him for how he plotted
Then he looked around
Then he frowned and scowled
Then he turned back and was inflated with pride
Then he said, "This is naught but enchantment, narrated of olden days
This is naught but the word of a mortal
Soon will I cast him into the burning (Hell-fire)
And what will make you understand what the burning (Hell-fire) is
It leaves naught, it spares naught
It scorches (darkens the colour) and shrivels the mortal
Over it are nineteen
And We have not made the wardens of the fire others than angels, and We have not made their number but as a trial for those who disbelieve, that those who have been given the Book (scriptures) may be certain and those who believe may increase in faith, an
Nay; I swear by (or call to witness) the moon
And by the night when it departs
And by the Dawn when it shines forth
Surely, this is but one of the mighty Signs
A warning to mortals
To him among you who wishes to go forward or remain behind
Every soul is held in pledge for its own deeds
Except the people of the right hand
In Gardens, they shall ask each other
And ask the guilty
What has brought you into hell
They shall say, "We were not of those who prayed
And we used not to feed the poor
And we used to enter into vain discourse with those who entered into vain discourses
And we used to call the Day of Judgment a lie
Till the inevitable event (death) overtook us
The intercession of no mediators shall avail them then
What is then the matter with them that they turn away from the admonition
As if they were frightened asses
Fleeing from a lion
Nay; every one of them desires that he may be given pages spread out (or open)
Nay! But they do not fear the Hereafter
Nay! This surely is an admonition
Let any who will, pay heed (or remember)
But none will remember (or heed) unless Allah wills. He is the source of fear (or righteousness) and the source of Mercy
Nay! I swear by (or call to witness) the Day of Resurrection
Nay! I swear by (or call to witness) the self-accusing soul
Does man think that We shall not gather his bones
Yea! We are able to make complete his very fingertips
Nay! Man desires to give the lie to what is before him
He asks, "When is the day of resurrection
So when the sight becomes dazzled
And the moon becomes dark
And the sun and the moon are brought together
Man shall say on that day, "Whither can I flee for refuge
By no means! There shall be no place of refuge
With your Lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest
Man shall on that day be informed of what he sent before and what he put off
Nay! Man is telling evidence against himself
Though he puts forth his excuses
Move not your tongue with it (the Quran) to make haste with it
Surely it is for Us to collect it and to recite (or enact) it
Therefore when We have recited it, follow its recitation
Nay, more, it is for Us to explain (and clarify) it
Nay! But you do love the fleeting Now
And neglect the Hereafter
Some faces on that Day shall be bright
Looking to their Lord
And other faces on that Day shall be gloomy
Knowing that there will be made to befall them some great calamity
Nay! When the soul comes up to the throat
And it is said, "Who will be a magician (to restore him)
And he is sure that it is the time of parting
And one leg will be tied to another (i.e. after death)
To your Lord on that day shall be the driving
So he did not accept the truth, nor did he pray
But called the truth a lie and turned back
Then he went to his folk, arrogant
Nearer unto you and nearer (comes the doom)
Again, nearer unto you and nearer (comes the doom)
Does man think that he is to be left to wander aimless (or purposeless)
Was he not a small seed in the seminal elements
Then he was a clot of blood, so He created (him) then made (him) perfect
Then He made of him two kinds, the male and the female
Is not He able to give life to the dead
Was there not over man a long period of time when he was a thing unremembered (nothing, not worth mention)
Surely We have created man from a small mingled life-germ; in order to try him, We made him hearing and seeing
Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or unthankful
Surely We have prepared for the unbelievers chains and yokes and a burning fire
Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of which is camphor
A fountain from which the servants of Allah shall drink, flows with abundance
Because they fulfil their vows and fear a day the evil of which spreads far and wide
And they give food out of love for Allah to the poor and the orphan and the captive
(Saying) We only feed you for Allah´s sake; we desire from you neither reward nor thanks
Surely we fear from our Lord a stern, distressful day
Therefore Allah will deliver them from the evil of that day and will shed on them the Light of Beauty and Joy
And reward them, because they were patient, with a Garden and garments of silk
Reclining therein on raised couches, they shall find therein neither the severe heat of the sun nor intense cold
And shade thereof is close upon them, and clustered fruits thereof bow down
And amongst them shall be passed vessels of silver and goblets of crystal
(Transparent as) glass but made of silver; they will determine the measure thereof
And they will be given to drink therein a cup whereof the mixture is of Zanjabil
From a fountain therein named Salsabil
And they will be served by youths never altering in age; when you see them you will think them to be scattered pearls
And when you look, you will see blessings and a magnificent kingdom
Upon them will be garments of fine green silk and gold brocade, and they shall be adorned with bracelets of silver, and their Lord will give them a drink pure and holy
Lo! This is a reward for you, and your striving has been recognised and accepted
Lo! We, even We have revealed the Quran to you in stages
Therefore wait patiently for the command of your Lord, and obey not from among them one who is guilty or ungrateful
And glorify the name of your Lord morning and evening
And during part of the night adore Him, and glorify Him a long part of the night
But they love the transitory life and put away behind them (ignore the remembrance of) a grievous Day
We, even We created them and made firm their frame, and when We will We will replace them, bringing others like them in their stead
Surely this is an admonition; whoever will, let him take a straight path to his Lord
But you will not, except as Allah wills, surely Allah is Knower, Wise
He makes whom He will enter into His mercy; and for evildoers, He has prepared a painful doom
I swear by (or call to witness) the emissary winds sent one after another for men´s benefit
By the raging hurricanes
Which scatter things far and wide
And separate things one from another
Then I swear by the angels who bring down the revelation (or message)
To clarify or to warn
Most surely what you are promised must come to pass
So when the stars are made dim
And when the heaven is rent asunder
And when the mountains are carried away as dust
And when the messengers are gathered at their appointed time
To what Day are these signs appointed
To the Day of Decision
And what will make you comprehend what the day of decision is
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Did We not destroy the former generations
Then did We follow them up with later ones
Even thus shall We deal with the guilty
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Did We not create you from a fluid regarded contemptible
Which We laid in a safe abode (the womb)
Till an appointed term
Thus We arrange things - how well are We at arranging things
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Have We not made the earth draw together to itself
The living and the dead
And placed therein lofty mountains, and given you to drink sweet water from them
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Go on to that which you used to deny
Go on to the smoke with three branches (or three fold shadow)
Neither having the coolness of the shade nor availing against the flame
Surely it sends up sparks like palaces
As if they were tawny camels
Woe on that day to the rejecters
This is the day on which they shall not speak
Nor are they permitted to make excuses (or pleas)
Woe on that day to the rejecters
This is the Day of Decision: We have gathered you and those of yore
So if you have a plan, plan against Me now
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Surely those who guard against evil shall be amid shades and fountains
And fruits such as they desire
Eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did
Surely thus do We reward the doers of good
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little; surely you are guilty
Woe on that day to the rejecters
And when it is said to them, "Bow down (in humility), they bow not
Woe on that day to the rejecters
In what announcement, then, after this, will they believe
Of what do they question one another
About the Great News
About which they are in disagreement
Verily, they shall soon come to know
Verily, verily, they shall soon come to know
Have We not made the earth an expanse
And the mountains as projections (thereon)
And created you in pairs
And made your sleep for rest
And made the night to be a covering
And made the day for livelihood and activity
And made above you seven firmaments (heavens)
And placed therein a shining lamp (the Sun)
And do We not send down from the clouds water in abundance
That We may bring forth thereby corn and vegetable
And gardens dense and luxuriant
Surely the Day of Decision (or Sorting ) is a thing appointed
The day on which the trumpet shall be blown so you shall come forth in hosts
And the heaven shall be opened as if it were all doors
And the mountains shall be moved off so that they shall remain a mere semblance
Surely hell lies in ambush
A destination for those who transgress the bounds
Abiding therein for ages
They shall not taste therein anything cool nor drink
But boiling and intensely cold water
Requital corresponding (or proportional to their state)
Surely they feared not the account
And called Our revelations a lie with strong denial
And We have preserved all things in a Record
So taste you (the fruits of your deeds)! For We will not add to you aught but torment
Surely for the righteous is achievement (or success, self-fulfilment)
Gardens and vineyards
And those showing freshness of youth, equals in age
And a pure cup
They shall not hear therein any vain words nor lying
A reward from your Lord, a gift according to reckoning (or sufficient)
From the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, the Beneficent Allah, with whom none can argue
The day on which the Spirit and the angels shall stand arrayed; they speak not except him whom the Beneficent permits and who speaks aright
That is the Day of Certain Reality, so whoever desires may take refuge with his Lord
Surely We have warned you of a doom near at hand: the day when man shall see that which his two hands have sent before, and the unbeliever shall say, "O! Would that I were dust
I swear by (or call to witness) those who tear out to destruction
And by those rushing
And by those who float
Then press forward as in a race
And those who regulate affairs
The day on which the first trump resounds (or that which can quake shall quake)
And others follow it
Hearts on that day shall palpitate
While eyes are cast down
They say, "Shall we indeed be restored to our first state
What! When we are rotten bones
They said, "That then would be a return, causing loss
But it shall be only a single cry
When lo! They will be fully awake
Has not there come to you the story of Moses
When his Lord called upon him in the holy valley of Tuwa
(Saying,) "Go to Pharaoh, surely he has transgressed beyond bounds
Then say, "Have you a desire to purify yourself
And I will guide you to your Lord so that you may fear
So he showed him the Mighty Sign
But he (Pharaoh) rejected it and disobeyed
Then turned he away (from Allah) in haste
Then he gathered (men) and made a proclamation
Saying, "I am your Lord, the most high
So Allah seized him with the punishment of the Hereafter and the former life
Most surely there is in this a lesson to him who fears
Are you the harder to create or the heaven? He created it
He raised high its height, and gave it order and perfection
And He made dark its night and its splendour does He bring out with light
And after that He expanded (spread) the earth
He brought forth from it its water and its pasturage
And the mountains, He made them firm
A provision for you and for your cattle
But when the great overwhelming calamity comes
The Day on which man shall recollect all he strove after
And Hell shall be made manifest to him who sees
Then for him who has transgressed all bounds
And prefers the life of this world
Surely, Hell will be his abode
And as for him who had feared standing in the presence of his Lord and restrains his soul from lust (or low desires)
Then surely the Garden, that is his abode
They ask you (Muhammad) about the Hour, when it will come
What," ask they, "have you to say about it
To your Lord belongs the knowledge of it
you are only a Warner to him who would fear it
On the day that they behold it, it will be as though they had not tarried but an evening or the morning
He frowned and turned his back
Because there came to him the blind man
And what would make you know that he would grow (spiritually)
Or that he might become heedful so that the reminder should profit him
As for him who considers himself independent (or self-sufficient)
To him do you attend
Yet no blame is on you if he grow not (spiritually)
And as to him who comes to you striving earnestly
And with the fear of Allah in his heart
From him were you unmindful (or distracted)
Nay! Verily, it is an admonishment (or a message of instructions)
So let whoever will pay heed to it
It is in honoured books
Exalted, purified
Set down by scribes
Noble and righteous
Cursed (self-destroyed) is man! How ungrateful (to Allah) is he
Of what stuff did He create him
Of a small seed; He created him, then gave him due proportions
Then He made his way easy for him
Then He causes him to die and buries him in his grave
Then when He wills, He will raise him to life again
Nay; but man has not done that which He bade him
Then let man consider his food
That We pour down the water in abundance
Then We cleave the earth
Then We cause to grow therein the grain
And grapes and clover
And the olive and the palm
And dense luxurious gardens
And fruits and herbage
A provision for you and for your cattle
But when the Deafening Noise (cataclysm) comes
The Day on which a man shall fly from his brother
And his mother and his father
And his spouse and his children
Every man of them shall on that Day be occupied with concerns which will make him heedless of others
Many faces on that Day shall be bright as dawn (or beaming with light)
Laughing, rejoicing
And many faces on that Day, shall be covered with dust
Veiled in darkness
These are the disbelievers, the wicked
When the sun is overthrown (or folded up)
And when the stars darken
And when the mountains pass away
And when the she-camels (with young) are left untended
And when the wild beasts are herded together
And when the seas swell and boil
And when souls are sorted and reunited
And when the female infant buried alive is asked
For what sin she was killed
And when the Record Books are spread open
And when the heavens are unveiled
And when Hell is kindled up
And when the Garden is brought nigh
Every soul shall then know what it has prepared
But nay! I swear by (or call to witness) the Planets
That run their course and hide themselves
And the Night when it departs
And the Dawn when it breaths away the darkness
Most surely it is the Word of an honourable Messenger
The possessor of power and high rank with the Lord of the Throne
One to be obeyed, and faithful to his trust
And your companion is not one possessed (or mad)
And of a truth he saw himself on the clear horizon
Nor is he a tenacious concealer of the unseen
Nor is it the word of the cursed Satan
Whither then will you go
It is naught but a reminder unto all creation (or all the worlds)
For him among you who wills to go straight
And you will not, unless Allah wills, the Lord (or Cherisher) of Creation (or all the Worlds)
When the heavens are cleft asunder
And when the stars are dispersed
And when the oceans are suffered to burst forth
And when the graves are overturned
Every soul shall know what it has sent before and held back
O man! What has beguiled you from your Lord, the Gracious one
Who created you, then completed your form in due proportions, then gave you balance (or an inclination to reason and justice)
Into whatever form He wills He castes you
Nay! But you deny the judgment
And most surely there are guardians over you
Honourable recorders
They know what you do
Verily, the righteous are in bliss
And verily, the wicked are in burning fire
They shall enter it on the Day of Judgment
And they shall by no means be absent from it
And what will convey unto you what the Day of Judgment is
Again, what will convey unto you what the Day of Judgment Is
The day on which no soul shall control anything for another soul; and the command on that day shall be entirely Allah´s
Woe to the defrauders
Who, when they take the measure of their dues from men take it fully
But when they give by measure or weight, they are deficient
Do not these think that they shall be raised again to account
On a Mighty Day
The day on which men shall stand before the Lord of the Worlds
Nay! Most surely the record of the wicked is in Sijjin
And what will explain to you what Sijjin is
It is an inscribed Record
Woe on that day to the rejecters
Who give the lie to the Day of Judgment
And none deny it but the transgressors beyond bounds, the sinful one
When Our revelations are recited to him, he says, "Stories of those of yore
Nay! But what they used to do has become like rust upon their heart
Nay! Most surely they shall on that day be debarred (or veiled) from their Lord
Then most surely they shall enter the burning Fire
Then shall it be said, "This is what you gave the lie to
Nay! Most surely the record of the righteous shall be in Iliyin
And what will explain to you what Iliyin is
It is an inscribed Record
Those who are drawn near to Allah shall witness it
Most surely the righteous shall be in bliss
On thrones, they shall gaze
You will see in their faces the brightness of bliss
They are given to drink pure wine, sealed
The sealing of it is with musk; and for that let the aspirers aspire
And the admixture of it is a water of Tasnim
A fountain from which drink they who are nearest to Allah
Surely they who are guilty used to laugh at those who believe
And when they passed by them, they winked at one another
And when they returned to their own folk they returned exulting
And when they saw them, they said, "Most surely these are truly astray
But they were not sent to be keepers over them
This day it is the believers who shall laugh at the unbelievers
On thrones (of dignity), they will gaze
Are not the disbelievers rewarded for what they did
When the heaven is rent asunder
And gives ear unto its Lord, and is dutiful
And when the earth is stretched out
And casts forth what is within it, and is emptied (or clean)
And gives ear unto its Lord, and is dutiful
O man! Verily, you are toiling on towards your Lord, painfully toiling; wherefore shall you meet Him
And as for him who is given his record in his right hand
His account shall be taken with an easy reckoning
And he shall go back to his people rejoicing
But as for him who is given his book behind his back
He shall call out for destruction
But he shall broil in a blazing Fire
Verily, he was amongst his family joyful
Verily, he thought that he should never return to Allah
Nay, nay! Verily, his Lord did watch him
So I do call as witness the glow of sunset
Or the night, and its homing
Or the moon in her fullness
You shall surely travel from stage to stage
What ails them that they believe not
And, when the Quran is read to them, they fall not prostrate
On the contrary, the unbelievers reject it
But Allah knows best the (malice) that they hide
So announce to them the grievous woe
Save those who believe and work right. For them is an unfailing reward
By the heaven with its zodiacal signs
And by the Promised Day
And by the witnesses and the witnessed
Self-destroyed were the owners of the pit
The fire of which was supplied with abundant fuel
Behold, they sat over it
And they witnessed all they were doing against the believers
And they mistreated them only for their belief in Allah, the Mighty, the Praiseworthy
Whose are the kingdoms of the heavens and the earth; for Allah is Witness over all
Verily, those who persecute (or mislead or tempt) the believers, men and women, and then do not repent, for them is the penalty of Hell: they will have the torment of the burning Fire
Verily, those who believe and do right, for them are Gardens beneath which rivers flow: that is the great bliss
Verily, strong is the power of your Lord
Verily, it is He who creates and restores
And He is the Forgiving, the Loving
The Lord of the Glorious Throne
The Doer of what He will
Has there come to you the story of the Hosts
Of Pharaoh and the Thamud
Yet the unbelievers persist in rejecting (the truth)
But Allah is behind them - encompassing
Nay, this is a glorious Quran
(Inscribed) in a Preserved Tablet
By the heaven and by the night or (morning) star
And what shall make you know what the night star is
The star of piercing brightness
Verily, every soul has a guardian over it
Then let man look from what he is created
He is created from a drop emitted
Which comes out from between the loins and the breast bones
Surely, He is able to bring back (to life)
On the day when the secrets shall be tried
And man shall have neither strength nor helper
By the Firmament which returns in its rounds
And the earth with its sprouting
Verily, this is indeed a discriminating word
And it is no frivolity
As for them, they do plot a scheme
But I plot my scheme too
So give respite to the unbelievers; deal you gently with them for a while
Glorify the name of your Guardian Lord most High
Who created and makes order and proportion
Who ordains Laws and Guides
Who brings forth the pasture
Then turns it to dusky stubble
We will teach you by degrees to declare (or recite), and you shall not forget
Save what Allah wills. Verily, Lo! He knows the open and the hidden
And We will ease your way into the simple (path)
Therefore, remind men, for, verily, the reminder is useful
But he who fears will be mindful
And the wretch will avoid it
He will broil in the great Fire
Wherein he shall neither die nor live
He is successful who grows
And remembers the name of his Lord and prays
Nay! But you prefer the life of this world
Although the Hereafter is better and more lasting
Verily, this was in the former books
The books of Abraham and Moses
Has the story reached you, of the overwhelming
Some faces on that day shall be humbled
Toiling, weary
While they broil upon a burning Fire
While they drink from a boiling spring
No food shall they have save from the bitter Dhari
Which shall not nourish nor avail against hunger
Other faces on that day shall be joyful
Content with their past endeavours
In a lofty (sublime) Garden
Wherein they shall hear no foolish word
Wherein is a flowing fountain
Wherein are Thrones (of dignity) raised on high
And goblets set down ready
And cushions arranged
And carpets spread
Do they not look then at the camel, how she is created
And at the heaven how it is raised high
And at the mountains how they are set firm
And at the earth how it is spread out
Therefore, remind them: for you are only one to remind
you are not in authority over them
But such as turns his back and disbelieves
Him will Allah punish with the greatest torment
Verily, unto us is their return
And, verily, for Us is their accounting
I swear by (or call to witness) the dawn
And by the nights twice five (of pilgrimage)
And the even and the odd
And the night when it passes on
Is there not in these a lesson (evidence or admonition) for a man of understanding
Have you not seen how your Lord did with the people of A´ad
With the city of Iram of the lofty pillars
The like of which has not been created in all the land
And with the people of Thamud when they hewed the great stones in the valley
And with Pharaoh, Lord of the stakes
All these were outrageous in the land
And did multiply wickedness therein
Therefore, your Lord poured out upon them the scourge of diverse torments
Verily, your Lord is ever watchful
Now as for man, whenever his Lord tries him and honours him and grants him favour, then he says, "My Lord has honoured me
But whenever he tries him and restricts his subsistence, then he says, "My Lord despises me
Nay, nay! But you do not honour the orphan
Nor do you urge each other to feed the poor
And you devour the inheritance (of the weak) with greed
And you love wealth with an abounding love
Nay, when the earth is crushed to pieces
And your Lord comes with the angels, rank on rank
And Hell is brought near on that Day, on that Day shall man remember! But how shall the remembrance profit him
He will say, "Would that I had sent something forward for my life
But on that Day none shall punish as He punishes
And none shall be bound with bonds like his
But O, you soul in peace and fulfilment
Return unto your Lord, well pleased and well pleasing unto Him
Enter you amongst My servants
Enter you My Garden (Paradise)
I swear (or call to witness) this City (Mecca)
And you (Muhammad) are a dweller of this City
And the (mystic ties) of Parent and Child
We have surely created man in suffering (struggle, trouble, sorrow)
Does he think that none has power over him
He says, "I have squandered wealth in plenty
Does he think that no one sees him
Have We not made for him two eyes
And a tongue, and two lips
And guided him in the two highways
But he has not attempted the ascent
And what will explain to you the ascent
It is freeing captives (or prisoners, slaves, the restricted or bound)
Or feeding on the day of privation
An orphan who is a kin
Or a destitute lying in the dust (of misery)
And again (it is) to be of those who believe and encourage each other to patience, and encourage each other to mercy
These are the fellows of the right
But those who disbelieve in our signs, they are the fellows of the left
For them is the enclosing Fire
By the sun and its noonday brightness
And the moon when it follows him
And the day when it displays him
And the night when it covers him
And the wondrous structure of the heavens and Him who built it
And the earth and Who spread it
And the soul and Who fashioned it
And enlightened it with what is wrong and right for it
He indeed is successful who causes it to grow (or purifies it)
And he indeed is a failure who corrupts it
The Thamud people denied (the Messenger) in their rebellious pride (or outrage)
When the basest of them rose up
And the Messenger of Allah (Salih) said to them, "(This is) Allah´s she-camel! So give her to drink
But they called him a liar, and they ham-strung her; so their Lord destroyed them in their sins, and served them all alike
And He fears not the result thereof
By the night when it veils
And the day when it is displayed
And by (the mystery) of male and female
Verily, your efforts are diverse
But as for him who gives alms and fears Allah
And believes in goodness
We will ease his way to ease
But as for him who is niggardly and thinks himself independent (or self-sufficient)
And calls the good a lie
We will ease his way to misery (adversity)
And his wealth shall not avail him when he falls down (into hell)
Verily, it is for Us to guide
And, verily, Ours are the Latter and the Former life
Therefore, I have warned you of a Fire that flames fiercely
None shall broil thereon, but the most wretched
Who says it is a lie and turns his back
But the pious shall be kept away from it
He who gives his wealth that he may grow
And who gives no favour expecting a return
But only desiring the face of his Lord Most High
In the end he shall be well fulfilled
By the glorious morning light
And the night when it is still
Your Lord has not forsaken you (Muhammad), nor is displeased with you
And surely the Hereafter is better for you than the present
And in the end your Lord will give you, and you shall be well pleased
Did He not find you an orphan, and give you protection
And find you wandering (or astray), and guide you
And find you in need, and enriched you (or made you independent)
Therefore, the orphan oppress him not
Nor the beggar (or petitioner) drive away
And as for the favour of your Lord, discourse (proclaim) thereof
Have We not expanded for you your breast
And set down from you your load
Which galled your back
And exalted for you your renown
Verily, with difficulty comes ease
Verily, with difficulty comes ease
So when you are at relieved, then still toil
And to your Lord turn all your yearning (or attention)
By the Fig and the Olive
And by Mount Sinai
And by this Safe City
Surely, We have created man in the best of moulds
Then We reduced him to the lowest of the low
Save those who believe and act right; for theirs is a reward unfailing
But what shall make you call the judgment after this a lie
Is not Allah the most wise (just or conclusive) of judges
READ (or proclaim), in the name of your Lord! Who created
Created man from a clot
Read (or proclaim), for your Lord is most Bountiful
Who teaches by the pen
Taught man what he did not know
Nay, verily, man is indeed rebellious
In that he thinks himself independent (or self-sufficient or rich)
Verily, unto your Lord is the return
Have you considered him who forbids
A servant when he prays
Have you considered if he were in guidance
Or bade piety
Have you considered if he denied the truth, and turned his back
Does he not know that Allah can see
Nay, surely, if he does not desist, We will drag him by the forelock
The lying sinful forelock
So let him call his council (or comrades)
We will call the guards of Hell
Nay, obey him not, but adore and draw nigh (unto Allah)
Verily, We sent it (the Quran) down on the Night of Power
And what shall make you know what the Night of Power is
The Night of Power is better than a thousand months
The angels and the Spirit descend therein, by the permission of their Lord with every decree
Peace it is until the rising of the dawn
Those of the People of the Book and the idolaters who disbelieve did not fall away until there came to them the Manifest Sign
A Messenger from Allah reading pure pages
Wherein are right scriptures
Nor did those who were given the Book divide into sects until after there came to them the Manifest Sign
But they were bidden nothing but to worship Allah, being sincere in religion unto Him as ´Hanifs´, and to be steadfast in prayer, and to give alms: for that is the true religion
Verily, those who disbelieve amongst the people of the Book and the idolaters shall be in the fire of hell, to dwell therein for aye; they are wretched creatures
Verily, those who believe and act aright, they are the best of creatures
Their reward with their Lord is Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye; Allah shall be well pleased with them, and they with Him! That is for him who fears his Lord
When the earth shall be shaken with its quaking
And the earth shall bring forth her burdens
And man shall say, "What ails her
On that day she shall tell her tidings
Because your Lord inspires her
On the day when men shall come up in separate bands to show their works
And he who does the weight of an atom of good shall see it then
And he who does the weight of an atom of evil shall see it
By the snorting chargers
And those who strike fire with their hoofs
And those who make incursions in the morning
And raise up dust therein
And cleave through a host therein
Verily, man is to his Lord ungrateful
And, verily, he is a witness of that
Verily, he is keen in his love of wealth
Does he not know when the tombs are exposed
And what is in the breasts is brought to light
Verily, your Lord upon that day indeed is well aware
The calamity
What is the calamity
And what will convey to you what the calamity is
The day when men shall be like scattered moths
And the mountains shall be like flocks of carded wool
And as for him whose balance is heavy
He shall be in a well-pleasing life
But as for him whose balance is light
His mother will be the Bereft and Hungry One
And who shall convey to you what she is
A raging fire
The rivalry in worldly increase deludes you
Till you visit the graves
Nay! In the end you shall know
And again Nay! In the end you shall know
Nay! Did you but know with certain knowledge
You shall surely see hell
And again you shall surely see it with an eye of certainty
Then you shall surely be asked about pleasure
By the declining day
Verily, man is in a state of loss
Save those who believe and do good works, and bid each other to truth, and bid each other endurance
Woe to every slanderous scandal-monger and backbiter
Who collects wealth and counts it
He thinks that his wealth can immortalize him
Not so! He shall be hurled into El´Hutamah
Ah, what shall make you understand what El´Hutamah is
The Fire by Allah kindled
Which leaps into the heart
Lo! It closes in as a vault on them
In outstretched columns
See you not how your Lord dealt with the people of the elephant
Did He not make their stratagem lead them astray
And sent down on them birds in flocks
To pelt them with stones of baked clay
And make them like stalks left by herbage eaten down
For the taming (civilizing) of the Qureysh
Their covenant covers their caravans in winter and summer
So let them serve the Lord of this house
Who feeds them against hunger, and makes them safe against fear
Have you considered him who calls the judgment (or Religion) a lie
He it is who pushes the orphan away
And urges not (others) to feed the needy
But woe to those who pray
But are careless in their prayers
Who pretend for show
Yet withhold small kindnesses (or necessaries)
Verily, We have given you (Muhammad) El Kauthar (The Fountain of Abundance)
So pray to your Lord and sacrifice
Verily, he who insults you shall be issueless (cut off)
Say, "O you faithless
I do not serve what you serve
Nor will you serve what I serve
Nor will I serve what you serve
Nor will you serve what I serve
To you your Way and to me my Way
When there comes Allah´s help and victory
And you shall see men enter into Allah´s religion in crowds
Then celebrate the praises of your Lord, and ask forgiveness of Him, verily, He is Relenting
Perish shall the hands of The Father of Flame, and he shall perish
His wealth shall not avail him, nor what he has gained
He shall soon broil in a Fire that flames
And his wife shall carry the wood as fuel
On her own neck a cord of palm fibres
Say, "He is Allah, the One and Only
Allah the Absolute, on whom all things depend, besought by all
He begets not and is not begotten
Nor is there like unto Him any one
Say, "I seek refuge in the Lord of the Dawn
From the evil of created things
And from the evil of the night when it cometh on
And from the evil of those who practice secret arts
And from the evil of the envious when he envies
Say, "I seek refuge in the Lord and Cherisher of mankind
The King (or Ruler) of mankind
The God (or Judge) of mankind
From the mischief of the Whisperer, who slinks off
Who whispers into the heart of men
From among Jinn and Men
{
    "name": "eng-hamidsaziz",
    "author": "Hamid S Aziz",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-hamidsaziz.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-hamidsaziz.min.json"
}