1|1|With God’s Name, the Merciful Benefactor, the Merciful Redeemer
1|2|The praise belongs to God, the Guardian Evolver of all systems of knowledge
1|3|The Merciful Benefactor, the Merciful Redeemer
1|4|Sole Judge on the Day of Judgement
1|5|We only worship You, and we beg for your assistance
1|6|Guide us on the straight path
1|7|The way of those on whom You bestow blessings, not those who incur your wrath, nor those who go astray
2|1|Alif, Laam, Meem
2|2|This is the Book. In it is guidance, sure, without doubt, for all who are mindful
2|3|Who believe in the unseen, are steadfast in prayer, and give from what We have given them
2|4|And who believe in the revelation sent to you, and sent before your time, and those who have an assurance of the hereafter
2|5|They are guided by their Lord, and it is these who will flourish
2|6|As for those who reject faith, it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe
2|7|God has placed a seal on their hearts and on their hearing, and over their eyes is a blindfold, terrible is the punishment they incur
2|8|And of the people there are some who say, “We believe in God and the Last Day,” but they do not really believe
2|9|They attempt to deceive God and those who believe, but they only deceive themselves, yet they realize it not
2|10|In their hearts is a disease, and God has increased their disease, and horrifying is the penalty they incur, because they are false to themselves
2|11|When it is said to them, “Do no harm on the earth,” they say, “We only want to make things right.”
2|12|But indeed they do harm, though they realize it not
2|13|When it is said to them, “Believe as the others believe,” they say, “Shall we believe as the fools believe?” No, certainly, they are the fools, yet they realize it not
2|14|When they meet with those who believe they say, “We believe.” But when they are alone with their evil ones they say, “We are really with you, we were only joking.”
2|15|God will throw back their mockery on them, and give them rope in their trespasses, so they will wander like blind ones
2|16|These have bartered guidance for error, their business is profitless, and they have lost their way
2|17|Their likeness is that of a man who kindled a fire. When it lights all around him, God took away his light and left them in darkness
2|18|Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not return to the path
2|19|Or it is like that of a rain-laden cloud from the sky. In it are zones of darkness, thunder and lightning. They press their fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunderclap, while in fear of death, but God encompasses those who reject faith
2|20|The lightning nearly snatches away their sight. Every time the light flashes before them they walk in it. But when darkness covers them they stand still. And if God willed, He could take away their ability to hear and see, for God has power over all things
2|21|O you people, adore your Guardian Lord, Who created you and those who came before you, that you may become righteous
2|22|Who has made the earth your couch, and the skies your canopy, and sent down rain from the skies, and grew with it fruits for your sustenance. So do not set up rivals with God when you know the truth
2|23|And if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed from time to time to Our servant, then produce a Surah like it, and call your witnesses or helpers, besides God, if your doubts are true
2|24|But if you cannot, and surely you cannot, then be aware of the fire whose fuel is people and stones, which is prepared for those who reject faith
2|25|But give the good news to those who believe and work righteousness, that their reward is gardens with rivers flowing through them. Every time they are fed with fruits from it they say, “This is what we were fed with before.” They are given similar things, they have therein companions who are pure, and they will live there forever
2|26|God does not hesitate to use examples of the lowest of things as well as the highest. Those who believe know that this is the truth from their Lord, but those who do not believe say, “What does God mean by this parable?” By it He allows many to stray, and many He leads to the straight path, but He allows none to stray except those who leave the path
2|27|Those who break God's sacred agreement after it is confirmed, and who separate what God has ordered to be joined, and do wrong on earth, these cause harm to themselves
2|28|How can you lose faith in God, seeing that you were without life, and He gave you life? Then He will cause you to die, and will again bring you to life, and again to Him you will return
2|29|It is He Who has created for you all things that are on earth, then He turned to the heaven, and fashioned it into seven firmaments, and He has perfect knowledge of all things
2|30|Behold," your Lord said to the angels, “I will evolve a creation of free will on the earth.” They said, “Will You place one there who will do harm and shed blood, while we celebrate and praise You?” He said, “I know what you know not.”
2|31|And He taught Adam the names of all things, then He placed them before the angels and said, “Tell me the names of these if you are right.”
2|32|They said, “Glory be to You, we have no knowledge, except what You have taught us. In truth it is You Who are perfect in knowledge and wisdom.”
2|33|He said, “O Adam, tell them their names.” When he told them, God said, “Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the heaven and earth, and that I know what you reveal and what you conceal?”
2|34|And behold, We said to the angels, “Bow down to Adam.” They bowed down, but Lucifer did not. He refused and was bigoted, and he was of those who do not believe
2|35|We said, “O Adam, dwell you and your mate in the paradise, and eat of the bountiful things therein, as you please, but do not approach this tree, or you will collide into harm and transgression.”
2|36|Then Satan made them slip, and enticed them out of the state in which they had been. We said, “Get down, all of you, with enmity between yourselves. On earth will be your home and your means of livelihood for a time.”
2|37|Then Adam learned from his Lord words of inspiration, and his Lord turned to him, for He is Oft-Returning, Mercifully Redeeming
2|38|We said, “Get down from here, and if, as is sure, there comes to you guidance from Me, whoever follows My guidance, on them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
2|39|“But those who do not believe and ignore Our signs, they will be companions of the fire, they will live there forever.”
2|40|O Children of Israel, call to mind the favor which I bestowed upon you, and fulfill your covenant with Me, as I fulfill My covenant with you, and fear none but Me
2|41|And believe in what I reveal, reflecting the truth of the revelation that is with you, and be not the first to disbelieve in it, nor sell My signs for a miserable price, and fear Me, and Me alone
2|42|And do not dress truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth when you know what it is
2|43|And be steadfast in prayer, give zakat, and bow your heads with those who bow
2|44|Do you encourage right conduct on people and forget to practice it yourselves, though you study the Scripture? Will you not understand
2|45|No, seek help with patient-perseverance and prayer. It is indeed hard, except for those who bring a humble spirit
2|46|Who remember with certainty that they are to meet their Lord, and that they will return to Him
2|47|O Children of Israel, call to mind the favor which I bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you to all others
2|48|Guard against a day when one soul will not avail another, nor will intercession be accepted for her, nor will compensation be taken from her, nor will they be helped
2|49|And remember We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh. They gave you hard work and punishment, slaughtered your males, and let your females live, this was a tremendous trial from your Lord
2|50|And remember We divided the sea for you, We saved you and drowned Pharaoh’s people, and you saw it with your own eyes
2|51|And remember We appointed forty nights for Moses, and in his absence, you took the calf, and you did a great wrong
2|52|Even then, We forgave you, and there was a chance for you to be grateful
2|53|And remember We gave Moses the Scripture and the Criterion. There was a chance for you to be guided aright
2|54|And remember Moses said to his people, “O my people, You have indeed wronged yourselves by your worship of the calf. So turn to your Maker, and slay yourselves, that will be better for you in the sight of your Maker.” Then He forgave you, for He is Oft-Forgiving, the Merciful Redeemer
2|55|And remember you said, “O Moses, we will never believe in you until we see God with our own eyes,” but you were dazed with thunder and lightning even as you looked on
2|56|Then when We raised you up after your death, you had the chance to be grateful
2|57|And We gave you shade from clouds, and sent down to you manna and quail. Eat of the good things We have provided for you. To Us they did no harm, but they harmed their own selves
2|58|And remember We said, “Enter this town, and eat of the plenty therein as you wish, but enter the gate with humility, in posture and in word, and We will remove your faults and increase those who do right.”
2|59|But the transgressors changed a word from that which had been given them, so We sent on the transgressors a plague from heaven, because they ignored repeatedly
2|60|And remember Moses prayed for water for his people. We said, “Split the rock with your staff.” Then there gushed forth from it twelve springs. Each group knew its place for water. So eat and drink of the sustenance provided by God, and do no wrong on the earth
2|61|And remember you said, “O Moses, we cannot endure one kind of food, so ask your Lord for us to produce for us what the earth grows, its pot herbs and cucumbers, its garlic, lentils, and onions.” He said, “Will you exchange what is better for what is worse? Go down to any town and you will find what you want.” They were covered with humiliation and misery. They brought on themselves the punishment of God. This is because they went on rejecting the signs of God and slaying His messengers without just cause. This is because they rebelled and went on transgressing
2|62|Those who believe, and those who are Jewish, and the Christians, and the Sabaeans, and any who believe in God and the Last Day, and work righteousness, they will have their reward with their Lord, on them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
2|63|And remember We took your covenant, and We raised above you the Mountain saying, “Hold firm to what We have given you and bring it to remembrance so that perhaps you may be aware.”
2|64|But you turned back thereafter. Had it not been for the grace and mercy of God to you, you would have surely been among the lost
2|65|And you knew well those among you who transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath. We said to them, “Become apes, despised and rejected.”
2|66|So We made it a lesson in their own time, and for their descendants, and a lesson to those who are aware of God
2|67|And remember Moses said to his people, “God commands that you sacrifice a heifer.” They said, “Are you trying to make a fool of us?” He said, “I seek refuge with God from being ignorant.”
2|68|They said, “Ask your Lord on our behalf to make plain to us what heifer it is.” He said, “He says the heifer should be neither too old nor too young, but of middle age, now do what you are asked.”
2|69|They said, “Ask your Lord on our behalf to make plain to us its color.” He said, “He says a fawn-colored heifer, natural and rich in tone, the admiration of all beholders.”
2|70|They said, “Ask your Lord on our behalf to make clear to us which kind, to us all heifers are alike. We indeed wish for guidance, if God wills.”
2|71|He said, “He says, a heifer not trained to till the soil or water the fields, healthy and without blemish.” They said, “Now you have brought the truth.” Then they offered it in sacrifice, but without good intentions
2|72|Remember you killed a person and argued among yourselves concerning the crime, but God would expose what you hid
2|73|So We said, “Strike him with a part of it.” This is like the way God brings the dead to life. He shows you His signs that perhaps you may understand
2|74|Then your hearts were hardened, they became like a rock, or even worse in hardness, for even among rocks there are some from which rivers gush forth. Others when split open, send forth water. Yet others sink for fear of God, and God is not unmindful of what you do
2|75|Can you entertain the hope that they will believe in you, seeing that a group of them heard the word of God, and corrupted it knowingly after they understood it
2|76|Behold, when they meet the people of faith they say, “We believe.” But when they meet each other in private they say, “Shall you tell them what God has revealed to you, that they may engage you in argument about it before your Lord?” Do you not understand
2|77|Do they not know that God knows what they conceal and what they reveal
2|78|There are among them illiterates who do not know the Book, but only their desires and they do nothing but speculate
2|79|Then woe to those who write the Book with their own hands and then say, “This is from God,” to sell it for a miserable price. Woe to them for what their hands write, and for the gain they make with it
2|80|But they say, “The fire will not touch us, except for just a few number of days.” Say, “Have you taken a promise from God, for He never breaks His promise? Or is it that you say of God what you do not know?”
2|81|No, those who wrongfully seek gain, and are surrounded by wrong, they are companions of the fire, and they will live there forever
2|82|But those who have faith and work righteousness, they are companions of the paradise, they will live there forever
2|83|And remember We took this covenant from the Children of Israel, “Worship none but God, treat with kindness your parents and other family, and orphans, and those in need, speak fair to people, be steadfast in prayer, and give zakat. Then you turned back, except a few among you, and you backslide
2|84|And remember We took this covenant, “Shed no blood among you, nor banish your own people from your homes.” And this you solemnly ratified, and to this, you can bear witness
2|85|After this it is you, the same people who slay those among yourselves, and banish a group of you from their homes, assist others against them in wrong and transgression, and if they come to you as captives, you ransom them, though it was not permissible for you to banish them. So is it only parts of the Book that you believe in, and do you reject the rest? But what is the reward for those among you who behave like this, except disgrace in this life, and on the Day of Accountability, they will be assigned to the most terrible penalty, for God is not unmindful of what you do
2|86|These are the people who buy the life of the present at the price of the hereafter. Their penalty will not be lightened nor will they be helped
2|87|We gave Moses the Book, and followed him with a succession of prophets. We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, guidance and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Is it that whenever there comes to you a messenger with what you do not desire, you are puffed up with pride? Some you called impostors, and others you slay
2|88|They say, “Our hearts are the wrappings which preserves God’s words. We need no more” No, God's curse is on them for their blasphemy. Little is it they believe
2|89|And when there comes to them a book from God reflecting the truth of what is with them, although they prayed for victory against those without faith. When there comes to them that which they recognized, they refused to believe in it, but the curse of God is on those without faith
2|90|Miserable is the price for which they have sold their souls, for they deny that which God has sent down, because in insolent envy they disapprove that God, of His grace, should send it to any of His servants He pleases. So they have drawn on themselves wrath upon wrath, and humiliating is the punishment for those who reject faith
2|91|When it is said to them, “Believe in what God has sent down,” they say, “We believe in what was sent down to us.” And they reject all else, even if it is truth reflecting what is with them. Say, “Why then have you slain the Prophets of God throughout history if you did indeed believe?”
2|92|Moses came to you with guidance, yet you worshipped the calf even after that, and you behaved wrongfully
2|93|And remember We took your sacred agreement, and We raised above you the Mountain saying, “Hold firmly to what We have given you and listen to it”. They said, “We hear but we do not follow.” So they had to drink into their hearts from the calf, because of their faithlessness. Say, “Evil is what encourages you to do it, as well as your incorrect faith, if you are in fact believers in that faith.”
2|94|Say, “If the last home with God is for you alone, and not for anyone else, then seek death if you are sincere.”
2|95|But they will never seek death, because of that which their hands have sent before them, and God is well acquainted with the wrongdoers
2|96|You will indeed find them, of all people, most greedy of life, even more than the idolaters. Each one of them wishes that he could be given a life of a thousand years, but the granting of such life will not save him from punishment, because God sees well all that they do
2|97|Say, whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, though he brings down to your heart, by God's will, a reflection of the truth that went before, guidance and good news for those who believe
2|98|Whoever is an enemy to God, His angels and messengers, and to Gabriel and Michael, God then is an enemy to those who do not believe
2|99|We have sent down to you clear signs, and none reject them except those who are perverse
2|100|Is it not that every time they make a covenant, some group among them throw it aside? Certainly, most of them are faithless
2|101|And when there came to them a messenger from God, reflecting the truth of what was with them, a group of the people of the Book threw away the Book of God behind their backs, as if they did not know it
2|102|They followed what the devils recited against the power of Solomon. The blasphemer was not Solomon, but the devils, teaching human beings illusions, and such things as came down at Babylon to the angels Harut and Marut, but neither of these taught anyone without saying, “We are only a trial, so do not blaspheme.” They learned from them the means to sow discord between husband and wife. But they could not harm anyone except by God's permission. And they learned what harmed them, not what profited them. And they knew that the buyers of wrong would have no share in the happiness of the hereafter, and awful was the price for which they sold their souls, if they but knew
2|103|But if they had kept their faith and guarded themselves from harm, far better would have been the reward from their Lord, if they only knew
2|104|O you people of faith, say not words of ambiguity, but words of respect, and act urgently. And for those without faith is a terrible punishment
2|105|It is never the wish of those without faith among the people of the Book, nor of the pagans, that anything good should come down to you from your Lord. But God will choose for His special mercy whom He wills, for God is Lord of grace abounding
2|106|None of Our revelations do We allow to be lost, but We substitute something better or similar. Do you not know that God has power over all things
2|107|Do you not know that to God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth? And besides Him, you have neither patron nor helper
2|108|Would you question your messenger as Moses was questioned previously? But whoever changes from belief to unbelief has strayed without doubt from the balanced way
2|109|Many of the people of the Book wish they could turn you back to infidelity after you have believed. To selfish envy, after the truth has become manifest to them. But forgive and overlook until God accomplishes His purpose. For God has power over all things
2|110|And be steadfast in prayer and give zakat, and whatever good you send ahead for your souls before you, you will find it with God, for God sees well all that you do
2|111|And they say, “None will enter paradise unless he is Jewish or Christian.” Those are merely their desires. Say, “Produce your proof if you are right.”
2|112|No, whoever submits his whole self to God and is a doer of good, he will receive his reward with his Guardian Evolver. On them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
2|113|Jews say, “The Christians have nothing to stand upon. And Christians say, “Jews have nothing to stand upon.” Yet they all read the Book. Their words are like those who know not. But God will judge between them in their quarrel on the Day of Accountability
2|114|And who is more unjust than he who forbids in places for the worship of God, that God's name should be praised, and whose zeal is to ruin them? It was not fitting that they should enter them except in fear. For them there is nothing but disgrace in the present, and in the hereafter, an exceeding torment
2|115|To God belong the East and West. Wherever you turn, there is the Presence of God, for God is Ever Present, All Knowing
2|116|They say, “God has a son, glory be to him.” No, to God belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and everything renders worship to Him
2|117|From Him is the origin of the heavens and the earth, when He decrees a matter He says to it: “Be”. And it is
2|118|Those without knowledge say, “Why does God not speak to us, or why does a sign not come to us?” As did the people say before them. Their words are similar, and their hearts are alike. We have indeed made clear the signs to any who hold firmly to faith
2|119|Indeed We have sent you, in truth, as a bearer of good news and a warner. But no question will be asked of you from the companions of the blazing fire
2|120|Never will Jews or Christians be satisfied with you unless you follow their way. Say, “The way of God, that is the only way.” If you followed their desires after the knowledge has reached you, then you would find neither protector nor helper
2|121|Those to whom We have sent the Book, read it as it should be read, they are the ones who believe. Those who do not believe, the loss is their own
2|122|O Children of Israel, call to mind the favor which I bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you to all others
2|123|So guard yourselves against a day when no soul will avail another, nor will compensation be accepted from her, nor will intercession profit her, nor will anyone be helped
2|124|And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain commands which he fulfilled. He said, “I will make you a leader of the nations.” He pleaded, “And also from my offspring.” He answered, “But My promise is not within reach of the wrongdoers.”
2|125|Remember We made the House a place of assembly for humanity and a place of safety. And take the station of Abraham as a place of prayer. And We made a covenant with Abraham and Ishmael, that they should redeem My house for those who circle it, or use it as a retreat, or bow, or prostrate themselves
2|126|And remember Abraham said, “My Lord, make this a city of peace, and feed its people with fruit, those of them who believe in God and the Last Day.” He said, “And those who do not believe, I will grant them their pleasure for a while, but will soon drive them to the torment of the fire, a miserable destination indeed.”
2|127|And remember Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House with this prayer, “Our Lord, accept this from us. Indeed You alone are the All Hearing, the All Knowing.”
2|128|“Our Lord, make us people of peace, raise from our offspring people at peace, teach us ways to worship, and forgive us, indeed You are Most Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
2|129|“Our Lord, send among them a messenger of their own who will rehearse Your signs to them, instruct them in scripture and wisdom, and sanctify them, for You are the Exalted in Might, the Wise.”
2|130|And who would turn away from the way of Abraham, except to debase their souls? We chose him and rendered him refined in this life. And he will be in the hereafter among the righteous
2|131|Behold, his Lord said to him, “Bow down.” He said, “I do bow to the Lord of the universe.”
2|132|And this was the legacy that Abraham left to his sons, as did Jacob. He said, “Oh my sons, God has chosen the way for you, so die not except as those at peace.”
2|133|Were you witnesses when death appeared before Jacob? Behold, he said to his sons, “What will you worship after me?” They said, “We will worship your God and the God of your fathers Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, the one God, and to Him we bow.”
2|134|That was a community who passed away. They will reap the fruit of what they sow, and you of what you sow. And you will not be asked about what they used to do
2|135|They say, “Become Jews or Christians if you are to be guided.” Say, “No, enough is the philosophy of Abraham the true, and he did not join gods with God.”
2|136|Say, “We believe in God, and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and that given to Moses and Jesus, and that given to the other prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between them, and we are at peace with Him.”
2|137|So if they believe as you believe, they are indeed on the right path. But if they turn back, they are in disunity. But God will suffice for you against them, and He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing
2|138|The baptism of God, who can baptize better than God? And it is He Whom we worship
2|139|Say, “Will you dispute with us about God, seeing that He is our Lord and your Lord? That we are responsible for our deeds, and you for yours? And that We are sincere before Him
2|140|“Or do you say that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, “Do you know better than God? Who is more unjust than those who conceal the testimony they have from God, and God is not unmindful of what you do.”
2|141|They were a community who have passed away. They will reap the fruit of what they sow, and you of what you sow. And you will not be asked about what they used to do. 141 (End of Part)
2|142|The foolish among the people will say, “What has turned them from the qibla to which they were accustomed?” Say, “To God belong both East and West, He guides whom He wills to a straight way.”
2|143|Thus we have made you a balanced community, that you might be witnesses over the nations, and the messenger a witness over you. And We appointed the qibla from that which you were used to, only to make evident he who followed the messenger and he who would turn on his heels. Indeed it was momentous, except for those guided by God. And never would God make your faith meaningless, for God is to all people full of kindness, the Merciful Redeemer
2|144|We see you turning your face to the heavens. Now We will turn you to a qibla that will please you. So turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Masjid. Wherever you are, turn your faces in that direction. The people of the Book know well that it is the truth from their Lord, nor is God unmindful of what they do
2|145|Even if you were to bring to the people of the Book all the signs at once, they would not follow your qibla, nor are you going to follow their qibla, nor will they follow each other’s qibla. If you, after the knowledge has reached you, follow their desires, you are then clearly in the wrong
2|146|The people of the Book know this as they know their own children. But some of them conceal the truth which they know
2|147|The truth is from your Lord, so do not be among those in doubt
2|148|To each is a goal to which God turns them. So strive together towards all that is good. Wherever you are, God will bring you together, for God has power over all things
2|149|From wherever you are, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Masjid. That is indeed the truth from the Guardian Evolver. And God is not unmindful of what you do
2|150|And from wherever you start out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Masjid. Wherever you are, turn your face in that direction. There is no grounds of dispute for you among the people, except those of them who are bent on corruption. So do not fear them, but fear Me, so that I may complete My favor on you, and so that you may be guided
2|151|And We have sent among you a messenger of your own, rehearsing to you Our signs, and helping to refine you, and teaching you the book and the wisdom, and that which you did not know
2|152|Then remember Me, I will remember you. Be grateful to Me, and do not reject it
2|153|O you who believe, seek help with patient perseverance and prayer. For God is with those who patiently persevere
2|154|And do not say of those who are slain in the way of God, “They are dead.” No, they are living, though you cannot see them
2|155|Know that We will challenge you with something of fear and hunger, some loss in goods or lives, or your fruits. But give good news to those who patiently persevere
2|156|That say when afflicted with calamity, “To God we belong, and to Him is our reversion.”
2|157|They are those on whom descend blessings from God— and mercy. And they are the ones who receive guidance
2|158|Behold, Safa and Marwa are among the symbols of God. So whoever circles the House while performing Hajj or Umra, there is no wrong in that. And whoever follows his own impulse to do good, be sure that God is He Who recognizes and knows it
2|159|Those who conceal the clear signs We have sent down, and the guidance, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book, on them is God's curse, a curse for those deserving curse
2|160|Except those who repent and make it right, and openly declare it. To them I turn, for I am Oft-Returning, Mercifully Redeeming
2|161|Those who do not believe and die rejecting, on them is God's curse, and the curse of the angels, and all humanity
2|162|They will live there. Their penalty will not be lightened, nor will they be given respite
2|163|And your God is One God. There is no god but He, the Merciful Benefactor, the Merciful Redeemer
2|164|Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth. In the alternation of the night and the day. In the sailing of the ships through the ocean for the profit of humanity. In the rain that God sends down from the skies. And the life which He gives to land that is dead. In the creatures of all kinds that He scatters through the earth. In the change of the winds, and the clouds which they trail like their slaves between the sky and the earth. Indeed in these are signs for people who are wise
2|165|Yet there are people who take others besides God as equals. They love them as they should love God. But those of faith are overflowing in their love for God. If only those who are not right could see, behold, they would see the penalty. To God belongs all power, and God will strictly enforce the penalty
2|166|Then those who are followed will clear themselves of those who follow them. They will see the penalty, and all relations between them would be severed
2|167|And those who followed would say, “If only We had one more chance, we would clear ourselves of them, as they have cleared themselves of us.” God will show them their deeds as regrets. And there will not be a way for them out of the fire
2|168|O you people, eat of what is on the earth, permissible and healthy. And do not follow the footsteps of Satan, for he is to you a sworn enemy
2|169|He only commands you what is harmful and shameful. And to say about God that which you do not know
2|170|When it is said to them, “Follow what God has revealed,” they say, “No, we will follow the ways of our parents.” What, even though their parents were void of wisdom and guidance
2|171|The parable of those who do not believe is as if one were to shout like a goat-herd to things that listen to nothing, but calls and cries. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they are void of wisdom
2|172|O you who believe, eat of the good things that We have provided for you, and be grateful to God, if it is Him you worship
2|173|He has only forbidden you animals found dead, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which any other name has been invoked besides that of God. But if one is forced by necessity, without willfully rejecting, nor transgressing due limits, then he is guiltless, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
2|174|Those who conceal God's revelation in the Book, and purchase them for a miserable profit, they swallow into themselves nothing but fire. God will not address them on the Day of Resurrection, nor redeem them, and terrible will be their penalty
2|175|They are the ones who buy error instead of guidance, and torment in place of forgiveness. What boldness they show for the fire
2|176|This is because God sent down the Book in truth. But those who seek causes of dispute in the Book are in disharmony
2|177|It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards East or West. But it is righteousness to believe in God and the Last Day, and the Angels, the Book, and the messengers. To give of your sustenance, out of love for Him, for your family, for orphans, for the needy, and for displaced persons, for those who ask, and for the freeing of slaves. To be steadfast in prayer, and give zakat. To fulfill the contracts which you have made, and to be firm and patient in pain and suffering, and adversity, and through all periods of crisis. Such are the people of truth, the realized
2|178|O you who believe, the law of equality is prescribed to you in the case of homicide. The free for the free, the slave for the slave, and the woman for the woman. Also, if any pardon is made by the sibling of the slain, then grant any reasonable demand, and compensate them with gratitude. This is a concession and a mercy from your Lord. After this, whoever exceeds the limits will be in grave penalty
2|179|In the Law of Equality, there is good for you, O you people of understanding, that you may restrain yourselves
2|180|It is prescribed when death approaches any of you, if he leaves good, that he make a will for parents and next of kin, according to what is reasonable. This is a duty from those who are regardful
2|181|If anyone changes the will after hearing it, the guilt will be on those who make the change, for God hears and knows
2|182|But if anyone fears partiality or wrongdoing on the part of the testator, and makes peace between them, there is no sin on him, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
2|183|O you who believe, fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed to those before you, that you might increase in consciousness and awareness
2|184|Abstain for a fixed number of days. But if any of you are ill, or on a journey, the prescribed number should be made up days later, for those who can do it, is an exchange of feeding one who needs food. But he who will give more of his own free will it is better for him. And it is better for you that you abstain, if you only knew
2|185|Ramadan is the month the Quran was revealed as a guide to humanity, as proof, and as the guidance and the criterion. So every one of you who are present during that month should spend it fasting, but if anyone is ill or on a journey, the prescribed period should be made up days later. God intends good for you, He does not want to make it difficult for you, instead He wants for you to complete the prescribed period, and to praise Him, for He has guided you, so that you might be grateful
2|186|When My servants ask you concerning Me, I am indeed near. I listen to the prayer of every suppliant when he calls on Me. Let them also, willingly, listen to My call, and believe in Me, that they may walk in the right way
2|187|Encouraged for you on the night of the fast is sexual relations with your wives. They are garments for you and you are garments for them. God knows what you used to do secretly among yourselves, but He turned to you and forgave you. So associate with them now, and seek what God has ordained for you. And eat and drink until the white thread of dawn appears to you distinct from its black thread. Then continue to fast until night. But do not be intimate with your wives while you are in retreat in the masjid. Those are limits set by God, do not come near it. God makes clear His signs to humanity, that they may become realized
2|188|And do not consume your property among yourselves in vanity, nor use it as bribes for the judges, with intent that you may consume wrongfully and knowingly, a little of other people’s property
2|189|They ask you concerning the new moons. Say, “They are signs to mark fixed periods of time for humanity, including the Hajj.” It is not righteous to enter your houses from the back. But it is righteous to be one who is conscious of God, and to enter houses through there proper doors, and to be aware of God, that you may flourish
2|190|Fight in the cause of God, those who fight you, but do not transgress limits, for God does not love transgressors
2|191|And slay them wherever you catch them. And drive them out from where they have driven you out, for oppression is worse than slaughter. But do not fight them at the Sacred Masjid, unless they attack you there, and if they attack you, slay them. Such is the punishment of those who suppress faith
2|192|But if they cease, indeed God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
2|193|And fight against them until there is no more oppression, and justice prevails, as does faith in God. But if they cease, let there be no hostility to any except those who practice oppression
2|194|The prohibited month for the prohibited month, and so for all things prohibited, there is the law of equality. But if anyone transgresses the prohibition against you, respond likewise against him, but be aware of God, and know that God is with those who show restraint
2|195|And give of your sustenance in the cause of God, and do not make your hands contribute to your own destruction. But do good, for God loves those who do good
2|196|And complete the Hajj and ‘Umra in service of God. But if you are prevented, send something of value which is manageable. And do not shave your heads until the offering reaches the place of sacrifice. And if any of you are sick, or has an ailment in his scalp, he should in exchange either fast, feed the poor, or offer sacrifice. When ready, if anyone wishes to continue the ‘Umra, on to the Hajj, he must make an offering, such as he can afford. But if he cannot afford it, he should fast three days during the Hajj and seven days on his return, making ten days in all. This is for those whose household is not in the Sacred Masjid. And be aware of God, and know that God is strict in punishment
2|197|The Hajj months are knowledge based. If anyone undertakes that duty therein, let there be no obscenity, nor corruption, nor wrangling during the Hajj. And whatever good you do, God knows it. And take provisions with you for the journey. But the best of provisions is consciousness. So be conscious of Me, O you who are wise
2|198|It is no sin on you if you seek of the bounty of your Lord. Then when you depart from Arafat, praise God at the sacred landmark, and praise Him as He has directed you, even though, before this, you went astray
2|199|Then continue at a quick pace from the place where it is usual for the crowd to do so, and ask for God's forgiveness, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
2|200|So when you have completed your rites, praise God, as you used to praise your ancestors. Yes, with even far more heart and soul. There are those who say, “Our Lord, give us Your bounties in the present.” But they will have no portion in the hereafter
2|201|Then there are those who say, “Our Lord, give us good in the present and good in the hereafter, and save us from the torment of the fire.”
2|202|To these will be allotted what they have earned, and God is quick in account
2|203|Glorify God by praising Him during the numbered days. But if anyone hastens to leave in two days, there is no blame on him, and if anyone stays, there is no blame on him, if his aim is to do right. And be regardful of God, and know that you will surely be gathered to Him
2|204|There is the type of person whose speech about the present life may dazzle you. And he calls God to witness what is in his heart, yet he is the most contentious of enemies
2|205|When he turns his back, his aim is to instigate problems through the earth, and destroy crops and livestock. But God does not love wrongdoing
2|206|When it is said to him, “Be conscious of God”, he is led by arrogance to harmful deeds. Enough for him is hell, an agonizing place indeed
2|207|And there is the type of person who gives his life to earn the pleasure of God, and God is full of kindness to the devotees
2|208|O you who believe, enter into Al-Islam whole-heartedly, and do not follow the footsteps of Satan, for he is to you a sworn enemy
2|209|If you backslide, after guidance has come to you, know then that God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
2|210|Will they wait until God comes to them in canopies of clouds, and the question is settled? And to God do all questions go back
2|211|Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We have sent them. And if anyone, after God's favor has come to him, substitutes something in its place, God is strict in punishment
2|212|The life of the present is alluring to those who do not believe. And they ridiculed those who believe. But the righteous will be above them on the Day of Resurrection, for God bestows His abundance without measure on whom He wills
2|213|Humankind was once one nation. And God sent messengers with good news and warnings, and with them He sent the Book in truth, to judge between the people in matters wherein they differed, but the people of the Book, after the clear signs came to them, did not differ among themselves, except through stubborn refusal. God, by His grace, guided the believers to the truth concerning that wherein they differed, for God guides whom He wills to a path that is straight
2|214|Or do you think that you will enter paradise without such things coming to you as came to those who passed away before you? They encountered suffering and adversity, and were so shaken in spirit, that even the messenger and those of faith who were with him cried, “When will come the help of God.” Indeed the help of God is near
2|215|They ask you what they should give. Say, “Whatever you give that is good, is for parents, family, orphans, those in want, and for displaced persons.” And whatever you do that is good, God knows it well
2|216|Fighting is prescribed for you though you dislike it. But it is possible that you may dislike a thing that is good for you, and that you may love a thing that is harmful to you, but God knows and you know not
2|217|They ask you concerning fighting in the prohibited month. Say, “Fighting therein is a grave offense, but worse in the sight of God is to prevent access to the path of God, to deny Him, to prevent access to the Sacred Masjid, and to drive out its members.” Oppression is worse than slaughter. Nor will they cease fighting you until they turn you back from your faith if they can. And if any of you turn back from their faith and die in unbelief, their works will bear no fruit in this life, and in the hereafter, they will be companions of the fire and will live therein forever
2|218|Those who believed, and those who suffered exile and fought in the path of God, they have the hope of the mercy of God, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
2|219|They ask you concerning intoxicants and gambling. Say, “In both of them is great harm and benefit for humanity, but the harm outweighs the benefit.” They ask you how much they are to give. Say, “That which is beyond your needs.” Indeed God makes clear to you His signs in order that you may contemplate
2|220|This life and the hereafter. They ask you concerning orphans. Say, “The best things to do is what is best for them. If you mix their affairs with yours, then they are your brothers, but God knows the person who means harm from the person who means well, and if God had willed, He could have put you into difficulties. He is indeed the Exalted in Power.”
2|221|Do not marry disbelieving women until they believe. A slave woman who believes is better than a disbelieving woman is, though she is attractive to you. Nor marry disbelieving men until they believe. A slave man who believes is better than a disbeliever is, even though he is attractive to you. Disbelievers lead you to the fire, but God leads, by His grace, to the garden and forgiveness, and makes His signs clear to humanity, that they may remember
2|222|They ask you concerning women’s menses. Say, “It is a renewal. Thus decline them during their menses, nor go unto them until they are renewed. But once renewed you may approach them in the manner ordained for you by God. For God loves those who constantly turn to Him, and He loves those who refine themselves.”
2|223|Your wives are tilth to you. So approach your tilth when and how you two decide. But do some good acts for yourselves beforehand, and be conscious of God, and know that you are to meet Him. And give good news to those who believe
2|224|And do not make God an excuse in your promises against doing good, or acting right, or making peace between people. For God is the One who hears and knows all things
2|225|God will not call you to account for the thoughtlessness in your promises, but for the intention in your hearts. And He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Understanding
2|226|For those who take an oath of abstention from their wives, a waiting period for four months is ordained. If then they return, God is the Oft-Forgiving, the Merciful Redeemer
2|227|But if their intention is firm for divorce, God hears and knows all things
2|228|Divorced women should wait concerning themselves for three monthly periods. And it is not permissible for them to hide what God has created in their wombs, if they have faith in God and the Last Day. And their husbands have the right to reunite in that period if they wish for reconciliation. But women have rights the same as the rights on them according to what is equitable. But men should take a final position concerning them, and God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
2|229|Divorce no more than twice. After that, the parties should either hold together on fair terms, or separate with kindness. It is not permissible for you to take back any of your gifts from your wives, except when both parties fear that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained by God. If you indeed fear that they would be unable to keep the limits set down by God, there is no blame on either of them if she negotiates with it. These are the limits established by God, so do not transgress them. If any transgress the limits prescribed by God, they are doing wrong
2|230|So if a husband divorces his wife irrevocably, he cannot re-marry her after that, until after she has married a different husband and he has divorced her. In that case, there is no blame on either of them if they reunite, provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by God. Such are the limits established by God which He makes plain to those who understand
2|231|If you divorce women and they fulfill the terms of their ‘iddat, either take them back on fair terms or let them go on fair terms. But do not take them back to injure them or to take undue advantage of them. If anyone does that, he wrongs his own self. Do not treat God's signs without regard, but solemnly rehearse God's favors on you, and the fact that He sent down to you the Book and the Wisdom for your instruction. And be conscious of God, and know that God is well acquainted with all things
2|232|If you divorce women and they fulfill the term of their ‘iddat, do not prevent them from marrying their husbands, if they mutually agree on fair terms. This instruction is for all among you who believe in God and the Last Day, the virtuous and refined. And God knows and you know not
2|233|And mothers wean their offspring in two complete years, for those who wish to complete the weaning. And he will bear the cost of their food and clothing on fair terms. No soul will have a burden laid on it greater than it can bear. No mother should be treated unfairly because of her child, nor a father because of his child. An heir should be treated the same. If they both decide on weaning, by mutual consent and after due consultation, there is no blame on them. If you decide on a foster-mother for your offspring, there is no blame on you, provided you pay the mother what you offered on fair terms. But be conscious of God, and know that God sees well all that you do
2|234|If any of you die and leave widows behind, they should wait concerning themselves, four months and ten days. When they have fulfilled their term, there is no blame on you if they deal with themselves in a just and reasonable manner, and God is well acquainted with all that you do
2|235|There is no blame on you if you make an offer of betrothal or hold it in your hearts. God knows that you cherish them in your hearts. But do not make secret promises to them except in honorable terms. Nor decide on marriage until the term prescribed is completed. And know that God knows what is in your hearts, and take heed of Him, and know that God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Understanding
2|236|There is no blame on you if you divorce women before consummation or the fixation of their dowry. But bestow on them a suitable gift, the wealthy according to his means, and the poor according to his means. A gift of a reasonable amount is due from those who wish to do right
2|237|And if you divorce them before consummation but after the fixation of a dowry, then half of the dowry is due to them, unless they decline it, or the one in whose hands is the marriage declines it. And the declining of the man’s half is nearest to righteousness. And do not forget generosity between yourselves, for God sees well all that you do
2|238|Remember prayers, especially the middle prayer. And stand before God in a devout frame of mind
2|239|If you are concerned, pray on foot or when riding. But when you are secure, remember God in the manner He has taught you which you knew not
2|240|Those of you who die and leave spouses, should leave for their spouse a year’s cost of living. But if they leave, there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves, it is acceptable, and God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
2|241|For divorced women, maintenance should be provided on a reasonable scale. This is an obligation on the righteous
2|242|And God makes clear His signs to you, in order that you may understand
2|243|Did you not turn your vision to those who abandoned their homes, though they were thousands, for fear of death? God said to them, “Die.” Then He restored them to life, for God is full of bounty to humanity. But most of them are ungrateful
2|244|Then strive in the cause of God, and know that God hears and knows all things
2|245|Who will loan to God a handsome loan which God will double to his credit and multiply many times? It is God Who gives you want or plenty. And to Him will be your reversion
2|246|Have you not turned your vision to the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses? They said to a prophet among them, “Appoint for us a king, so that we may fight in the cause of God.” He said, “Is it possible that if you were asked to fight that you will not fight?” They said, “How could we refuse to fight in the cause of God, seeing that we were banished from our homes and from our families?” But when they were asked to fight, they turned back, except a small group among them, but God has full knowledge of those who do wrong
2|247|Their prophet said to them, “God has appointed Talut as king over you.” They said, “How can he have authority over us when we are better fitted than he to have authority, and when he has not been given great wealth?” He said, “God has chosen him above you and has given him great knowledge and substance. God grants His authority to whom He pleases. God cares for all and He knows all things.”
2|248|And their prophet said to them, “A sign of his authority is that there will come to you the Ark of the Covenant with an assurance of security from your Lord, and the relics left by the family of Moses, and the family of Aaron carried by angels. Indeed in this is a symbol for you if you are believers.”
2|249|When Talut marched with the soldiers he said, “God will challenge you at the stream. If any drinks of its water, he will not go with my army. Only those who do not drink it will go with me, a little sip from the hand is excused.” But they all drank of it, except a few. When they crossed the river, he and the faithful with him said, “This day We cannot cope with Goliath and his forces.” But those who were convinced that they must meet God said, “How often, by God's will, has a small force vanquished a large one? God is with those who steadfastly persevere.”
2|250|When they advanced to meet Goliath and his forces, they prayed, “Our Lord, pour out constancy on us and make our steps sure, and help us against those who do not believe.”
2|251|By God's will they defeated them, and David slew Goliath. And God gave him power and wisdom, and taught him whatever he wished. And if God did not check one set of people by way of another, the earth would indeed be full of chaos. But God is full of bounty to all the worlds
2|252|These are the signs of God. We rehearse them to you in truth because indeed you are one of the messengers. 252 (End of Part)
2|253|Some of the messengers We endowed with gifts above others. Among them is one to whom God spoke. Others He raised through levels. To Jesus the son of Mary We gave guidance and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. If God had willed, succeeding generations would not have fought among themselves after guidance came to them. But they were divided, some believing and others rejecting. If God had willed they would not have fought each other, but God fulfills His plan
2|254|O you who believe, give from what We have given you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining, nor friendship, nor intercession. And those who reject it, they are the wrongdoers
2|255|God, there is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Sufficient, the Eternal. No exhaustion can overcome Him, nor sleep. His are all things in the heavens and on earth. Who is there that can intercede in His presence except as He permits? He knows what is before, after, and behind them. And they will not grasp any of His knowledge except as He wills. His throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and He feels no fatigue in guarding and preserving them, for He is the Most High, the Supreme
2|256|Let there be no compulsion in religion. Indeed right is clear, as is wrong. Whoever rejects wrong and believes in God has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that never slips, and God hears and knows all things
2|257|God is the Protector of those who have faith. From the depths of darkness He will lead them out into the light. Of those who do not believe, their companions are the wrongdoers. From light, they will lead them down into the depths of darkness. They will be companions of the fire, to dwell therein forever
2|258|Have you not turned your vision to one who disputed with Abraham about his Lord because God had granted him power? Abraham said, “My Lord is He Who gives life and death.” He said, “I give life and death.” Abraham said, “And it is God Who causes the Sun to rise from the East, can you cause it to rise from the West?” Then he was angered, he who rejected. And God does not give guidance to those people who are wrongdoers
2|259|Or it is like one who passed over a neighborhood in ruins up to its rooftops. He said, “How will God bring it to life after its death?” So God caused him to die for a hundred years then raised him up. He said, “How long have you been here?” He said, “A day or part of a day.” He said, “No, you have been here a hundred years. But look at your food and drink, they show no sign of age, and look at your donkey. And We will make you a sign for humanity. Look further at the bones, how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh.” Once this became clear to him he said, “I know that God has power over all things.”
2|260|Behold, Abraham said, “My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead.” He said, “Do you not believe?” He said, “I do, but show me to satisfy my heart.” He said, “Take four birds, and train them to return to you. Put a part of them on every hill and call to them. They will come to you with speed. So know that God is Exalted in Power, the Wise.”
2|261|The comparison of those who give their sustenance in the way of God is that of a grain of corn. It grows seven ears, and each ear has a hundred kernels. God gives abundant increase to whom He pleases, and God cares for all and He knows all things
2|262|Those who give their sustenance in the cause of God, and do not follow up their gifts with reminders of their generosity or with injury, for them, their reward is with their Lord. Upon them should be no fear, nor shall they grieve
2|263|Kind words and the covering of faults are better than charity followed by injury. But God is free of all wants, and He is Enduring
2|264|O you who believe, do not cancel out your charity with reminders of your generosity or by insults, like one who gives their sustenance to be seen by people, but believe neither in God nor in the Last Day. His similitude is like a hard, barren rock, on which is a little soil. On it falls heavy rain which leaves it a bare stone. They will be able to do nothing with what they have earned, and God does not guide those who do not believe
2|265|And the likeness of those who give their sustenance seeking the pleasure of God and to strengthen themselves is as a garden high and fertile. Heavy rain falls on it, and makes it yield a double increase of harvest, and if it does not receive heavy rain, a drizzle suffices it. And God sees all that you do
2|266|Do any of you wish that he would have a garden with date palms, and vines, and streams flowing through, and all kinds of fruit, while he is stricken with old age and his children are not yet strong? That it would be caught in a whirlwind with fire and be burned up? In this way, God makes clear to you His signs so that you may consider
2|267|O you who believe, give of the good things that you have earned, and of the fruits of the earth that We have produced for you. And do not aim at getting anything in the wrong way, in order that out of it you may give away something when you yourselves would not receive it except with closed eyes. And know that God is free of all wants and worthy of all praise
2|268|Satan threatens you with poverty and invites you to indecent conduct, while God promises you His forgiveness and bounties, and God cares for all and He knows all things
2|269|He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and he to whom wisdom is granted, indeed receives a benefit overflowing, but none will grasp the message except people of understanding
2|270|And whatever you give in charity or devotion, be sure God knows it all, but the wrongdoers have no helpers
2|271|If you disclose your charity, that is fine. But if you give anonymously to those in need, that is best for you. It will remove from you some of your guilt, and God is well acquainted with what you do
2|272|It is not required of you to guide them, but God guides whom He pleases. Whatever good you give, benefits your own souls, but you should only do so seeking the Face of God. Whatever good you give, will be repaid to you, and you will not be dealt with unjustly
2|273|It is for those in need, who in God's cause, are restricted and cannot move around in the land to seek opportunity. The ignorant person thinks because of their modesty, that they are free from want. You will know them by their mark, not by them constantly begging. And whatever good you give, be assured God knows it well
2|274|Those who give of their resources by night and by day, in secret and in public, have their reward with their Lord. On them will be no fear nor shall they grieve
2|275|Those who devour usury will not stand except as one stands who Satan, by his touch, has driven to madness. Because they say, “Trade is like usury.” But God has permitted trade and forbidden usury. Those who cease after receiving direction from their Lord will be forgiven for their past, and their case is for God. But those who continue are companions of the fire, they will live therein forever
2|276|God will deprive usury of all blessings, but will give more for deeds of charity, for He does not love ungrateful wrong-doers
2|277|Those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, who establish prayer and give zakat, they will have their reward with their Lord. On them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
2|278|O you who believe, be conscious of God and give up what remains of your demand for usury, if you are indeed believers
2|279|If you do not, then prepare for war from God and His messenger. But if you turn back, you will have your capital gains. So do not deal unjustly, because you will not be dealt with unjustly
2|280|If the debtor is in difficulty, grant him time until it is easy for him to repay. But if you forgive it as a charity, that is best for you if you only knew
2|281|And fear the day when you will be brought back to God. Then every soul will be paid what she earned, and none will be dealt with unjustly
2|282|O you who believe, when you deal with each other in transactions involving future obligations in a fixed period of time, put them in writing. Let a scribe write it down correctly for the parties involved, and the scribe should not refuse to write. God has taught him, so let him write. Let him who incurs the liability dictate, but let him fear his Lord and not omit any of what he owes. If the party liable is mentally deficient or weak, or unable to dictate, let his guardian dictate correctly. And get two witnesses from your men. If not two men, then a man and two women, of whom you agree to be witnesses, so that if one of the two errs, then one of the two can remind the other. And the witnesses should not refuse when they are called on. Do not refuse to reduce things to writing for a future period, whether it is small or large. This is more just in the sight of God, more suitable as evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves. But if it is a transaction which you carry out on the spot among yourselves, there is no blame on you if you do not reduce it to writing, but take witnesses whenever you make a commercial contract, and let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm. If you do, it would be wrong on your part. So be regardful of God, for it is God who teaches you, and God is well acquainted with all things
2|283|If you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then pledge with your possessions. And if one of you deposits a thing on trust with another, let the trustee discharge his trust and let him be regardful of his Lord. And do not conceal evidence, and whoever conceals it, his heart is then tainted with corruption. And God knows all that you do
2|284|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth. Whether you reveal what is in you or conceal it, God calls you to account for it. He forgives whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases, and God has power over all things
2|285|The messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord, as do the people of faith. Each one believes in God, His angels, His books, and His messengers. They say, “We make no distinction between one and another of His messengers.” And they say, “We hear, and we follow. We seek Your forgiveness Our Lord, and to You is the end of all journeys.”
2|286|On no soul does God place a burden greater than she can bear. She gets every good that it earns and she suffers from every ill that she earns. Pray, “Our Lord, condemn us not if we forget or fall into error. Our Lord, lay not on us a burden like that which You laid on those before us. Our Lord, lay not on us a burden greater than we have the strength to bear. Blot out our sins, grant us forgiveness, and have mercy on us. You are our Protector, and help us against those who reject it.”
3|1|Alif, Laam, Miim
3|2|God, there is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Reliant, Eternal
3|3|He sent down to you, in truth, the Book reflecting the truth of what went before it. And He sent down the Torah, and the gospel
3|4|Then those who reject the signs of God will suffer the severest penalty, and God is Exalted in Might, Lord of Retribution
3|5|From God, indeed nothing is hidden on earth or in the heavens
3|6|He is the One Who shapes you in the wombs as He pleases. There is no god but He, the Exalted in Might, the Wise
3|7|It is He who sent down to you the Book. In it are verses of obvious wisdom. These verses are the mother of the Book. Still there are other verses containing esoteric wisdom. Those in whose hearts is deviation, they only follow the esoteric verses, seeking disharmony and seeking its hidden meaning. But none has the understanding of their interpretations except God and those well-grounded in the knowledge. They say, 'We believe in it, all of it is from the presence of our Guardian Evolver." But none will remember this, except the possessors of insight and a penetrating mind
3|8|“Our Lord, let not our hearts deviate now after You have guided us, but grant us mercy from Your own presence, for You are the Grantor of Bounties without measure.”
3|9|“Our Lord, You are He Who will gather humanity together on a day which there can be no doubt, for God never fails in His promise.”
3|10|Those who do not believe, neither their possessions nor their progeny will avail them against God, they are fuel for the fire
3|11|They are no better than the people of Pharaoh are, or their predecessors. They denied our signs, and God called them to account for their sins, for God is strict in punishment
3|12|Say to those who do not believe, “Soon you will be defeated and gathered together to hell which is indeed a miserable place to be
3|13|There was for you a sign in the two armies who met. One was fighting in the cause of God, the other resisting God. They saw with their own eyes twice their number, but God supports with His aid whom He pleases. In this is a warning for such as have eyes to see
3|14|Beautiful in the eyes of men are the love of things they covet, women and sons, heaped-up hoards of gold and silver, horses, livestock and well-tilled land. Such are the possessions of the present life, but nearness to God is an excellent goal
3|15|Say, shall I tell you what is better than those are? For those who are regardful are gardens with their Lord, and rivers flowing beneath. That is their eternal home. With companions refined, and the blessings of God. And in God's sight are all His servants
3|16|Those who say, “Our Lord, we have indeed believed, forgive us our wrongs and save us from the agony of the fire.”
3|17|These are those who show patience, firmness, and self-control, who are truthful, who worship devoutly, who spend, and who seek to forgive and to be forgiven in the early hours of the morning
3|18|There is no god but He, that is the testimony of God, His angels, and those endued with knowledge, standing firmly on justice. There is no god but He, the Exalted in Power, the Wise
3|19|Indeed, the way of life connected to God is Al-Islam. And the people of the Book did not dispute it except through envy of each other, until after knowledge had come to them. But if any deny the signs of God, God is swift in calling them to account
3|20|So if they dispute with you say, “I have submitted my whole self to God and so have those who follow me.” And say to the people of the Book and to those who are unlearned, “Do you also submit yourselves?” If they do, they are on right guidance. But if they turn back, your duty is only to convey the message. And in God's sight are His servants
3|21|As for those who reject the signs of God in defiance of right, who slay the Prophets, and slay those who teach just dealing with humanity, announce to them a terrible penalty
3|22|They are those whose works will not bear fruit in the present, nor in the hereafter, nor will they have anyone to help
3|23|Have you not turned your vision to those who have been given a part of the Book? They are invited to the Book of God to settle their disputes, but a group of them turn back and decline
3|24|This is because they say, “The fire will not touch us but for a few number of days.” But their delusions deceive them as to the way
3|25|Then how will it be when We gather them together on a day which there is no doubt? And each soul will be paid out exactly what she has earned, without injustice
3|26|Say, “O God, the Lord, the Powerful, You give power to whom You please, and You strip power from whom You please. You honor whom You please, and You bring down whom You please. In Your Hand is all that is good. Indeed, over all things You have power
3|27|“You cause the night to gain on the day, and you cause the day to gain on the night. You bring the living out of the dead, and You bring the dead out of the living. And You give sustenance to whom You please, without measure.”
3|28|Let not the believers take for friends or helpers those who refuse to believe rather than believers. If any do that, they will never receive help from God, except by way of precaution, that you may guard yourselves from them, but God cautions you, for the final goal is to God
3|29|Say, “Whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it, God knows it all. He knows what is in the heavens, and what is on earth, and God has power over all things
3|30|“On the day when the soul will be shown all the good she has done, and all the wrong she has done, she will wish that there were a great distance between her and it. But God cautions you, and God is full of kindness to those who serve Him.”
3|31|Say, “If you love God, follow me. God will love you and forgive you your wrongs, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
3|32|Say, “Follow God and His messenger.” But if they turn back, God does not love those who do not believe
3|33|God chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of ‘Imran above all people
3|34|Connected one to the other. And God hears and knows all things
3|35|Behold, a woman of ‘Imran said, “O my Lord, I dedicate to You what is in my womb for Your service. So accept this from me, for You hear and know all things.”
3|36|Once she delivered she said, “O my Lord, behold, I have delivered a female child.” But God knew even more about what she delivered. And the male is not the same as the female. “I have named her Mary, and I commit her and her offspring to Your protection from Satan, the Rejected.”
3|37|Graciously, her Lord accepted her. He made her grow in refinement and beauty. She was assigned to the care of Zachariah. Every time he entered her chamber to visit her, He found her supplied with sustenance. He said, “O Mary, were does this come to you from? “ She said, “From God. For God provides sustenance to whom He pleases without measure.”
3|38|There Zachariah prayed to his Lord, “O my Lord, grant to me from You, good offspring, for You are He Who hears prayer.”
3|39|While he was standing in prayer in the room, the angels called to him, “God gives you good news of Yahya, witnessing the truth of a word from God, noble, chaste, a prophet of the company of the righteous.”
3|40|He said, “O my Lord, how will I have a son seeing I am very old and my wife is barren?” “Like so,” was the answer. God accomplishes what He wills
3|41|He said, “O my Lord, give me a sign.” “Your sign,” was the answer, “Shall be that you should not speak to the people for three days, except with signals. And remember your Lord again and again, and praise Him in the evening and in the morning.”
3|42|Behold, the angels said, “O Mary, God has chosen you and purified you, and chosen you above all the women of all the nations
3|43|“O Mary, worship Your Lord devoutly, prostrate yourself, and bow down with those who bow down.”
3|44|This is part of the knowledge of the things unseen which We reveal to you by inspiration. You were not with them when they drew pins, as to which of them should be charged with the care of Mary, nor were you with them when they disputed about it
3|45|Behold, the angels said, “O Mary, God gives you good news of a word from Him, his name will be Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, held in honor in the present and the hereafter, and of the company of those nearest to God
3|46|“He will speak to the people in childhood, and in maturity, and he will be of the righteous.”
3|47|She said, “O my Lord, how will I have a son when no man has touched me?” He said, “Like this, God creates what He wills, when He decrees a plan, He only says to it ‘Be,’ and it is
3|48|“And God will teach him the Book and the Wisdom, the Law and the gospel
3|49|“And appoint him as a messenger to the Children of Israel with this message, ‘I have come to you with this sign from your Lord, I make for you out of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, and breathe into it, and it becomes a living bird by God's permission. I heal those born blind, and the lepers. I quicken the dead, by God's permission. And I advise you what to eat, and what you should store in your houses. Indeed in this is a sign for you if you do believe
3|50|“ ‘I have come to you, to attest the Law which is before me, and to make permissible to you part of what was forbidden to you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, so be regardful of God, and follow me
3|51|“It is God Who is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a way that is straight.”
3|52|When Jesus found unbelief on their part he said, “Who will be my helpers for God.” The Disciples said, “We are God's helpers, we believe in God, so bear witness that we are Muslims
3|53|“Our Lord, we believe in what You have revealed, and we follow the messenger, so record us among those who bear witness.”
3|54|And the unbelievers plotted and planned. God also planned. And God is the best of planners
3|55|Behold, God said, “O Jesus, I will take you and raise you to Myself, and clear you of those who do blaspheme. I will make those who follow you superior to those who do not believe, to the Day of Resurrection. Then you will all return to Me, and I will judge between you concerning the matters that you dispute
3|56|“As for those who do not believe, I will punish them with a severe punishment in the present and in the hereafter, nor will they have anyone to help.”
3|57|“As for those who believe and work righteousness, God will pay them their reward. But God does not love those who do wrong.”
3|58|“This is what we rehearse to you of the signs and the message of wisdom.”
3|59|The similitude of Jesus from God is as that of Adam, He created him from dust then said to him: “Be”. And he was
3|60|The truth comes from God alone, so do not be of those who doubt
3|61|If anyone disputes in this matter with you, now that knowledge has come to you say, “Come, let us gather together, our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then let us earnestly pray, and invoke the curse of God on those who lie.”
3|62|This is the true account, there is no god except God, and God, He is indeed the Exalted in Power, the Wise
3|63|But if they turn back, God has full knowledge of those who do wrong
3|64|Say, “O people of the Book, come to an agreement with us, that we worship none but God, that we associate no partners with him, that we do not erect from among ourselves lords other than God.” If they then turn back say, “Bear witness that we are Muslims.”
3|65|O people of the Book, why do you dispute about Abraham when the Torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him? Have you no understanding
3|66|You are those who fell into disputing about matters of which you had limited knowledge. But why do you argue about matters that you cannot know? It is God Who knows, and you who know not
3|67|Abraham was not a Jew, nor a Christian, but he was an honorary Muslim, and he did not join gods with God
3|68|Without doubt, among humanity, the nearest of family to Abraham are those who follow him, this messenger, and those who believe. And God is the Protector of those who have faith
3|69|It is the wish of a group from the people of the Book to lead you astray, but they will lead astray not you, but their own selves, but they do not see
3|70|O people of the Book, why do you reject the signs of God, of which you were witnesses
3|71|O you people of the Book, why do you clothe truth with falsehood, and conceal the truth while you have knowledge
3|72|A group of the people of the Book say, “Believe in the morning what is revealed to the believers, but reject it at the end of the day, so perhaps they may turn back
3|73|“And believe no one unless he follows your way.” Say, “True guidance is the guidance of God. Or will a revelation be sent to someone like that which was sent to you? Or should they engage you in argument before your Lord?” Say, “All bounties are in the Hand of God. He grants them to whom He pleases, and God cares for all, and He knows all things.”
3|74|For His mercy, He specially chooses whom He pleases, for God is the Lord of bounties unbounded
3|75|Among the people of the Book are some who if entrusted with a treasure of gold would return it, others who if entrusted with a single silver coin will not return it unless you stood constantly demanding, because they said, “There is no obligation on us to keep faith with those who are unlettered.” But they tell a lie against God, and they know it
3|76|No, those who keep their faith and do right, indeed know that God loves those who do right
3|77|As for those who sell the faith they owe to God, and their own word for a miserable price, they will not be gratified in the hereafter, nor will God speak to them or look at them on the Day of Accountability, nor will He redeem them. They will have a terrible penalty
3|78|There is among them some who distort the Book with their tongues. You would think it is a part of the Book, but it is not part of the Book. And they say, “It is from God.” But it is not from God, they are telling a lie against God, and they know it
3|79|It is not possible that a person to whom the Book is given, and the Wisdom, and the prophetic office, should say to people, “Be my worshippers rather than God's.” Instead he would say, “Be worshippers of He Who is truly the Guardian Evolver of all, for you have taught the Book and you have studied it earnestly.”
3|80|Nor would he instruct you to take angels and prophets for lords. What, would he call you to unbelief after you have surrendered your will
3|81|Behold, God took the covenant of the Prophets saying, “I give you a book and wisdom, then there comes to you a prophet reflecting the truth of what is with you. Believe in him and give him help.” God said, “Do you agree and take My covenant as binding on you?” They said, “We agree.” He said, “Then bear witness, and I am with you among the witnesses.”
3|82|If any turn back after this, they are transgressors
3|83|Do they seek for other than the way of life from God, while all creatures in the heavens and on earth have willingly or unwillingly bowed to His will, and to Him will they all be brought back
3|84|Say, “We believe in God, and in what has been revealed to us, and what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and in that given to Moses, Jesus, and all the Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between one and another among them. And to God we surrender our will.”
3|85|If anyone desires a way other than Al-Islam, never will it be accepted of him, and in the hereafter, he will be in the ranks of those who are lost
3|86|How will God guide those who do not believe after they accepted it, and bore witness that the messenger was true, and that clear signs had come to them? God does not guide wrongdoers
3|87|For them, their punishment is that on them is the curse of God, of His angels, and of all humanity
3|88|In that will they dwell, nor will their penalty be lightened, nor will respite be their destiny
3|89|Except for those who repent after that, and make amends, for indeed God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
3|90|But those who make excuses and exceptions after they accepted it, and then go on adding to their defiance of faith, never will their repentance be accepted, for they have gone astray
3|91|As for those who do not believe, and die rejecting, never would be accepted from them even as much gold as the earth contains, if they could offer it for ransom, for them is a terrible penalty, and they will find no helpers. 91 (End of Part)
3|92|Never will you attain righteousness until you share that which you love. And whatever you give of a thing, indeed God knows it well
3|93|All food was permissible to the Children of Israel except what Israel made impermissible for itself before the Law was revealed. Say, “Bring the Law and study it, if you are people of truth.”
3|94|If any, after this, invent a lie and attribute it to God, they are wrongdoers
3|95|Say, “God has spoken the truth. Follow the way of Abraham, the intelligent in faith. He was not of the pagans.”
3|96|The first house appointed for humanity was that at Bakkah, full of blessings and of guidance for all the worlds
3|97|In it are clear signs, such as the station of Abraham. Whoever enters it attains security. Pilgrimage is a duty humanity owes to God, that is, those who can afford the journey. But if any deny faith, God is not in need of any of His creatures
3|98|Say, “O people of the Book, why reject the signs of God when God is Himself witness over what you do?”
3|99|Say, “O you people of the Book, why obstruct those who believe from the path of God, seeking to make it crooked while you were yourselves witnesses? But God is not unmindful of that which you do.”
3|100|O you who believe, if you follow a group among the people of the Book, they would lead you to unbelief after you have believed
3|101|And how could you deny faith while to you are rehearsed the signs of God, and among you lives the messenger? Whoever holds firmly to God will be shown a straight way
3|102|O you who believe, be regardful of God as He should be regarded, and die not except as those who submit
3|103|And hold tightly, all together, by the rope that God stretches out to you, and do not be divided among yourselves. And remember with gratitude God's favor on you, because you were enemies and He joined your hearts in friendship, so that by His grace, you became connected. And you were on the brink of the pit of fire and He saved you from it. God makes His signs clear to you, that you may be guided
3|104|Let there arise from you a community inviting to all that is good, advocating for what is right, and protesting against what is wrong, they are the ones who attain felicity
3|105|Be not like those who are divided among themselves and fall into disagreements after receiving clear signs, for them is a dreadful penalty
3|106|That day some faces will be white, and some faces will be black. To those whose faces will be black will be said, “Did you disbelieve in it after accepting it? Then taste the penalty for rejecting faith.”
3|107|But those whose faces will be white, they will be in God's mercy. They will dwell therein forever
3|108|These are the signs of God. We rehearse them to you in truth, and God wills no injustice to any of His creatures
3|109|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and to Him do all questions go back
3|110|You are the best of communities evolved for humanity, advocating for what is right, protesting against what is wrong, and believing in God. If only the people of the Book had faith, it would be best for them. Among them are some who have faith, but many of them are transgressors
3|111|They will do you no harm, except mental anguish. And if they come out to fight you, they will show you their backs, and no help will they get
3|112|Shame is cast over them wherever they are found, except when under a covenant from God and the people. They draw on themselves punishment from God, and cast over them is destitution. This is because they rejected the signs of God, and killed the Prophets in defiance of right. This is because they rebelled and transgressed beyond bounds
3|113|But not all of them are alike. Of the people of the Book, are those who stand for right. They sing the verses of God all night long, and they prostrate themselves in adoration
3|114|They believe in God and the Last Day, they advance what is right, and oppose what is wrong, and they strive in all good works. They are in the ranks of the righteous
3|115|Of the good they do, nothing will be rejected, for God knows well those who do right
3|116|Those who do not believe, neither their possessions nor their progeny will avail them against God. They will be companions of the fire, dwelling therein forever
3|117|What they give in the life of the present may be likened to a wind which brings a chilling frost. It strikes and destroys the harvest of the people who have wronged their own souls. God has not wronged them, but they wrong themselves
3|118|O you who believe, do not take as confidants those other than yourselves. They will not fail to corrupt you. They only desire your ruin. Hatred has already appeared from their mouths, what their hearts conceal is far worse. We have made plain to you the signs, if you are wise
3|119|You are those who love them, but they do not love you, because you believe in the whole Book. When they meet you they say, “We believe.” But when they are alone, they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you in their rage. Say, “Die in your rage, God knows well all the secrets of the heart.”
3|120|If anything good happens to you, it grieves them. But if some misfortune overtakes you, they rejoice in it. But if you are constant and do right, not the least harm will their deviousness do to you, for God compasses all that they do
3|121|The morning when you left your home to post the believers at their stations for battle, while God hears and knows all things
3|122|Two of your troops then lost heart, but God was their protector, and in God the believers should put their trust
3|123|God helped you at Badr when you were weak, so be conscious of God, so that you may feel grateful
3|124|Remember you said to the faithful, “Is it not enough for you that God helps you with three thousand angels sent down
3|125|“Yes, if you remain firm, and do right, even if the enemy ambushes you, your Lord would help you with five thousand unrelenting angels.”
3|126|God made it a message of hope for you, and an assurance to your hearts. There is no help except from God, the Exalted, the Wise
3|127|He might cut off a fringe of the unbelievers or expose them to dishonor, and they will then be turned back, defeated
3|128|Not for you, but for God, is the decision. Whether He turns in mercy to them, or punishes them, for they are indeed wrongdoers
3|129|To God belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth. He forgives whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases, but God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
3|130|O you who believe, do not take usury, doubled and multiplied, but be conscious of God that you may flourish
3|131|Be aware of the fire which is prepared for those who do not believe
3|132|And follow God and the messenger, that you may obtain mercy
3|133|Be quick in the race for forgiveness from your Lord and for a garden whose width is that of the heavens and of the earth, prepared for the righteous
3|134|Those who give, whether in prosperity or in adversity, who restrain anger, and pardon the people, God loves those who do right
3|135|And those who having done something to be ashamed of or wronged their own souls, earnestly bringing God to mind and ask for forgiveness for their sins, and who can forgive sins except God, and never repeatedly do wrong knowingly, for them the reward is forgiveness
3|136|And for them the reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and gardens with rivers flowing beneath, an eternal dwelling place. And how excellent a reward for those who strive
3|137|Many were the ways of life that have passed away before you. Travel through the earth and see what the end of those who rejected truth was
3|138|Here is a plain statement to humanity, a guidance, and instruction to those who are aware
3|139|So do not lose heart, nor fall into despair, for you must gain mastery if you are true in faith
3|140|If a wound has touched you, be sure a similar wound has touched the others. Such days do We alternate between people, that God may make evident those who believe, and that He may take to Himself, from your ranks, witnesses. And God does not love those who do wrong
3|141|God's objective is also to keep purified those who are true in faith, and to deprive of blessings those who resist faith
3|142|Did you think that you would enter heaven without God testing those of you who fought hard and remained steadfast
3|143|You indeed wished for death before you met it. Now you have seen it with your own eyes
3|144|Muhammad is no more than a messenger. Many were the messengers who passed away before him. If he died or is slain, would you then turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his heels, not the least harm will he do to God, but God will swiftly reward those who serve Him with gratitude
3|145|Nor can a soul die except by God's permission, the term being fixed as by writing. If any desire a reward in this life, We will give it to them, and if any desire a reward in the hereafter, We will give it to them, and swiftly will We reward those who serve us with gratitude
3|146|How many of the Prophets fought and with them fought large groups of conscious people? But they never lost heart if they were met with disaster in the way of God, nor did they weaken nor give in. And God loves those who are firm and steadfast
3|147|All that they said was, “Our Lord, forgive us our sins and anything We have done to transgress our duty, establish our feet firmly, and help us against those who do not believe.”
3|148|And God gave them a reward in the present, and a reward in the hereafter, for God loves those who do right
3|149|O you who believe, if you follow the unbelievers, they will drive you back on your heels, and will turn you back, to your own detriment
3|150|No, God is your protector, and He is the best of helpers
3|151|Soon will We cast fear into the hearts of the unbelievers, because they joined partners with God for which He has sent no authority. Their abode will be the fire, and miserable is the home of the wrongdoers
3|152|God indeed fulfilled His promise to you when you, with His permission, were about to annihilate your enemy, until you flinched and began disputing about the orders and did not follow them after He brought you in sight of the spoils that you desired. Among you are some who pursue the present and some who pursue the hereafter. Then He diverted you from your enemies in order to challenge you, but He forgave you, for God is full of grace to those who believe
3|153|Behold, you were climbing up the high ground, without even casting a side-glance at anyone, and the messenger in your rear was calling you back. There, God gave you one distress after another, to teach you not to grieve over the spoils that missed you, and for the ill that had befallen you, for God is well aware of all that you do
3|154|After the distress, He sent down calm on a company of you overcome with slumber, while another company was stirred to anxiety by their feelings, moved by wrongful doubt of God, suspicions due to ignorance. They said, “What concern is this of ours?” Say, “Indeed, this concern is entirely God's.” They hide in their minds what they dare not reveal to you. They say, “If we had anything to do with this affair, we would not have been in the slaughter here.” Say, “Even if you had remained in your homes, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their death.” But all this was for God to make evident what is in your chest and to redeem what is in your hearts, for God knows well the secrets of your hearts
3|155|Those of you who turned back on the day the two armies met, Satan caused them to fail, because of some wrong they did, but God has deleted their faults, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Understanding
3|156|O you who believe, do not be like the unbelievers who say of their brothers, when they are traveling through the earth or engaged in fighting, “If they had stayed with us, they would not have died, or been slain.” This is so that God may make it a cause of sighs and regrets in their hearts. And God gives life and death, and God sees well all that you do
3|157|And if you are slain or die in the way of God, forgiveness and mercy from God are far better than all they could accumulate
3|158|And if you die or are slain, remember it is to God Who you will be gathered
3|159|It is part of the mercy of God that you deal gently with them, were you unkind or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from you, so excuse them, and ask for God's forgiveness for them, and consult them in their affairs. Then, when you have made a decision, put your trust in God, for God loves those who put their trust in Him
3|160|If God helps you, none can defeat you. If He abandons you, who is there after that, who can help you? In God then let believers put their trust
3|161|No prophet can shirk his trust. And whoever does this, they will on the Day of Accountability, restore what they misappropriated. Then every soul will receive their due, whatever it earned. And none will be dealt with unjustly
3|162|Is the person who follows the blessings of God like the person who brings on himself the punishment of God, and whose home is hell? This is a terrible destination indeed
3|163|They are on different levels in the sight of God, and God sees well all that they do
3|164|God bestowed a great favor on the believers when He sent them a messenger from among themselves, rehearsing to them the signs of God, refining them, and instructing them in scripture and wisdom, while before that they had been in clear error
3|165|What, when a single disaster strikes you, although you struck your enemies with one twice as great, do you say, “From whom did this come?” Say, “It is from yourselves, for God has power over all things.”
3|166|What you suffered on the day the two armies met was by the permission of God, in order that He might challenge the believers
3|167|And those whose integrity had been compromised were told, “Come, fight in the way of God, or drive them from your city.” They said, “Had we known how to fight, we would certainly have followed you.” They were that day nearer to unbelief than to belief, saying with their mouths what was not in their hearts, but God has full knowledge of all they conceal
3|168|They are the ones who say, while they themselves sit, “If only they had listened to us, they would not have been slain.” Say, “Avert death from yourselves, if you speak the truth.”
3|169|Do not think of those who are slain in God's way as dead, no they live, finding their sustenance in the presence of their Guardian Evolver
3|170|They rejoice in the bounty provided by God. And with regard to those left behind, who have not yet joined them, they rest on the fact that on them is no fear, nor have they cause to grieve
3|171|They rejoice in the grace and the bounty from God, and in the fact that God does not cause the reward of the believers to be lost
3|172|Of those who answered the call of God and the messenger, even after being wounded, those who do right and refrain from wrong have a great reward
3|173|The people said to them, “A great army is gathering against you,” in order to frighten them, but it increased their faith. They said, “For us God suffices, and He is the best manager of affairs.”
3|174|And they returned with grace and bounty from God. No harm ever touched them, for they followed the blessings of God, and God is the Lord of bounties unbounded
3|175|It is Satan that suggests to you the fear of his allies. Do not be afraid of them, but instead fear Me, if you have faith
3|176|Do not let those grieve you who rush into unbelief. Not the least harm will they do to God. God's plan is that He will give them no portion in the hereafter, except a severe punishment
3|177|Those who purchase unbelief at the price of faith, not the least harm will they do to God, but they will have a terrible punishment
3|178|Let not the unbelievers think that Our respite to them is good for them. We grant them respite so that they may increase their sins, but they will have a shameful punishment
3|179|God will not leave the believers in the state in which you are in now, until He separates what is harmful from what is good, nor will He disclose to you the secrets of the unseen. And He chooses for His messenger the purpose that He pleases. So believe in God, and His messengers. And if you believe and do right, you will have a reward without measure
3|180|And let not those who greedily withhold the gifts which God has given them from His grace, think that it is good for them. No, it is bad for them. Soon the things which they withheld will be tied to their necks, on the Day of Accountability. To God belongs the origin of the heavens and the earth, and God is well acquainted with all that you do
3|181|God has heard the taunt of those who say, “Truly God is poor and we are rich.” We will certainly record their words and their act of slaying the Prophets in defiance of right, and We will say, “Taste the penalty of the scorching fire
3|182|“This is because of that which your hands sent on before you, for God never harms those who serve Him.”
3|183|They said, “God took our promise not to believe in a prophet unless He showed us a sacrifice consumed by fire.” Say, “There came to you prophets before me, with clear signs and even with what you ask for, why then did you slay them if you speak the truth?”
3|184|And if they reject you, so were the prophets before you, who came with clear signs, books of prophecies, and the Book of Enlightenment
3|185|Every soul will have a taste of death. And only on the Day of Accountability will you be paid your full reward. Only he who is saved from the fire and admitted to the garden will have attained the object of life, for the life of the present is but stuff of illusion
3|186|You will certainly be tried and tested by your possessions and by your own selves, and you will certainly hear much that will hurt you, from those who received the Book before you and from those who worship many gods, but if you persevere patiently, and remain conscious, that will be a determining factor in all affairs
3|187|And remember God took a covenant from the people of the Book, to make it known and clear to humanity, and not to hide it. But they threw it away behind their backs, and purchased with it some miserable gains, and terrible was the bargain they made
3|188|Do not think that those who brag about what they have done, and love to be praised for what they have not done, will escape the penalty, for them is a terrible penalty indeed
3|189|To God is the control of the heavens and the earth, and God has power over all things
3|190|Behold, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of night and day, there are indeed signs for people of understanding
3|191|The people who glorify God by praising Him, standing, sitting, and lying on their sides, and contemplate the creation in the heavens and the earth, with the thought, “Our Lord, not without purpose have You created all this, glory be to You, and give us salvation from the penalty of the fire
3|192|“Our Lord, any whom You admit to the fire, truly You cover with shame, and never will wrongdoers find any helpers
3|193|“Our Lord, we have heard the call of one calling to faith saying, ‘Believe in the Lord,’ and we have believed. Our Lord, forgive us our sins, and remove from us our sins, and take our souls to You and in the company of the righteous
3|194|“Our Lord, grant us what You promised to us through Your messengers, and save us from shame on the Day of Accountability, for You never break Your promise.”
3|195|And their Lord accepted this from them and answered, “Never will I cause to be lost the work of any of you, be they male or female. You are connected, one to the other. Those who have left their homes, or have been banished from it, or suffered harm in My cause, or fought or have been slain, I will indeed remove from them their sins, and admit them into gardens with rivers flowing beneath. A reward from the presence of God, and from His presence is the best of rewards.”
3|196|Let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive you
3|197|Little is their enjoyment. Their ultimate abode is hell– the torturous tomb of misery
3|198|But for those who are conscious of their Lord are gardens with rivers flowing beneath, there they will dwell forever, a gift from the presence of God, and that which is in the presence of God is best for the righteous
3|199|And there are certainly among the people of the Book, those who believe in God, in the revelation sent to you, and in the revelation sent to them, bowing in humility to God. They will not sell the signs of God for a miserable gain, for them is a reward with their Lord, and God is swift in account
3|200|O you who believe, persevere in patience and constancy, compete in such perseverance, strengthen each other, and be conscious of God, so that you may flourish
4|1|O humanity, reverence your Guardian Evolver, Who created you from one soul. Created, of like nature, her mate. And from them scattered many men and women. Reverence God, from Whom you ask of, and reverence the wombs that bore you, for God always watches over you
4|2|To orphans return their property, and do not substitute worthless things for their valuable ones. And do not take their sustenance by mixing it up with your own, for this is a great sin indeed
4|3|If you fear you will be unable to deal justly with the orphans, then marry women of your choice, two, three, or four. But if you fear that you will not be able to deal justly with them, then only one, or one whom your right hands possess. That would be better to prevent you from doing injustice
4|4|And give the women their dowry. But if they, of their own free will, return any part of it to you, take it and enjoy it with gratefulness
4|5|And those weak in understanding, do not put them in charge of your property which God has made a means of support for you. But feed and clothe them, and speak to them words of kindness and justice
4|6|Train and educate the orphans until they reach the age of marriage. When you find that they have good judgment, release their property to them. Do not consume it wastefully, nor in haste before they grow up. If the guardian is well off, let them claim no compensation. But if they are poor, let them have for themselves what is just and reasonable. When you release their property to them, have witnesses in their presence, although sufficient is God in taking account
4|7|From what is left by parents and those nearest related, there is a share for men and a share for women, whether the property be small or large, a determined share
4|8|But if at the time of division there are other relatives, or orphans, or other people in need present, then provide for them out of the property, and speak to them words of kindness and justice
4|9|Let those disposing of an estate have the same considerations in mind as they would if they had left their own dependents behind. Let them also consider God, and speak words that are appropriate
4|10|Those who unjustly take the property of orphans, also take a fire into their own bodies. They will soon be enduring a blazing fire
4|11|God directs you regarding your children’s inheritance. To the male, a portion equal to that of two females. If only daughters, two or more, their share is two-thirds of the inheritance. If only one, her share is a half. For parents, a sixth share of the inheritance to each, if the deceased left children. If no children and the parents are the only heirs, the mother has a third. If the deceased left brothers or sisters, the mother has a sixth. These distributions, in all cases, are after the payment of estate tax and debt. You do not know whether your parents or your children are nearer to you in benefit. These are settled portions ordained by God, and God is All Knowing, All Wise
4|12|In what your wives leave, your share is a half, if they leave no child, but if they leave a child, you get a fourth, after payment of estate tax and debt. In what you leave, their share is a fourth, if you leave no child, but if you leave a child, they get an eighth, after payment of estate tax and debt. If the male or female whose inheritance is in question has left neither ascendants nor descendants, but has left a brother or a sister, each one of the two gets a sixth, but if more than two, they share in a third, after payment of estate tax and debt, so that no loss is caused to anyone. This is ordained by God, and God is All Knowing, Most Understanding
4|13|Those are limits set by God. Those who follow God and His messenger will be admitted to gardens with rivers flowing beneath, to live therein, and that will be their greatest achievement
4|14|But those who ignore God and His messenger and transgress His limits, will be admitted to a fire to live therein, and they will have a crushing punishment
4|15|If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, take the evidence of four witnesses from among you against them. And if they testify, confine them to houses until death claims them or God ordains for them some other way
4|16|If two men among you are guilty of lewdness, punish them both. If they repent and change, leave them alone, for God is Oft-Returning, the Merciful Redeemer
4|17|God accepts the repentance of those who do wrong in ignorance and repent soon afterward. To them God will turn in mercy, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom
4|18|Of no effect is the repentance of those who continue to do wrong until death faces one of them and he says, “Now have I repented indeed. Nor of those who die rejecting faith. For them We have prepared a punishment most terrible
4|19|O you who believe, you are forbidden to marry women against their will, nor should you treat them with harshness by taking away part of the dowry you have given them, except when they have been guilty of open lewdness. Instead, live with them in kindness. If you take a disliking to them, it may be that you dislike something with which God brings a great deal of good
4|20|But if you decide to place a spouse in the place of the other, even if you had given the latter a whole treasure as a dowry, do not take the least bit of it back. Would you take it by slander and manifest wrong
4|21|And how could you take it when you have bonded with each other, and they have taken from you a solemn covenant
4|22|Do not marry women whom your fathers married, except what has undoubtedly passed. It was immoral and detestable, an abominable custom indeed
4|23|Prohibited to you for marriage are your mothers, daughters, sisters, father’s sisters, mother’s sisters, brother’s daughters, sister’s daughters, foster-mothers, foster-sisters, your wives’ mothers, your step-daughters under your guardianship born of your wives to whom you have been intimate, no prohibition if you have not been intimate, those who have been wives of your sons proceeding from your loins, and two sisters in wedlock at the same time, except what has undoubtedly passed, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming. 23 (End of Part)
4|24|Also, women already married, except those whom your right hands possess. God has ordained this for you. And except for these, all others are permissible, provided you pursue them with gifts from your property, desiring chastity, not lust. Seeing that you are given blessings from them, give them their dowries as prescribed. But if after a dowry is prescribed you agree to modify it, there is no blame on you, and God is All Knowing, All Wise
4|25|If any of you do not have the means to wed mature believing women, you may wed less mature believing women from among those whom your right hand possess. But God has full knowledge of your faith. Some of you are from the others. So wed them with the permission of their family, and give them their dowries according to what is reasonable. They should be chaste, not lustful, nor should they have illicit relationships. After they are taken in wedlock, if they fall into wrong, their punishment is half of that for mature women. This is for those among you who fear doing wrong. And it is better for you to practice self-restraint, but God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|26|God wishes to make clear to you and to guide you to the ways of those before you, and to turn to you, for God is All Knowing, All Wise
4|27|God wishes to accept your repentance, but the wish of those who follow their passions is that you should turn away, far away
4|28|God wills to lighten your difficulties, for the human being was created fragile
4|29|O you who believe, do not consume your property among yourselves with vanity, but let there be among you traffic and trade by mutual good will, nor kill yourselves, for indeed God has been to you Mercifully Redeeming
4|30|If any do so with hatred and injustice, soon will We cast them into the fire, and that is easy for God
4|31|If you avoid the most heinous of things that you are forbidden to do, We will remove from you your desire to do wrong, and admit you to a gate of great honor
4|32|And in no way covet those things that God bestowed on some more than others. To males belongs what they earn, and to females what they earn, but ask God for His bounty, for God has full knowledge of all things
4|33|For everyone, We have appointed shares and heirs to property left by parents and relatives. And also to those whom your right hand possess. Give their due portion, for truly God is witness to all things
4|34|Men and women support one another, because God has given each of them more than the other, and because they spend from their wealth. So the righteous women, being loyal, maintain in their absence what God would have them maintain. As for those who you suspect disloyalty, advise them, refrain from sleeping with them, and separate from them. However, if they return to loyalty, do not try to harm them, for God is the Most High, the Great
4|35|If you fear a split between the two, appoint two arbiters, one from his family, and the other from hers. And if they wish for peace, God will cause their reconciliation, for God has full knowledge and is acquainted with all things
4|36|Serve God, and do not join any partners with Him. And do good to parents and other family, orphans, those in need, neighbors who are near, neighbors who are strangers, the companion by your side, displaced persons, and those whom your right hand possess, for God does not love the arrogant, the vainglorious
4|37|Nor those who are greedy or recommend greediness to others, or hide the bounties which God has bestowed on them. We have prepared for those who reject it, a crushing punishment
4|38|And for those who give of their sustenance to be seen by people, but have no faith in God and the Last Day. And if any take Satan for their intimate, then what a harmful intimate he is
4|39|And how will it harm them if they had faith in God and in the Last Day, and if they spent from what God has given them for sustenance? And God has full knowledge of them
4|40|God is never unjust in the least degree. If there is any good, He doubles it, and gives from His own presence a great reward
4|41|It is how We brought from each people a witness, and We brought you as a witness against these people
4|42|On that day, those who do not believe and did not follow the messenger, will wish that the earth were made one with them, but never will they hide a single fact from God
4|43|O you who believe, do not approach prayer with a confused mind, until you can understand all that you say. Nor in a state of ceremonial impurity, until after washing your entire body. If you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you come from offices of nature, or you have been intimate with your woman, and you find no water, then take for yourselves earth, and rub your faces and hands with it, for God removes sins and forgives again and again
4|44|Have you not turned Your vision to those who were given a portion of the Book? They deal in wrong, and wish that you would lose the right path
4|45|But God has full knowledge of your enemies. God is enough for a protector, and God is enough for a helper
4|46|Of the Jews, there are some who displace words from their places and say, “We hear and we do not follow,” and “Hear what is not heard,” and “Ra’ina,” with a twist of their tongues and a slander to faith. If only they had said, “We hear and we follow,” and “Do hear,” and “Do look at us,” it would have been better for them, and more proper. But God has cursed them for their unbelief, still few from those will believe
4|47|O you people of the Book, believe in what We have revealed, reflecting the truth of what was with you, before We change the face of some beyond all recognition, and turn them backward, or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath breakers, for the decision of God must be carried out
4|48|God does not forgive that partners be established with Him, but He forgives anything else, to whom He pleases. But to establish partners with God is to commit a sin most heinous indeed
4|49|Have you not turned your vision to those who claim purity for themselves? No, but God purifies who He wills. And never will they fail to receive justice in the least
4|50|See how they invent a lie against God? But that in of itself is clearly a sin
4|51|Have you not turned Your vision to those who were given a portion of the Book? They believe in illusions and wrongdoing, and say to the unbelievers that they are better guided to the way than the believers
4|52|They are the people whom God has cursed, and those whom God has cursed, you will find that they have no one to help
4|53|Do they have a share in control or power? Behold, they give nothing to their society
4|54|Or do they envy people for what God has given them of His bounty? But We had already given the people of Abraham the Book, and the Wisdom, and conferred upon them a great kingdom
4|55|Some of them believed, and some of them turned their faces from him. And enough is hell for a burning fire
4|56|Those who reject our signs, We will soon cast into the fire. As often as their skin is roasted through, We will change them for fresh skin, that they may taste the penalty. For God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
4|57|But those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness, We will soon admit to gardens with rivers flowing beneath, their eternal home. There they will have companions refined. We will admit them to shade, ever-widening
4|58|God commands you to render back your trusts to those to whom they are due. And that when you judge between people, you judge with justice. How excellent indeed is the teaching which He gives you, for God is He Who hears and sees all things
4|59|O you who believe, follow God and follow the messenger, and those given authority among you. If you differ among yourselves, refer it to God and His messenger, if you do believe in God and the Last Day, that is best, and most suitable for the final decision
4|60|Have you not turned your vision to those who declare that they believe in the revelations that have come to you and to those before you? Their wish is to come together for accountability in their disputes with Satan, though they were told to reject him. But Satan’s wish is to lead them astray
4|61|When it is said to them, “Come to what God has revealed, and to the messenger,” you will see the hypocrites turn their faces from you in disgust
4|62|O how they will be seized by misfortune because of the deeds which their hands have sent forth. Then they come to you swearing by God, “We meant no more than good-will and conciliation.”
4|63|God knows what is in their hearts, so do not join them, but advise them, and speak to them a word to reach their very souls
4|64|We did not send a messenger except to be followed in accordance with the will of God. If they had only, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and asked God's forgiveness, and once the messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found God indeed Oft-Returning, the Merciful Redeemer
4|65|But no, by the Guardian Evolver, they can have no faith, until they make you judge for all disputes among them, and find in their souls no resistance against your decisions, but instead accept them with the fullest conviction
4|66|If We ordered them to sacrifice their lives or to leave their homes, very few of them would have done so. But if they had done what they were told, it would have been best for them, and would have gone furthest to strengthen their faith
4|67|And We would then have given them, from our presence, a great reward
4|68|And We would have shown them the straight way
4|69|All who follow God and the messenger, are in the company of those on whom is the grace of God, the Prophets who teach, the sincere, the witnesses, and the righteous. What a beautiful fellowship
4|70|Such is the bounty from God, and sufficient is it that God knows all
4|71|O you who believe, take your precautions, and either go forward in groups or go forward all together
4|72|There are certainly among you those who would stay behind. If a misfortune befalls you they say, “God favored us in that we were not present among them.”
4|73|But if good fortune comes to you from God they would be sure to say, as if there had never been ties of affection between you and them, “Oh, I wish I had been with them, a great success would I have made of it.”
4|74|Let those fight in the cause of God, who sell the life of the present for the hereafter. To him who fights in the cause of God, whether he is slain or is victorious, soon We will give him a reward of immense value
4|75|And how could you refuse to fight in the cause of God and for those who lack power and are oppressed? Men, women, and children whose cry is, “Our Lord, rescue us from this place whose people are oppressors, and raise for us, from You, one who will protect, and raise for us, from You, one who will help.”
4|76|Those who believe, fight in the cause of God. And those who do not believe, fight in the cause of wrong. So fight against the friends of Satan. Weak indeed is the scheme of Satan
4|77|Have you not turned your vision to those told to hold back their hands, but to instead establish prayer and pay their zakat? When the order for fighting was issued to them, behold, a section of them feared people as, or even more than, they should have feared God. They said, “Our Lord, why have you ordered us to fight? Will you not grant us respite to our natural term?” Say, “Short is the enjoyment of the present. The hereafter is best for those who do right. And never will you be dealt with unjustly in the least
4|78|“Wherever you are, death will find you. Even if you are in towers built up strong and high.” If some good befalls them they say, “This is from God.” But if problems arise they say, “This is from you.” Say, “All things are from God.” But what comes to the people who fail to understand this fact
4|79|Whatever can naturally harm you comes to you from God. However, whatever unnaturally harms you is from yourselves. We have sent you as a messenger to humanity, and enough is God for a witness
4|80|He who obeys the messenger, has certainly obeyed God. However, if any turn away, We have not sent you to watch over them
4|81|They have obedience on their lips, but when they leave you, a group of them thinks all night about things very different from what you tell them. However, God records their nightly plots. So keep clear of them and put your trust in God, and enough is God as a manager of affairs
4|82|Do they not consider the Quran? Had it been from other than God, they would surely have found in it much discrepancy
4|83|When there comes to them some matter concerning fear, they divulge it. If they had only referred it to the messenger, or to those given authority among them, the proper investigators would have proven it for them. Were it not for the grace and mercy of God to you, all but a few of you would have fallen into the clutches of Satan
4|84|So fight in God's cause. You are responsible only for yourself. And rouse the believers. It may be that God will restrain the might of the unbelievers, for God is stronger in might and stronger in punishing
4|85|Whoever recommends and helps a good cause becomes a partner in it. And whoever recommends and helps a harmful cause, shares in its burden. And God has power over all things
4|86|When a greeting is offered to you, meet it with a greeting more courteous, or of equal courtesy. And God takes careful account of all things
4|87|God, there is no god but Him. Indeed He will gather you together against the Day of Accountability, about which there is no doubt, and whose word can be truer than God's
4|88|Why are you divided into two groups concerning the hypocrites? God has upset them for their deeds. Would you guide those whom God has thrown out of the way? For those whom God has thrown out of the way, never can you show him a way
4|89|They only wish that you would not believe, like them, so that you would be on the same level as them. But do not take friends from their ranks until they go the way of God. But if they turn renegades, seize them and slay them wherever you find them, and take no allies from their ranks
4|90|Except those who join a group with whom there is a treaty of peace, or those who approach you with hearts restraining them from fighting you and from fighting their own people. If God so pleased, He could have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. Therefore, if they withdraw from you, and do not fight you, and send you peace, then God has opened no way for you to war against them
4|91|Others you will find who wish to gain your confidence, as well as some from their people. But every time they are sent back to temptation, they succumb to it. If they do not withdraw from you, nor give you guarantees of peace, nor restrain their hands, then seize them and slay them wherever you find them. In their case, We have provided you with a clear argument against them
4|92|Never should a believer kill a believer. But if it happens by mistake, compensation is due. If one kills a believer, it is ordained that he should free a believing slave, and pay compensation to the family of the deceased, unless they refuse it freely. If the deceased belonged to a people at war with you, and he was a believer, the freeing of a believing slave is enough. If he belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty of mutual alliance, compensation should be paid to his family, and a believing slave should be freed. For those who find this beyond their means, fast for two months straight, by way of repentance to God, for God has all knowledge, and all wisdom
4|93|Whoever kills a believer intentionally, his reward is hell, to live in forever. And the punishment and the curse of God are upon him. And a dreadful penalty is prepared for him
4|94|O you who believe, when you go abroad in the cause of God, observe carefully, and do not say to anyone who offers you a salutation, “You are not a believer.” They covet the perishable goods of this life. But with God are profits and goods abundant. You were like them yourselves until God conferred on you His favors. Therefore, carefully observe, for God is well aware of all that you do
4|95|Not equal are those believers who sit at home and receive no hurt, and those who strive and fight in the cause of God with their goods and their persons. God has granted a grade higher to those who strive and fight with their goods and persons, than to those who sit at home. To all has God promised good, but He favors those who strive and fight, above those who sit at home, with a special reward
4|96|Ranks specially bestowed by Him, and forgiveness and mercy. For God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|97|When angels take the souls of those who die harming their souls, they say, “In what condition were you in?” They will reply, “Weak and oppressed were we in the earth.” They say, “Was not the earth of God spacious enough for you to move yourselves away from wrong?” Such people will find their abode in hell, what a terrible place
4|98|Except for those who are truly weak and oppressed. The men, women, and children who have neither means in their power, nor were they guided to the path
4|99|For these, there is hope that God will forgive, for God removes sins and forgive again and again
4|100|He who abandons his home in the cause of God, finds in the earth many places of refuge, wide and spacious. If he dies as a refugee from home, for God and His messenger, his reward becomes due and sure with God, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|101|When you travel through the earth, there is no blame on you if you shorten your prayers, for fear the unbelievers may attack you. For the unbelievers are to you open enemies
4|102|When you, O messenger, are with them and stand to lead them in prayer, let one group of them stand up in prayer with you, taking their arms with them. When they finish their prostrations, let them take their position in the rear, and let the other group come up which has not yet prayed. And let them pray with you, taking all precaution, and bearing arms. The unbelievers wish, if you were negligent of your arms and your gear, to assault you in a single ambush. But there is no blame on you if you put away your arms, because of the inconvenience of rain or because you are ill, but take precaution for yourselves, for the unbelievers, God has prepared a crushing punishment
4|103|When you finish prayer, remember God, standing, sitting down, or lying down on your sides. But when you are free from danger, establish prayer, for such prayers are recommended for believers at stated times
4|104|And do not slack in following up the enemy. If you are suffering hardship, they are suffering similar hardship, but you have hope from God, while they have none, and God is full of knowledge and wisdom
4|105|We have sent down to you the Book in truth, that you might judge between the people, as guided by God. Thus do not be used as a warner by those who betray their trust
4|106|But seek the forgiveness of God, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|107|Do not contend on behalf of those who betray their own souls, for God does not love one given to deceitfulness and sin
4|108|They may hide their crimes from people, but they cannot hide them from God, seeing that He is in their presence as they plot by night, in words that He does not approve, and God compasses round all that they do
4|109|These are the sort of people on whose behalf you may contend in the present, but who will contend with God on their behalf, on the Day of Accountability, and who will carry out their affairs
4|110|If anyone does wrong, or wrongs their own soul, but afterwards seeks God's forgiveness, they will find God Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|111|Still if anyone does that, he does it against his own soul, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom
4|112|But if anyone does wrong, and blames it on one who is innocent, he carries on himself both his sin and their sin
4|113|But for the grace of God to you and His mercy, a group of them would certainly have led you astray. But in fact, they will only lead themselves astray, and to you they can do no harm in the least. Because God has sent down to you the Book and the Wisdom, and taught you what you knew not. And great is the grace of God to you
4|114|In most of their secret talks, there is no good. But if one exhorts to a deed of charity or justice, or conciliation between people, secrecy is permissible. To him who does this, seeking the blessings of God, We will soon give a reward of the highest value
4|115|If anyone contends with the messenger, even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, and follows a path other than that becoming to believers, We will leave him on the path he has chosen which will end in hell, what a terrible destination
4|116|God does not forgive the harmful deed of joining other gods with Him, but He forgives whom He pleases, sins other than this. One who joins other gods with God has strayed far away
4|117|The pagans, leaving Him, call upon female deities, and they call upon Satan, the persistent rebel
4|118|God cursed him but he said, “I will take of Your servants a designated group
4|119|“I will mislead them, and I will create in them false desires. I will order them to slit the ears of livestock, and to deface the fair nature created by God.” Whoever forsakes God, takes Satan for a friend, and has surely suffered a loss which is clear
4|120|Satan makes them promises, and creates in them false desires. But Satan’s promises are nothing but deception
4|121|His dupes will have their dwelling in hell, and from it, they will find no way of escape
4|122|But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, We will soon admit them to gardens with rivers flowing beneath, to dwell therein forever. God's promise is the truth, and whose word can be truer than God's
4|123|Neither your desires, nor those of the people of the Book, can prevail. Whoever does wrong, will be rewarded accordingly, nor will he find, besides God, any protector or helper
4|124|If any do deeds of righteousness, whether male or female, and have faith, they will enter heaven, and not the least injustice will be done to them
4|125|Who can be better in religion than one who submits their whole self to God, does right, and follows the way of Abraham, the intelligent in faith? For God took Abraham for a friend
4|126|But to God belongs all things in the heavens and on earth, and He is the One Who encompasses all things
4|127|They ask your instruction concerning women. Say, “God instructs you about them, and what has been rehearsed to you in the Book concerning the orphans of women to whom you do not give what is asked of you, and yet whom you desire to marry. And also concerning the children who are weak and oppressed. And that you stand firm for justice on behalf of the orphans. There is not a good deed that you can do, that God is not well acquainted with
4|128|If a wife fears mistreatment or neglect on her husband’s part, there is no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement between themselves. And such settlement is best, even though men’s souls are swayed by greed. But if you do good and practice self-restraint, God is well acquainted with all that you do
4|129|You are never able to be fair and just between women, even if it is your ardent desire. But do not turn away from a woman altogether, as to leave her hanging in the air. If you come to a friendly understanding and practice self-restraint, God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|130|But if they disagree and must part, God will provide abundance for all from His all-reaching bounty. For God is He Who cares for all and is wise
4|131|To God belong all things in the heavens and on earth. Indeed We have directed the people of the Book before you, and you too, to be conscious of God. But if you deny Him, then to God belong all things in the heavens and on earth, and God is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
4|132|And to God belong all things in the heavens and on earth. And enough is God to carry out all affairs
4|133|If it were His will, He could eliminate you, and create another race, and He has power to do this
4|134|Some desire a reward in this life, but God rewards both in this life and in the hereafter, for God is He Who hears and sees all things
4|135|O you who believe, stand out firmly for justice as witnesses to God, even against yourselves, your parents, or your family. And whether it is against rich or poor, and God can best protect both. Do not follow the lusts of your hearts, or you may stray, and if you distort justice or decline to do justice, indeed God is well acquainted with all that you do
4|136|O you who believe, believe in God and His messenger, and the Scripture which He has sent to His messenger, and the Scripture which He sent to those before him. Any who denies God, His angels, His books, His messenger, and the Day of Accountability, has gone astray
4|137|Those who believe, then do not believe, then believe again, and again do not believe, and thus increase in unbelief, God will not forgive them nor guide them on the path
4|138|To the hypocrites, give the news that there is for them a terrible penalty
4|139|Those who take for friends unbelievers rather than believers, is it honor they seek among them? No, all honor is with God
4|140|He has already revealed to you in the Book, that when you hear the signs of God held in defiance and ridicule, you are not to sit with them unless they turn to a different theme. If you did, you would be like them, for God will gather the hypocrites and those who reject it, all in hell
4|141|These are the ones who wait and watch. If you gain a victory from God they say, “Were we not with you?” But if the unbelievers gain a victory they say to them, “Did we not gain an advantage over you, and did we not guard you from the believers?” But God will judge between you on the Day of Accountability, and never will God grant to the unbelievers a way to triumph over the believers
4|142|The hypocrites think they are over-reaching God, but He will over-reach them. When they stand up for prayer, they stand without earnestness, only to be seen by people. And little do they hold God in remembrance
4|143|They are distracted in mind, even in the middle of it, being committed to neither one group nor the other. God leaves them straying, and never will you find for him the way
4|144|O you who believe, take not for friends unbelievers rather than believers. Do you wish to offer God an open proof against you
4|145|The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire, no helper will you find for them
4|146|Except for those who repent, mend their lives, hold fast to God, and redeem their ways in God's sight. If so, they will be numbered with the believers. And soon will God grant to the believers a reward of immense value
4|147|What can God gain by your punishment, if you are grateful and believe? No, it is God Who recognizes good, and knows all things. 147 (End of Part)
4|148|God does not like that misfortune be broadcasted, except where wrong has occurred, for God is He who hears and knows all things
4|149|Whether you disclose a good deed or conceal it, or cover wrong with pardon, indeed God has the Power
4|150|Those who deny God and His messengers, and wish to separate God from His prophets by saying, “We believe in some, but reject others”, or are somewhere in the middle
4|151|They are in fact unbelievers, and we have prepared for unbelievers a crushing punishment
4|152|To those who believe in God and His messengers, and make no distinction between any of them, we will soon give them their rewards. For God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
4|153|The people of the Book ask you to cause a book to descend to them from heaven. Indeed, they asked Moses for an even greater miracle for they said, “Show us God visibly.” But they were dazed for their presumption, with thunder and lightning. Still they worshipped the calf even after clear signs had come to them. Even then, we forgave them, and gave Moses clear proofs of authority
4|154|And for their covenant, We raised over them the Mountain, and We said, “Enter the gate with humility.” And We told them, “Do not transgress in the matter of the Sabbath.” And We took from them a solemn covenant
4|155|But they broke their covenant, and they rejected the signs of God. And they slew the messengers in defiance of right. And they said, “Our hearts are the wrappings.” No, God has set a seal on their hearts for their blasphemy, and little is it they believe
4|156|And they rejected faith when they uttered against Mary a serious false charge
4|157|And they said, “We killed Christ Jesus, the son of Mary, the messenger of God. But they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but it was only made to appear as such. And those who differ therein are full of doubt, with no knowledge, and only speculation to follow. For certain, they did not kill him
4|158|No, God raised him up to Himself, and God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
4|159|And there are none of the people of the Book, but must believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Accountability, he will be a witness against them
4|160|And for the iniquity of those who were Jews, We made impermissible for them certain good and wholesome things which had been permissible for them. With this, they hindered many from God's way
4|161|And because they took usury, though they were forbidden, and because they wrongfully devoured the people’s sustenance. We have a terrible punishment prepared for those among them who do not believe
4|162|But those among them who are well-grounded in knowledge, and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you, and those who establish prayer and give zakat, and believe in God and in the Last Day, to them We will soon give a great reward
4|163|We have sent you inspiration, as We sent it to Noah and the messengers after him. We sent inspiration to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon, and to David We gave the Psalms
4|164|Of some prophets, We have already told you their story, of others We have not, and to Moses God spoke directly
4|165|They were messengers who gave good news as well as the warning that humanity, after the coming of the messengers, should have no plea against God, for God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
4|166|But God bears witness that what He has sent to you, He has sent from His own knowledge, and the angels bear witness, but enough is God for a witness
4|167|Those who do not believe and who keep people off the path of God, have indeed strayed far, far from the path
4|168|Those who do not believe, and do wrong, God will not forgive them nor guide them to a path
4|169|Except a path to hell, to dwell therein forever, and this is easy for God
4|170|O humanity, the messenger has come to you in truth from God. Believe in him, it is best for you. But if you do not believe, to God belong all things in the heavens and on earth, and God is All Knowing, All Wise
4|171|O people of the Book, commit no excesses in your way of life, nor say of God anything but the truth. Christ Jesus the son of Mary was a messenger of God and His word which He bestowed on Mary, and a spirit proceeding from Him. So believe in God and His messengers, and say not “Trinity.” Desist, it will be better for you, for only God is God, the One, and Glory be to Him. Far exalted is He above having a son. To Him belong all things in the heavens and on earth, and enough is God as a manager of affairs
4|172|Christ does not fail to serve and worship God, nor do the angels, those who are nearest. Those who fail to worship Him are arrogant, He will gather them all to Himself
4|173|But to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, He will give them their reward and more, out of His bounty. But those who are disdainful and arrogant, He will punish them with a terrible penalty, and they will not find, besides God, any to protect them or help them
4|174|O humanity, indeed there has come to you a clear proof from your Lord, for We have sent to you a light manifest
4|175|Then those who believe in God hold fast to Him, and soon will He admit them to mercy and grace from Himself, and guide them to Himself, by a straight way
4|176|They ask you for a legal decision. Say, God teaches concerning those who leave no descendants or ascendants as heirs, that if a man dies leaving a sister but no child, she will have half the inheritance. If a woman leaves no child, her brother inherits her portion. If there are two sisters, they will have two-thirds of the inheritance. If there are brothers and sisters, they share, the male having twice the share of the female. God makes this clear to you, so that you will not err, and God has knowledge of all things
5|1|O you who believe, fulfill all obligations. Permissible to you are four-footed animals, with the exceptions named. But hunting is forbidden while you are in pilgrim garb, and God commands according to His will and plan
5|2|O you who believe, do not impose on the symbols of God, nor on the sacred month. Nor on the animals brought for sacrifice. Nor on the garlands that identify such animals. Nor on the people visiting the Sacred House, seeking the bounty and blessings of their Lord. And when you come out of pilgrim garb, you may hunt. But do not let the hatred of some people who shut you out of the Sacred Masjid, lead you to transgression. Help one another in righteousness and piety, but do not help one another in harmful deeds and hatred. And be conscious of God, Who is strict in punishment
5|3|Forbidden to you are the meat of animals found dead, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which has been invoked a name other than God, and that which has been strangled to death, or fatally hit, or falls to its death, or is gored to death, and that which has been partly eaten by a wild animal, unless you are able to slaughter it in the correct way. And forbidden is that which is sacrificed on stone, and the division by raffling with arrows, for that is impiety. This day have those who reject it given up all hope of your way of life. Yet do not fear them, but fear Me. This day have I complemented your way of life for you, completed My favor upon you, and have chosen for you Al-Islam as your way of life. But if any are forced by hunger, with no inclination to transgress, God is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
5|4|They ask you what is permissible to them. Say, “Permissible to you are things good and pure, and that slaughtered by that which you have made to slaughter, in the manner God has taught you. Eat what they slaughter for you, pronounce the name of God over it, and be conscious of God, for God is swift in taking account
5|5|This day all things good and pure are made permissible to you. The food of the people of the Book is permissible to you and yours is permissible to them, as are chaste women who are Believers, and chaste women among the people of the Book revealed before your time, if you give them their dowries, and desire chastity, not lewdness, nor secret rendezvous. If anyone rejects faith, fruitless is his work, and in the hereafter, he will be in the ranks of those who are lost
5|6|O you who believe, when you prepare for prayer, wash your faces, hands and arms to the elbows, wipe your heads and feet to the ankles. If you are in a state of ceremonial impurity, bathe your whole body. But if you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you comes from the offices of nature, or you have been intimate with women, and you find no water, then take for yourselves natural earth, and wash your faces and hands with it. God does not wish to make things difficult, but to refine you, and to complete his favor to you, that you may experience appreciation
5|7|And call to mind the favor of God to you, and His covenant which He ratified with you when you said, “We hear, and we follow.” And be conscious of God, for God knows well the secrets of your hearts
5|8|O you who believe, stand out firmly for God, as witnesses to fair dealings. And do not let the hatred of others towards you make you stray to wrong and depart from justice. Be just, that is next to piety, and be conscious of God, for God is well acquainted with all that you do
5|9|To those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, God has promised forgiveness and a great reward
5|10|Those who do not believe and deny Our signs will be companions of hellfire
5|11|O you who believe, call to mind the favor of God to you when certain people made a plan to stretch out their hands against you. But God held back their hands from you. So be conscious of God, and on God let believers put their trust
5|12|God took a covenant from the Children of Israel, and We appointed twelve leaders among them and God said, “I am with you, if you establish worship, give zakat, believe in my messengers, honor and assist them, and loan to God a handsome loan, and indeed I will remove your guilt, and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing beneath. But if after this, any of you resists faith, he has certainly wandered from the path of righteousness.”
5|13|But because of the breach of their covenant, We cursed them, and made their hearts grow hard. They change the words from their places and forget a good part of the message that was sent to them. And you will not cease to find them, except a few, relying on lies. But forgive them, and overlook it, for God loves those who are kind
5|14|Also from those who said, "Certainly we are Christians," We took a covenant. But they forgot a good part of the message that was sent to them. So we estranged them with enmity and hatred between one another, until the Day of Accountability. And soon God will show them what it is they have done
5|15|O people of the Book, there has come to you Our messenger revealing to you much of that which you used to hide in the Book, and passing over much. There has come to you from God, a light and a clear book
5|16|With which God guides all who seek His guidance, to ways of peace and security, and leads them out of darkness, by His will, into the light, guiding them to a straight path
5|17|Indeed committing blasphemy are those who say that God is Christ the son of Mary. Say, “Who then has the least bit of power against God, if His will were to destroy Christ the son of Mary, his mother, and everyone else on the earth? For to God belong the control of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between. He creates what He pleases, for God has power over all things.”
5|18|Among Jews and Christians are some who say, “We are sons of God, and are his beloved.” Say, “Why then does He punish you for your sins? No, you are sons of human beings, of the human beings He has created. He forgives whom He pleases, and He punishes whom He pleases, and to God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between, and to Him is the final goal.”
5|19|O people of the Book, now there has come to you, to make things clear to you, Our messenger, after a pause in the series of our messengers, so that you cannot say, “There came to us no bringer of good news and no warner.” But now there has come to you a bringer of good news and a warner, and God has power over all things
5|20|Remember Moses said to his people, “O my people, call to mind the favor of God to you, when He produced prophets among you, made you kings, and gave you what He had not given to any other peoples
5|21|“O my people, enter the Holy Land which God has assigned to you, and do not turn back shamefully, for then you will be overthrown, to your own ruin.”
5|22|They said, “O Moses, in this land is a people of exceeding strength. Never will we enter it until they leave it, but when they leave, then will we enter.”
5|23|Among the conscious people were two on whom God had bestowed His grace. They said, “Assault them at the gate. Once you are in, victory will be yours, but on God put your trust if you have faith.”
5|24|They said, “O Moses, while they remain there, never will we be able to enter, to the end of time. You go, with your Lord, and you two can fight, while we stay here.”
5|25|He said, “O my Lord, I have power only over myself and my brother. So separate us from these rebellious people.”
5|26|God said, “Therefore the land will be out of their reach for forty years. They will wander in distraction through the land, but do not worry over these rebellious people
5|27|Recite to them the truth of the story of the two sons of Adam. Behold, they each presented a sacrifice, it was accepted from one, but not from the other. Said the latter, “Certainly I will slay you.” “Certainly,” said the former, “God only accepts the sacrifice of those who are righteous.”
5|28|“If you reach your hand against me to slay me, it is not for me to reach my hand against you to slay you, for I am conscious of God, Lord of the worlds
5|29|“For me, I intend to let you draw on yourself my sin, as well as yours, for you will be among the companions of the fire, and that is the reward for those who do wrong.”
5|30|The soul of the other led him to the murder of his brother. As he murdered him, he became one of the lost
5|31|Then God sent a raven who scratched the ground to show him how to hide the shame of his brother, “Oh my God,” He said, “Was I not even able to be as this raven, and to hide the shame of my brother?” Then he became full of regrets
5|32|On that account, We ordained for the Children of Israel, that if anyone slew a person, unless it is for murder or for spreading devilry in the land, it would be as if he slew a whole people, and if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of a whole people. Then, although there came to them Our messengers with clear signs, even after that, many of them continued to commit atrocities in the land
5|33|The punishment of those who wage war against God and His messenger, and commit crimes through the land, is execution, crucifixion, or the cutting off of hands and feet from opposite sides, or exile from the land. That is their disgrace in the present, and a heavy punishment is theirs in the hereafter
5|34|Except for those who repent before they fall to your power. In that case, know that God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
5|35|O you who believe, do your duty to God, seek the way to Him, and strive in his cause, that you may flourish
5|36|As for those who do not believe, if they had everything on earth, and twice repeated to ransom themselves with it from the penalty on the Day of Accountability, it would never be accepted of them, for them is a terrible penalty
5|37|Their wish will be to escape from the fire, but they will never escape. Their penalty will be one that endures
5|38|As well as the male and female thief. So cut off their hands. A punishment by way of example from God, for what they acquired, and God is exalted in power
5|39|But if the thief repents after his crime, and amends his conduct, God turns to them in forgiveness, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
5|40|Do you not know that to God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He pleases, He forgives whom He pleases, and God has power over all things
5|41|O messenger, do not let those grieve you who race each other to disbelief, whether it be among those who say, “We believe,” with their lips, but whose hearts have no faith, or it be among the Jews, some of who will listen to any lie, will listen even to others who have never so much as come to you. They take the words out of context. They say, “If you are given this, take it, but if not, beware.” If for anyone a trial is intended by God, you have no authority in the least for him against God. For them, it is not God's will to redeem their hearts. For them there is disgrace in the present, and in the hereafter a heavy punishment
5|42|They listen to falsehood, and devour things forbidden. If they do come to you, either judge between them or decline to interfere. If you decline, they cannot harm you in the least. If you judge, judge with justice between them, for God loves those who judge with justice
5|43|But why do they come to you for decision, when they have the Torah before them? In it is the command of God, yet even after that they would turn away, because they are not people of faith
5|44|It was We who revealed the Law containing guidance and light. By its standard, the Jews have been judged by the Prophets who bowed to God's will, by the rabbis and by the doctors of law, for to them was entrusted the protection of God's book, and they were witnesses to that. Therefore, do not fear others, but fear Me, and do not sell My signs for a miserable price. If any fail to judge by what God has revealed, they are unbelievers
5|45|We ordained in it for them, “Life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, ear for ear, tooth for tooth, and wounds equal to the other.” But if anyone refrains from retaliation by way of charity, it is an act of atonement for them, and if any fails to judge by what God has revealed, they are wrongdoers
5|46|And in their footsteps, We sent Jesus the son of Mary, reflecting the truth of the Law that had come before him. We sent him the gospel, containing guidance and light, a reflection of the truth of the Law that had come before him, guidance and advice to those who are conscious
5|47|Let the people of the gospel judge by what God has revealed in it. If any fail to make decisions using what God has revealed, they are those who are not at peace
5|48|To you We sent the Scripture in truth, reflecting the truth of the Scripture that came before it, and guarding it in safety. So judge between them by what God has revealed, and do not follow their vain desires, diverging from the truth that has come to you. To each one among you We have prescribed a law and a clear way. If God had so willed, He would have made you a single people, but His plan is to challenge you with what He has given you. So strive as in a race to all virtues. The goal of you all is to God. It is He Who will show you the truth of that which you dispute
5|49|And judge between them by what God has revealed. And do not follow their selfish desires, but beware of them, so that they will not mislead you from that which God has sent down to you. And if they turn away, know that for some of their sins it is God's will to punish them. And indeed most people are rebellious
5|50|Do they then seek a judgment of ignorance? But who, for a people whose faith is assured, can give better judgment than God
5|51|O you who believe, you cannot take all Jews, and all Christians for your friends and protectors, some are only friends and protectors to each other. Those among you who turn to them, are of them, and indeed God does not guide a people who are unjust
5|52|Those in whose hearts is a disease, you see how eagerly they run about among them saying, “We do fear, in case a change of fortune bring us disaster.” Perhaps God will give you victory, or a decision according to His will. Then they will repent of the thoughts which they secretly harbored in their hearts
5|53|And those who believe will say, “Are these the people who swore their strongest promises by God that they were with you?” All that they do will be in vain and they will fall into ruin
5|54|O you who believe, if any among you turn back from his faith, soon will God produce a people who He will love, as they will love Him. A people gentle with the believers, firm with the opposition, fighting in the way of God, and never afraid of the criticism of those who find undue fault. That is the grace of God which He will bestow on whom He pleases, God encompasses all, and He knows all things
5|55|Your friends are God, His messenger, and the believers, those who establish prayer and zakat, and who bow down humbly
5|56|As for those who turn to God, His messenger, and the believers, know that this fellowship from God must triumph
5|57|O you who believe, do not take for friends and protectors those who take your way of life as ridiculous and amusing, whether they are among those who received the Scripture before you, or among those who reject it, but be conscious of God, if you have faith
5|58|When you proclaim your call to prayer, they take it as ridiculous and amusing. That is because they are a people without understanding
5|59|Say, “O people of the Book, do you disapprove of us for no other reason than that we believe in God and the revelation that has come to us, and that which came before? Most of you are rebellious.”
5|60|Say, “Shall I show you something far worse than this, as judged by the treatment it receives from God? Those who incurred the curse of God and His punishment, some of those whom He transformed into apes and swine, and those who worshipped wrong. These are worse in rank, and far more astray from the balanced way.”
5|61|When they come to you they say, “We believe.” But in fact, they enter with a mind against faith, and they go out with the same, but God knows fully all that they hide
5|62|Many of them you see racing each other in harmful deeds and hatred, and involved in things forbidden. Wrong indeed are the things that they do
5|63|Why do the rabbis and the doctors of law not discourage them from their saying sinful words, and from involvement in things forbidden? Wrong indeed are their deeds
5|64|Jews say, “God's hands are tied.” Their hands are tied, and they are cursed for what they utter. No, both His hands are wide open. He gives as He pleases, but the revelation that comes to you from God increases in most of them their obstinate rebellion and blasphemy. Among them, we have placed enmity and hatred, until the Day of Accountability. Every time they kindle the fire of war, God extinguishes it, but they strive to do wrong on earth, and God does not love those who do wrong
5|65|If only the people of the Book had believed and been righteous, We would indeed have forgiven their immorality and admitted them to gardens of bliss
5|66|If only they had stood fast by the Law, the gospel, and all the revelation sent to them from their Lord, they would have enjoyed happiness from every direction. There are among them people on the right path, but many of them refuse to follow it
5|67|O messenger, proclaim the message which has been sent to you from your Lord. If you did not, you would not have fulfilled His mission. God will defend you from the people, for God does not guide those who do not believe
5|68|Say, “O people of the Book, you have no grounds to stand upon unless you stand fast by the Law, the gospel, and all the revelation that has come to you from your Lord.” It is the revelation that comes to you from your Lord which increases in most of them their obstinate rebellion and blaspheme. But do not worry about the people without faith
5|69|Those who believe, those who are Jews, Sabaeans, Christians, and any who believe in God and the Last Day and work righteousness, on them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
5|70|We took the covenant of the Children of Israel and sent them messengers. Every time there came to them a messenger with what they did not desire, they called some of them impostors, and some they slay
5|71|They thought there would be no trial or punishment, so they became blind and deaf. Still God turned to them, but again, many of them became blind and deaf, but God sees well all that they do
5|72|They do blaspheme who say, “God is Christ the son of Mary.” But what Christ said was, “O Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord and your Lord.” Whoever joins other gods with God, He will forbid him the garden, and the fire will be his abode. For the wrongdoers there will be no one to help
5|73|They do blaspheme who say, “God is one of three in a trinity,” for there is no god except the one God. If they do not desist from these words, indeed a terrible penalty will befall the blasphemers among them
5|74|Why do they not turn to God and seek His forgiveness? For God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
5|75|Christ the son of Mary was no more than a messenger. Many were the messengers who passed away before him. His mother was a woman of truth. They both had to eat their food. See how God makes His signs clear to them, yet see in what ways they are deluded away from the truth
5|76|Say, “Will you worship besides God something that has power neither to harm nor benefit you? But God, He hears and knows all things.”
5|77|Say, “O people of the Book, do not go to extremes in your religions, other than in truth. Nor follow the vain desires of people who went wrong in times gone by, who misled many and strayed from the balanced way.”
5|78|Condemnation was pronounced on those among the Children of Israel who rejected faith, by the tongue of David and of Jesus the son of Mary, because they did not follow them and persisted in excesses
5|79|Nor did they discourage one another the immorality which they committed. Wrong indeed were the things they did
5|80|You see many of them turning in friendship to the unbelievers. Wrong indeed is that which their souls have sent forward before them. God's punishment is on them, and they will live in torment
5|81|If only they had believed in God, in the messenger, and in what is revealed to him, never would they have taken them for friends and protectors, but many of them are rebellious wrongdoers
5|82|Strongest among people in opposition to the believers will you find among the Jews and pagans. And alongside those believers in devotion will you find those who say, “We are Christians,” because among these are those devoted to learning and those who are in service to humanity, and they are not arrogant. 82 (End of Part)
5|83|And when they listen to the revelation received by the messenger, you will see their eyes overflowing with tears, for they recognize the truth. They pray, “Our Lord, we believe, write us down among those who bear witness
5|84|“What cause do we have not to believe in God and the truth that has come to us, seeing that we long for our Lord to admit us to the company of the righteous?”
5|85|And for this prayer has God rewarded them with gardens through which rivers flow. This is their eternal home. Such is the reward of those who do right
5|86|But those who do not believe and deny Our signs, they will be companions of hellfire
5|87|O you who believe, do not make impermissible good things that God has made permissible for you. However do not overindulge, for God does not love those who overindulge
5|88|Eat of the things which God has provided for you, permissible and healthy, but be aware of God, in Whom you believe
5|89|God will not call you to account for your casual promises, but He will call you to account for your contractual obligations. For atonement, feed ten indigent people on a scale of the average for your families, or clothe them, or free a slave. If that is beyond your means, fast for three days, that redeems the promises you have made. But keep your promises. God makes clear to you His signs so that you may be grateful
5|90|O you who believe, intoxicants and gambling, dedication of stones and divination by arrows is the harmful work of Satan. Avoid such harm that you may flourish
5|91|Satan’s plan is to incite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling, and to keep you from the remembrance of God and from prayer. Will you not then abstain
5|92|Follow God, follow the messenger, and be cautious. If you turn back, know that it is only Our messenger’s duty to proclaim the message in the clearest manner
5|93|On those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, there is no blame for what they were fed, when they guard themselves from harm, believe and do deeds of righteousness. Again, guard themselves from harm and believe. Again, guard themselves from harm and do good deeds. For God loves those who do right
5|94|O you who believe, God challenges you concerning game well within reach of your hands and weaponry, that He may make evident those who fear Him, although He is Unseen. Any who transgress thereafter will have a terrible penalty
5|95|O you who believe, do not kill game while in pilgrim garb. If any of you does so intentionally, the compensation is an offering brought to the Kaaba of a domestic animal equivalent to the one he killed, as adjudged by two just people among you, or in exchange, the feeding of the indigent, or its equivalent in fasts, that he may taste of the penalty of his deed. God forgives what has passed. For retribution God will exact from him the penalty, for God is Exalted, Lord of retribution
5|96|Permissible to you is the pursuit of water-game and its use for food for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel with you. But forbidden is the pursuit of land-game as long as you are in pilgrim garb. And be conscious of God, to Whom you will be gathered back
5|97|God made the Kaaba, the Sacred House, a sanctuary for people, and also the sacred months, the animals for offerings, and the garlands that identify them, that you may know that God has knowledge of what is in the heavens and on earth, and that God is well acquainted with all things
5|98|Know that God is strict in punishment and that God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
5|99|The Messenger’s duty is only to proclaim the message, but God knows all that you reveal and conceal
5|100|Say, “Not equal are things that are harmful and things that are good, even though the abundance of the harmful may dazzle you. So be conscious of God, O you who understand, that you may flourish.”
5|101|O you who believe, do not ask questions about things which if made plain to you, may cause you problems. But if you ask about things when the Quran is being revealed, they will be made plain to you, and God will forgive, because God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Understanding
5|102|Some people before you asked such questions, and consequently lost their faith
5|103|It was not God who instituted superstitions like a slit-ear she-camel, or a she-camel let loose for free pasture, or idol sacrifices for twin-births in animals, or stallion-camels freed from work. Blasphemers invent a lie against God, but most of them lack wisdom
5|104|When it is said to them, “Come to what God has revealed, come to the messenger. They say, “Enough for us are the ways we found our fathers following.” What, even though their fathers were void of knowledge and guidance
5|105|O you who believe, guard your souls. If you follow guidance, no harm can come to you from those who stray. The goal of you all is to God. He will show you the truth of all that you do
5|106|O you who believe, when death approaches any of you, take witnesses among yourselves when making wills, take two just people from your brothers, or two others from outside if you are journeying through the earth and the chance of death befalls you. If you doubt their words, keep them both after prayer, and let them both swear by God, “We do not want any worldly gain, even though the beneficiary is a near relative. We will not hide the proof before God, and if we do, then behold, the sin is on us.”
5|107|But if it becomes known that these two were guilty of this sin, let two others stand forth in their place, those nearest in family from among those who claim a lawful right. Let them swear by God that, “We affirm that our witness is truer than that of those two, and that we have not trespassed beyond the truth. If we did, behold, the harm is on us.”
5|108|That is most suitable, that they may give the evidence in its true form, or else they should fear that other testimonies would be taken over their testimony. So be conscious of God, and listen, for God does not guide a rebellious people
5|109|One day God will gather the messengers together and ask, “What was the response you received?” They will say, “We cannot know. It is You who fully know all that is hidden.”
5|110|Then God will say, “O Jesus the son of Mary, remember My favor to you and to your mother. Behold, I strengthened you with the Holy Spirit, so that you spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity. Behold, I taught you the Book and the Wisdom, the Law and the gospel. And behold, you make out of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, by My permission, and you breathe into it and it becomes a real bird, by My permission, and you heal those born blind, and the lepers, by My permission. And behold, you bring forth the dead by My permission. And behold, I kept the Children of Israel from you when you showed them the clear signs, and the unbelievers among them said, ‘This is nothing but obvious deception.’ ”
5|111|And behold, I inspired the Disciples to have faith in My messenger and Me. They said, “We have faith, bear witness that we are Muslims.”
5|112|Behold, the Disciples said, “O Jesus the son of Mary, can your Lord send down to us a table set from heaven?” Jesus said, “Be regardful of God, if you are believers.”
5|113|They said, “We only wish to eat of it and satisfy our hearts, and to know that you have indeed told us the truth, and that we may be witnesses to a miracle.”
5|114|Said Jesus the son of Mary, “O God, our Guardian Evolver, send us from heaven a table set, that there may be for us, for the first and the last of us, a solemn celebration and a sign from You, and provide for our sustenance, for you are the Best Sustainer.”
5|115|God said, “I will send it down to you, but if any of you after that resists faith, I will punish him with a penalty such as I have not inflicted on anyone among all peoples.”
5|116|And behold, God will say, “O Jesus the son of Mary, did you say to the people, worship me and my mother as gods?” He will say, “Glory to You, never could I say what I had no right to say. Had I said such a thing, you would indeed have known it. You know what is in my heart, though I know not what is in Yours, for You know all that is hidden.”
5|117|“Never did I say to them anything except what You asked me to say, namely, ‘worship God, my Lord and your Lord’, and I was a witness over them while I lived among them. When You raised me up, You were the Watcher over them, and You are a witness to all things
5|118|“If You punish them, they are Your servants. If You forgive them, You are the Exalted in Power, the Wise.”
5|119|God will say, “This is a day on which the truthful will profit from their truthfulness. Theirs are gardens with rivers flowing beneath, their eternal home. God well pleased with them, and they with God. That is the great salvation
5|120|To God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth, and all that is in it, and it is He Who has power over all things
6|1|Praise be to God, Who created the heavens and the earth, and made the darkness and the light. Yet, those who do not believe hold others as equal with their Guardian Evolver
6|2|He Who created you from clay, and then decreed a stated term for you, and there is in His presence another determined term, yet you doubt it within yourselves
6|3|And He is God in the heavens and on earth. He knows what you hide, and what you reveal, and He knows that which you earn
6|4|But never did even one of the signs of their Lord reach them, except that they turned away from it
6|5|And now they reject the truth when it reaches them, but soon they will learn the reality of what they used to mock
6|6|Do they not see how many of those before them We destroyed? Generations have We established on the earth with the type of strength which We have not given to you. For whom We poured out rain from the skies in abundance, and gave streams flowing beneath them. Yet for their sins, We caused them to perish, and produced in their wake new generations
6|7|If We had sent to you writing on parchment, so that they could touch it with their hands, the unbelievers would have been sure to say, “This is nothing but obvious magic.”
6|8|They say, “Why is an angel not sent down to him?” If We sent down an angel, the matter would have been settled at once, and no discovery would have been possible for them
6|9|And if We had sent an angel, We would have sent it in an image of a human being. And We would have then further confused them in a matter which they were already confused
6|10|Mocked were messengers before you, but the very thing they mocked hemmed them in
6|11|Say, “Travel through the earth to see what the end of those who rejected truth was.”
6|12|Say, “Who does all that is in the heaven and the earth belong to?” Say, “To God.” And He has decreed for Himself mercy. Indeed, He will gather you together for the Day of Accountability, there is no doubt whatsoever. It is those who have lost themselves that will not believe
6|13|To Him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day, for He is the One Who hears and knows all things.”
6|14|Say, “Shall I take for my protector any other than God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth? It is He Who feeds, but is not fed.” Say, “No, I am asked to be the first of those who bow to God, so do not be people who join gods with God.”
6|15|Say, “I would, if I did not follow my Guardian Evolver, indeed have fear of the penalty of a mighty day
6|16|“On that day, if the penalty is averted from any, it is due to God's mercy, and that would be salvation, and the fulfillment of all desire
6|17|“If God touches you with affliction, none can remove it but Him. If He touches you with happiness, He has power over all things
6|18|“He is the Irresistible, watching from above His worshippers, and He is the Wise, acquainted with all things.”
6|19|Say, “What thing is most weighty in evidence?” Say, “God is witness between you and me, that this Quran has been revealed to me by inspiration, that I may warn you and all whom it reaches. Can you bear witness that besides God there is another god?” Say, “No, I cannot bear witness.” Say, “In truth He is the one God, and I certainly am free of your joining others with Him.”
6|20|Those to whom We have given the Book, know this as they know their own sons. Those who have lost their own souls, refuse therefore to believe
6|21|Who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against God or rejects His signs? Indeed the wrongdoers will never prosper
6|22|One day We will gather them all together. We will say to those who ascribed partners to Us, “Where are the partners whom you spoke of?”
6|23|There will then be no plea for them except to say, “By God Our Lord, we were not those who joined gods with God.”
6|24|Behold, how they lie against their own souls. But that which they invented will leave them
6|25|Some listen to you, but We have thrown veils over their hearts, so they understand it not, and deafness is in their ears. If they saw each and every one of the signs, they would not believe in them, so much so, that when they come to you, they dispute with you. The unbelievers say, “These are nothing but tales of the ancient.”
6|26|They keep others away from it, and themselves they keep away from it, but they only destroy themselves, but they perceive it not
6|27|If you could only see when they are confronted with the fire, they will say, “If only we were sent back. Then we would not reject the signs of Our Lord, but would be among those who believe.”
6|28|Yes, in them will become manifest, that which before they concealed. But if they were returned, they would certainly relapse to the things they were forbidden to do, for they are indeed liars
6|29|And they say, “There is nothing except our life on this earth, and never will we be raised up again.”
6|30|If you could only see when they are confronted by their Lord, He will say, “Is this not the truth?” They will say, “Yes, by our Lord.” He will say, “Taste then the penalty, because you rejected faith.”
6|31|Lost indeed are they who treat as falsehood, the fact that they must meet God, until all of a sudden, the Hour is on them and they say, “Woe to us, that we did not consider it.” For they bear their burdens on their backs, and miserable indeed are the burdens that they bear
6|32|What is the life of the present but play and entertainment? Best is the home in the hereafter, for those who are righteous. Will you not then understand
6|33|Indeed We know the grief that their words cause you. It is not you that they reject, it is the signs of God which the wicked condemn
6|34|Rejected were the messengers before you. With patience and constancy they bore their rejection and their wrongs, until Our aid reached them. None can alter the words of God. You have already received some account of those messengers
6|35|Their aversion is hard on your mind, yet if you were able to seek a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the skies and bring them a sign, no good would it be. If it were God's will, He could gather them to true guidance. So do not be among those who are swayed by ignorance
6|36|Those who listen, surely will accept it, but the dead, God will raise them up, and then they will turn to Him
6|37|They say, “Why is a sign not sent down to him from his Guardian Evolver?” Say, “God certainly has power to send down a sign, but most of them do not use reason.”
6|38|There is not an animal on the earth nor a being that flies on its wings, that does not form communities like you. Nothing have We omitted from the Book, and they will be gathered to their Lord in the end
6|39|Those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb, in the middle of darkness. And whom God wills, He leaves to wander. And whom He wills, He places on the way that is straight
6|40|Say, “Do you think that if there came upon you the punishment of God or the Hour, that you would then call upon other than God? Reply if you are truthful
6|41|“No, you would call on Him. And if it is His will, He would remove the distress which caused your call to Him, and you would forget that which you join with Him.”
6|42|Before you We sent much to many nations. And We afflicted the nations with suffering and adversity that they may experience virtue
6|43|When the suffering reached them from Us, why then did they not learn virtue? On the contrary, their hearts became hardened, and Satan made their acts seem alluring to them
6|44|But when they forgot the warning they received, We opened to them the gates of all things, until in the middle of their enjoyment of Our gifts, all of a sudden, We called them to account, and then, they were plunged into despair
6|45|Of the wrongdoers, the last remnant was cut off. Praise God, the Guardian Evolver of all the worlds
6|46|Say, “Do you think that if God took away your hearing and your sight, and sealed up your hearts, which god other than God, could restore them to you?” See how We explain the signs by various signs? And still they turn away
6|47|Say, “Do you think that if the punishment of God comes to you, whether suddenly or openly, will any be caused to perish except those who do wrong
6|48|We send the messengers only to give good news and to warn. So those who believe and mend their lives, upon them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
6|49|But those who reject Our signs, them will punishment touch, because they ceased not from transgressing
6|50|Say, “I do not tell you that with me are the treasures of God, nor do I know what is hidden, nor do I tell you that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me.” Say, “Can the blind be held equal to the seeing?” Will you not then consider
6|51|Give this warning to those who fear that they will be brought before their Guardian Evolver. Except for Him, they will have no protector or intercessor to guard them
6|52|Do not send away those who call on their Guardian Evolver morning and evening, seeking His face. In no way are you accountable for them, and in no way are they accountable for you, but you should not turn them away and become one of the unjust
6|53|So We tried some of them by comparison with others so that they would say, “Is it these then who God has favored from among us?” Does God not know best those who are grateful
6|54|When those who believe come to you with Our signs say, “Peace be upon you.” And remember that your Lord has inscribed for Himself mercy. Indeed, if any of you did wrong in ignorance, and thereafter repented, and amend their conduct, then He is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
6|55|And the reason why We explain the signs in detail is so the ways of the corrupt will be exposed
6|56|Say, “I am forbidden to worship those other than God that you call upon.” Say, “I will not follow your vain desires. If I did, I would stray from the path, and not be of the company of those who receive guidance.”
6|57|Say, “For me, I follow guidance from my Lord, but you reject Him. What you would see hastened is not in my power. The command rests with none but God. He declares the truth, and He is the best of judges.”
6|58|Say, “If what you would see hastened were in my power, the matter would be settled at once between you and me, but God knows best those who do wrong.”
6|59|With Him are the keys of the unseen, the secrets that none know but He. He knows what there is on the earth and in the sea. Not a leaf falls except with His knowledge. There is not a seed in the darkness of the earth, nor anything fresh nor dry, that is not in a clear record
6|60|It is He Who takes your souls by night, and has knowledge of all that you have done by day. And by day, He raises you up again, that a term appointed is fulfilled. In the end, to Him will be your return, and then will He show you the truth of all that you did
6|61|He is the Irresistible, high above His worshippers, and He sets guardians over you. Then when death approaches one of you, Our angels take her soul, and they never fail in their duty
6|62|Then they are returned to God, their Protector, the Reality. Is not His the command? And He is the swiftest in taking account
6|63|Say, “Who is it that delivers you from the dark recesses of land and sea, when you call upon Him in humility and with fear, ‘If He would only deliver us from this, then we will truly show our gratitude.’ ”
6|64|Say, “It is God that delivers you from these and all other distresses, yet you worship false gods.”
6|65|Say, “He has power to send calamities on you, from above and below. Or to cover you with confusion and strife, giving you a taste of mutual vengeance, each from the other.” See how We explain the signs, that they may understand
6|66|But your people reject this, though it is the truth. Say, “I do not have the responsibility for arranging your affairs
6|67|“For every message is a limit of time, and soon will you know it.”
6|68|When you see people engaged in vain talk about Our signs, ignore them until they talk of something different. If Satan makes you forget, then after remembering, do not sit in the company of those who do wrong
6|69|No responsibility falls on the righteous, except that they are to remind them, so that they may be regardful
6|70|Leave those alone who take their religion to be play and entertainment, and are deceived by the life of the present. But proclaim this, “That every soul delivers itself to ruin by its own deeds. It will find for itself no protector nor intercessor except God. If they offered any ransom, none will be accepted. Such is the end of those who deliver themselves to ruin by their own acts. They will have for drink boiling water, for a punishment most terrible, for they persisted in rejecting God.”
6|71|Say, "Shall we indeed call on others besides God, call on things that can do us neither good nor harm? And should we turn on our heels after receiving guidance from God, like one whom Satan has made into a fool, wandering lost through the earth, with his friends calling, ‘come to us’, vainly guiding him to the path.” Say, “God's guidance is the guidance, and we have been directed to submit ourselves to the Guardian Evolver of the cosmos
6|72|“To establish prayer and to be conscious of God, for it is to Him Who we will be gathered together.”
6|73|It is He who created the heavens and the earth in truth. The day He says “Be”, behold, it is. His word is the truth. His will is the control, the day the trumpet will be blown. He knows the unknown, as well as that which is apparent, for He is the Wise, well acquainted with all things
6|74|Abraham said to his father Azar, “Do you take idols for gods? Indeed I see that you and your people are clearly error.”
6|75|We also showed Abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and the earth, that he might have certainty
6|76|When the night spread over him, He saw a star and said, “This is my Lord.” But when it set he said, “I love not those that set.”
6|77|When he saw the Moon rising in splendor he said, “This is my Lord.” But when the Moon set he said, “Unless my Lord guides me, I will surely be among those who are lost.”
6|78|When he saw the Sun rising in splendor he said, “This is my Lord, this is the greatest of all.” But when the Sun set he said, “O my people, I am indeed free from your giving partners to God
6|79|“For me, I have set my face firmly and truly towards He Who created the heavens and the earth, and never will I give partners to God.”
6|80|His people argued with him and he said, “You argue with me about God, when He has guided me? I do not fear that which you associate with God, unless my Lord wills. My Guardian Evolver comprehends and delivers in His knowledge of all things. Will you then not be advised
6|81|“How could I fear those you associate with God, when you do not fear giving partners to God without permission having been given to you? Which of the two groups has more right to security? Tell me if you know
6|82|“It is those who believe and do not confuse their beliefs with wrong who are truly secure, for they are rightly guided.”
6|83|That was the reasoning about Us which We gave to Abraham for his people. We raise whom We will, degree after degree, for your Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge
6|84|We gave him Isaac and Jacob. All were guided. And before him, We guided Noah, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. We reward those who do right
6|85|And Zachariah and Yahya, and Jesus and Elias, are all in the ranks of the righteous
6|86|And Ishmael and Elisha, Jonas and Lot, and to all We gave favor above the nations
6|87|And from their parents, progeny, and siblings, We chose them, and we guided them to a straight way
6|88|This is the guidance of God. He gives that guidance to whom He pleases among His worshippers. If they were to join other gods with Him, then all that they did would be in vain
6|89|These were those to whom We gave the Book, authority, and the prophetic office. If they reject them, behold, We will entrust their charge to a new people who will not reject them
6|90|These received God's guidance. As for the guidance they received they say, “No reward do I ask of you for this. This is no less than a message to all the worlds.”
6|91|No just estimate of God do they make when they say, “God reveals nothing to a human being.” Say, “Who then sent down the Book that Moses brought, a light and guidance to humanity which you made into scrolls for show, while you conceal much of what is in it, and that which you were taught which you knew not, neither you nor your ancestors?” Say, “God.” Then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and to be trifling
6|92|And this is a book that We have sent down, bringing blessings and reflecting the truth of what came before it, so that you might warn the Mother of Cities, and all around it. Those who believe in the hereafter, believe in this, and are constant in remembering their prayers
6|93|Who can do more wrong than one who invents a lie against God or says, “I have received inspiration,” when he has received none, or who says, “I can reveal the like of what God has revealed.” If you could only see how the wrong-doers fare in the flood of confusion at death. The angels stretch out their hands saying, “Yield up your souls, this day will you receive your reward, a penalty of shame, because you used to tell lies against God, and sarcastically reject His signs.”
6|94|“And behold, you come to us bare and alone, as We created you the first time. You have left behind you, all that We gave to you. We do not see with you your intercessors whom you thought to be partners in your affairs. So now, all relations between you have been cut off, and your desires have left you lost.”
6|95|It is God Who causes the seed-grain and the date-stone to split and sprout. He causes the living to issue from the dead, and He causes the dead to issue from the living. That is God, so how are you deluded from the truth
6|96|He cleaves the daybreak. He makes the night for rest and tranquility, and the Sun and Moon for telling time. Such is His judgment and ordering, the Exalted in Power, the Knower of all things
6|97|It is He Who has made the stars for you, that you may guide yourselves, with their help, through the dark spaces of land and sea. We detail Our signs for people who think
6|98|It is He Who has produced you from a single soul, in a place of sojourn and a place of departure. We detail Our signs for people who understand
6|99|It is He Who sends down rain from the skies. With it, We produce vegetation of all kinds. From some We produce green crops, out of which We produce grain heaped up. Out of the date palm and its sheaths, come clusters of dates hanging low and near, and gardens of grapes, and olives, and pomegranates, each similar yet different. When they begin to bear fruit, look at the fruit and the ripeness of it. Behold, in these are signs for people who believe
6|100|Yet they make the jinn equal with God, though God did create the jinn. And they falsely, having no knowledge, attribute to Him sons and daughters. Praise and glory be to Him, for He is above what they attribute to Him
6|101|He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. How can He have a son without a female companion? He created all things, and He has full knowledge of all things
6|102|That is God, your Guardian Evolver, there is no god but He, the Creator of all things. So worship Him, and He has power to manage all affairs
6|103|No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp is over all vision. He is above comprehension, yet comprehends all things
6|104|“Now there has come to you, from your Lord, proof. If any choose to see, it will be for their own self, if any choose to be blind, it will be against their own self. I am not here to watch over your doings.”
6|105|Thus we explain the signs that they may say, “You have taught us diligently,” and that We may make the matter clear to those who know
6|106|Follow what you are taught by inspiration from your Lord. There is no god but He. And turn away from those who join gods with God
6|107|If it had been in God's plan, they would not have taken false gods. But We did not make you one to watch over their doings, nor are you set over them to manage their affairs
6|108|Do not criticize those whom they call on besides God, or they will, out of spite, criticize God, out of ignorance. We have made pleasing to each people, their doings. In the end, they will return to their Lord, and We will then tell them the truth of all that they did
6|109|They swear their strongest promise by God, that if a sign came to them, they would believe. Say, “Certainly the signs are in the power of God.” But what will make you realize that even if signs came, they would not believe
6|110|We will turn their hearts and their eyes, even though they refused to believe in it the first time. We will leave them in their trespasses to wander in distraction. 110 (End of Part)
6|111|Even if We sent to them angels, and the dead spoke to them, and We gathered all things before their very eyes, they are not ones to believe, unless it is in God's plan, but most of them ignore this
6|112|We made enemies for every messenger from wrong-doers among humans and jinn, inspiring each other with flowery discourse by way of deception. If your Guardian Evolver had so willed, they would not have done it. So leave them and what they fabricate
6|113|Let their hearts incline to it, those who have no faith in the hereafter. Let them enjoy it, and let them earn from it what they will
6|114|Say, “Shall I look for a judge other than God, when it is He Who has sent to you the Book explained in detail?” They know full well to whom We have given the Book, and that it has been sent down from your Lord in truth. So never be of those who doubt
6|115|The word of your Lord finds its fulfillment in truth and in justice. None can change His words, for He is the One Who hears and knows them all
6|116|Were you to follow the common run of those on earth, they would lead you from the way of God. They follow nothing but speculation, they do nothing but lie
6|117|Your Lord knows best who strays from His way, and He knows best who receives His guidance
6|118|So eat of that on which God's name has been pronounced, if you have faith in His verses
6|119|Why should you not eat of that on which God's name has been pronounced when He has explained to you in detail what is forbidden to you, except when forced by necessity? Indeed many stray by their appetites unchecked by knowledge. Your Lord knows best those who transgress
6|120|Avoid harmful deeds, open or secret. Those who earn sin will get due reward for their earnings
6|121|Do not eat of that on which God's name has not been pronounced. That would be impiety. But the devils inspire their friends to contend with you. If you were to follow them, you would indeed be pagans
6|122|Can he who was dead, to whom We gave life and light, with which he can walk among people, be like him who is in the depths of darkness, from which he can never come out? So to those without faith, their deeds seem pleasing
6|123|And We have placed in every great city, those who are corrupt, to conspire therein. But they only conspire against their own selves, though they realize it not
6|124|When there comes to them a sign they say, “We will not believe until we receive one like those received by God's messengers.” God knows best where to carry out His mission. Soon the corrupt will be overtaken by humiliation before God, and a severe punishment for all their schemes
6|125|Those whom God wills to guide, He opens their heart to Al-Islam. Those whom He wills to leave straying, He makes their heart closed and constricted, as if they had to climb up to the skies. And God heaps punishment on those who refuse to believe
6|126|This is the way of your Lord, leading straight. We have detailed the signs for those who take advice
6|127|For them will be a home of peace in the presence of their Lord. He will be their Friend, because they practiced righteousness
6|128|One day He will gather them all together and say, “O you assembly of jinn, much did you take from humanity.” Their friends among humanity will say, “Our Guardian Evolver, we made profit from each other, but we reached our term which You appointed for us.” He will say, “The fire will be your dwelling-place, you will dwell there forever, except as God wills.” For your Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge
6|129|So we make the wrongdoers turn to each other because of what they earn
6|130|“O you assembly of jinn and humans, did there not come to you messengers from among you, relating to you My signs, and warning you of the meeting of this day of yours?” They will say, “We bear witness against ourselves.” The life of the present deceived them. So against themselves will they bear witness that they rejected faith
6|131|For this, your Lord would not destroy them for their wrongdoing, or the peoples’ houses, while their occupants were unwarned
6|132|To all are degrees according to their deeds, for your Guardian Evolver is not unmindful of anything they do
6|133|Your Lord is self-sufficient, full of mercy. If it were His will, He could destroy you, and in your place appoint whom He wills as your successors, as He raised you up as successors of others
6|134|All that has been promised to you will happen, and you cannot stop it
6|135|Say, “O my people, do whatever you can, I will do what I can. Soon you will know who it is whose end will be in the hereafter. Indeed the wrong-doers will not succeed.”
6|136|Out of what God has produced in abundance in land and in livestock, they assigned Him a share. They say according to their desires, “This is for God, and this for our partners.” But the share of their partners does not reach God, while the share of God reaches their partners. Terrible is their assignment
6|137|And in the eyes of most of the pagans, their partners made alluring the slaughter of their children, in order to lead them to their own destruction, and cause confusion in their religion. If God had willed, they would not have done so, but leave them alone, them and their fabrications
6|138|And they say that such and such livestock and crops are taboo, and none should eat of them except those whom, so they say, We wish. Further, there are livestock forbidden to burden, and livestock on which the name of God is not to be pronounced, all created against God's name. Soon He will repay them for their creations
6|139|They say, “What is in the wombs of such and such livestock is specially reserved for our men, and forbidden for our women. But if it is still-born, then all may partake.” For their attributing superstitions to God, He will soon punish them, for He is full of wisdom and knowledge
6|140|Lost are those who kill their children out of ignorance, and forbid food that God has provided for them, inventing lies against God. They have indeed gone astray and took no guidance
6|141|It is He Who produces gardens with trellises and without, dates and land with produce of all kind, and olives and pomegranates, similar yet different. Eat of its fruit in their season, but render the dues that are proper on the day that the harvest is gathered, and waste not by excess, for God loves not the wasters
6|142|Of the livestock, there are some for work and some for meat. Eat what God has provided for you, and do not follow the footsteps of Satan, for he is to you a sworn enemy
6|143|Take eight head of livestock in four pairs, of sheep a pair, and of goats a pair. Say, “Has He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females enclose? Tell me with certainty if you are truthful.”
6|144|Of camels a pair, and oxen a pair. Say, “Has He forbidden the two males, or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females enclose? Were you present when God commanded such a thing? But who does more wrong than one who invents a lie against God, to lead astray people without knowledge? God does not guide the people who do wrong
6|145|Say, “I do not find in the message I received by inspiration anything forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it, unless it is animals found dead, or blood poured out, or the flesh of swine, for it is an abomination, or what is unclean, or that on which a name has been invoked other than God.” But if a person is forced by necessity, with neither outright rejecting, nor transgressing due limits, your Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
6|146|For those who were Jewish, We made forbidden every animal with an undivided hoof. And We made forbidden to them fat of the ox and the sheep, except what adheres to their backs or their entrails, or what is mixed up with bone. That is their reward for their outright rejection, for indeed We are truthful
6|147|If they accuse you of falsehood say, “Your Lord is full of mercy All-Embracing. But from guilty people, never will His punishment be turned back.”
6|148|Those who give partners to God will say, “If God had wished, we would not have given partners to Him, nor would our fathers, nor should we have had any taboos,” as did their fathers argue falsely, until they tasted Our punishment. Say, “Have you any proof? If so, bring it before us. You follow nothing but speculation. You do nothing but lie.”
6|149|Say, “With God is the argument that reaches home. If it had been His will, He could indeed have guided you all.”
6|150|Say, “Bring forward your witnesses to prove that God did prohibit this.” If they bring such witnesses, be not among them, nor follow the vain desires of those who treat our signs as falsehood, and those who do not believe in the hereafter, for they hold others as equal with their Guardian Evolver.”
6|151|Say, “Come, I will rehearse what God has made sacred. Join not anything as equal with Him, be good to your parents, and do not kill your children for fear of want. We care for you and for them. Come not near shameful deeds, whether open or secret, do not take life that God has made sacred, except by way of justice and law. This is what He commands you, that you may learn wisdom
6|152|And do not come near to the orphan's property, except to improve it, until he attains the age of full strength, and give measure and weight with justice. No burden do We place on any soul except that which it can bear. Whenever you speak, speak justly, even if a near relative is concerned, and fulfill the covenant of God. This He recommended to you, that you may remember
6|153|Indeed this is My path leading straight, so follow it. Do not follow other paths that will separate you from His way, this does He recommend to you, that you may be righteous
6|154|Moreover, We gave Moses the Book, completing Our favor to those who wish to do right, and explaining all things in detail, and a guide and a mercy, that they might believe in the meeting with their Lord
6|155|And this is a book which We have revealed as a blessing. So follow it and be righteous, that you may receive mercy
6|156|Lest you should say, “The book was sent down to two peoples before us, and for our part, we remained unacquainted with all that they learned from their study.”
6|157|Or lest you should say, “If the Book had only been sent down to us, we would have followed its guidance better than they.” Now there has come to you a clear book from your Lord, and a guide and a mercy. Then who could do more wrong than one who rejects God's signs, and turns away from it? In good time, We will repay those who turn away from Our signs, with a dreadful penalty, for their turning away
6|158|Are they waiting to see if the angels will come to them, or your Lord Himself, or some of the signs of your Lord? The day that some of the signs of your Lord will come, no good will it do for one to believe in them then, if he believed not before, nor earned righteousness through his faith. Say, “Wait, we too are waiting.”
6|159|As for those who divide their religion and break up into sects, you are not responsible for any of their internal strife. Their affair is with God. In the end, He will tell them the truth of all that they did
6|160|Whoever does right will have ten times as much to his credit. Whoever does wrong will only be rewarded according to their wrong. No wrong will be done to them
6|161|Say, “Indeed, my Lord has guided me to a way that is straight, and a way that is right, the way of Abraham, the intelligent in faith, and he did not join gods with God.”
6|162|Say, “Truly my prayer and my service of sacrifice, my life and my death, are for God, the Guardian Evolver of all the worlds
6|163|“He has no partner. This am I asked, and I am the first of those who bow to His will.”
6|164|Say, “Shall I seek for my Lord other than God, when He is the Guardian Evolver of all things? Every soul draws the reward of its acts on none but itself. No bearer of burden can bear the burden of another. Your goal in the end is to God. He will tell you the truth of the things you disputed.”
6|165|It is He Who has made you caretakers and inheritors of the earth. He has raised you in ranks, some above others, that He may try you in the gifts He has given you. And your Lord is quick in punishment, yet He is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
7|1|Alif, Laam, Miim, Saad
7|2|A book revealed to you, so let your heart be oppressed no more by any difficulty from it, and with it, advise and teach
7|3|Follow the revelation given to you from your Guardian Evolver, and do not follow as friends or protectors others before Him. But little is it that you remember
7|4|How many towns have We caused to perish? Our punishment took them all of a sudden by night, or while they slept during their afternoon rest
7|5|When Our punishment took them, no cry did they utter but this, “Indeed we did wrong.”
7|6|Then will we question those to whom Our message was sent and those by whom We sent it
7|7|And indeed, We will retell their whole story with certainty, for We were never absent
7|8|The balance that day will be true. Those whose scale will be heavy will flourish
7|9|Those whose scale will be light, their souls will be in perdition, because they treated Our signs wrongfully
7|10|It is We Who have placed you with authority on earth, and provided you with means for the fulfillment of your life. Little is the thanks that you give
7|11|It is We Who created you and gave you shape, then We asked the angels to bow down to Adam, and they bowed down, but not Lucifer. He refused to be of those who bowed down
7|12|God said, “What prevented you from bowing down when I asked you to?” He said, “I am better than he is. You created me from fire and him from mud.”
7|13|God said, “Get down from this. It is not for you to be arrogant here. Get out. For you are most arrogant.”
7|14|He said, “Give me respite until the day they are raised up.”
7|15|God said, “Be among those who have respite.”
7|16|He said, “Because you have thrown me out of the way, I will lie in wait for them on your straight way
7|17|“Then I will assault them from in front and behind them, from their right and their left, nor will You find in most of them any gratitude.”
7|18|God said, “Get out from here, disgraced and expelled. If any of them follow you, hell will I fill with you all
7|19|“O Adam, dwell you and your wife in the garden, and enjoy it as you wish, but approach not this tree or you will run into harm and transgression.”
7|20|Then Satan began to whisper suggestions to them, bringing openly before their minds all their shame which was hidden from them. He said, “Your Lord only made forbidden to you this tree, so that you will not become angels, or such beings that live forever.”
7|21|And he swore to them both, that he was their sincere adviser
7|22|So by deceit, he brought about their fall. When they tasted from the tree, their shame became manifest to them, and they began to sew together the leaves of the garden over their bodies, and their Lord called to them, “Did I not forbid you that tree, and tell you that Satan was a sworn enemy to you?”
7|23|They said, “Our Lord, We have wronged our own souls. If you do not forgive us and do not bestow upon us Your mercy, we will certainly be lost.”
7|24|God said, “Get down, with enmity between yourselves. On earth will be your dwelling-place and your means of livelihood for a time.”
7|25|He said, “There you will live, and there you will die, but from it will you be taken out.”
7|26|O children of Adam, We have bestowed raiment upon you to cover your shame, as well as to be an adornment to you, but the raiment of righteousness, that is best. Such are among the signs of God, that they might receive advice
7|27|O you children of Adam, let not Satan seduce you in the same manner as he seduced your parents out of the garden, stripping them of their raiment, to expose their shame, for he and his party watch you from places where you cannot see them. We made the devils friends to those without faith
7|28|When they do anything that is shameful they say, “We found our fathers doing so, and God asked us to do this.” Say, “No, God never asks what is shameful. Do you say things about God that you do not know?”
7|29|Say, “My Lord has commanded justice, and that you submit your whole selves to Him at every time and place of prayer, and call upon Him, making your devotion to Him sincere. As He created you in the beginning, so will you be again.”
7|30|Some He has guided, others have deserved the loss of their way, in that they took the devils, in preference to God, for their friends and protectors, and think that they receive guidance
7|31|O children of Adam, take your zeenah with you to every place of prayer. Eat and drink, but waste not by excess, for God does not love wasters
7|32|Say, “Who has forbidden the beautiful gifts of God which He has produced for His servants, and the things clean and pure for sustenance?” Say, “They are in the life of the present for those who believe, and exclusively for them on the Day of Accountability.” Thus We explain the signs in detail for those who understand
7|33|Say, “The things that my Lord has indeed made forbidden are shameful deeds whether open or secret, deeds and ideas against truth and reason, assigning partners to God for which He has revealed no authority, and saying things about God which you do not know.”
7|34|To every people is a term appointed. When their term is reached not an hour can they delay or advance it
7|35|O you children of Adam, there comes to you messengers from among you, rehearsing My signs to you, those who are righteous and mend their lives, on them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
7|36|But those who reject Our signs and treat them with arrogance, they are companions of the fire, and will dwell in there forever
7|37|Who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against God, or rejects His signs? For them, their appointed portion must reach them from the Book. Until when our messengers arrive and take their souls and they say, “Where are the things that you used to invoke besides God?” They will reply, “They have left us lost,” and they will bear witness against themselves, because they rejected it
7|38|He will say, “Join the company of the peoples who passed away before you, enter into the fire, humans and jinn.” Every time a new people enter, it curses its sister people, until they follow each other, all into the fire. Says the last about the first, “Our Lord, these are the ones who misled us, so give them a double punishment in the fire.” He will say, “Doubled for all.” But this you do not understand
7|39|Then the first will say to the last, “See, you have no advantage over us, so taste the penalty for all that you did.”
7|40|To those who reject Our signs and treat them with arrogance, no opening will there be of the gates of heaven, nor will they enter the garden, until the camel can pass through the eye of the needle. Such is Our reward for those in sin
7|41|For them there is hell, as a bed, and folds and folds of covering above. Such is Our punishment for those who do wrong
7|42|So believe and work righteousness, for no burden do We place on any soul, except that which she can bear. They will be companions of the garden, to dwell therein forever
7|43|And We will remove from their hearts, any hatred. Beneath them will be rivers flowing and they will say, “Praise God, who has guided us to this. Never would we have found guidance, had it not been for the guidance of God, indeed it was the truth that the messengers of our Lord brought to us.” And they will hear the call, “Behold, the garden before you. You have been made its inheritors, because of your deeds.”
7|44|The companions of the garden will call out to the companions of the fire, “We have indeed found the promise of our Lord to us, true. Have you also found your Lord’s promise true?” They will say, “Yes.” But a caller will proclaim between them, “The curse of God is on the wrongdoers
7|45|“Those who hinder others from the path of God, and seek in it something crooked, they were those who denied the hereafter.”
7|46|Between them will be a veil, and above will be those who would know everyone by their marks. They will call out to the companions of the garden, “Peace be upon you.” They would not have entered, but they will have an assurance of it
7|47|When their eyes will be turned towards the companions of the fire, they will say, “Our Lord, send us not to the company of the wrongdoers.”
7|48|Those above will call to those whom they will know from their marks saying, “Of what profit to you were your possessions, and those things about which you were arrogant
7|49|“Behold, are these not those whom you swore that God, even with His mercy, would never bless? Enter the garden, no fear will be on you, nor will you grieve.”
7|50|The companions of the fire will call to the companions of the garden, “Pour down to us water or anything that God provides for your sustenance.” They will say, “Both these things have God forbidden to those who rejected Him.”
7|51|“Those who took their religion to be mere entertainment and play, and were deceived by the life of the world.” That day We will forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs, and because they were accustomed to rejecting Our signs
7|52|For We had certainly sent to them a book of knowledge which We explained in detail, a guide, and a mercy to all who believe
7|53|Do they just wait for the final fulfillment of the event? On the day the event is finally fulfilled, those who disregarded it before will say, “The messengers of our Lord indeed brought truth. Have we no intercessors now to intercede on our behalf? Or can we be sent back? Then we would behave differently from our behavior in the past.” In fact, they will have lost their souls, and the things they invented will leave them lost
7|54|Your Guardian Evolver is God, He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and is firmly established on the throne. He draws the night over the day, each seeking the other in rapid succession. He created the sun, the moon, and the stars, all governed by laws under His command. Is it not His to create and to govern? Blessed is God, the Lord of all the worlds
7|55|Call on your Guardian Evolver with humility and in private, and God does not love those who trespass beyond bounds
7|56|Create no chaos on the earth, after it has been set in order, but call on Him with awe and longing, for the mercy of God is near those who do right
7|57|It is He Who sends the winds like heralds of good news, going before His mercy. When they have carried the heavy-laden clouds, We drive them to a dead land, make rain to descend, and produce there every kind of harvest. Thus will We raise the dead, so that you may remember
7|58|From the land that is clean and good, by the will of its Guardian Evolver, springs up produce after its kind, but from the land that is corrupt, springs up nothing but that which is corrupt. We explain the signs by various signs to those who are grateful
7|59|We sent Noah to his people. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. I fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day
7|60|The leaders of his people said, “We see that you are obviously in error.”
7|61|He said, “O my people, I am not in error. In fact, I am a messenger from the Lord of all the worlds
7|62|“I fulfill towards you the duties of my Lord’s mission. Sincere is my advice to you, and I learned from God, something that you know not
7|63|“Do you wonder how there has come to you a message from your Lord, through a person of your own people, to warn you, so that you may be conscious of God, and happily receive His mercy?”
7|64|But they rejected him, and We delivered him and those with him, in the Ark. But We overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected Our signs. They were indeed a blind people
7|65|To the ‘Ad people, We sent Hud, one of their brothers. He said, "O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. Will you not realize this?”
7|66|The leaders of the unbelievers among his people said, “We see you are an imbecile,” and “We think you are a liar.”
7|67|He said, “O my people, I am no imbecile, but I am a messenger from the Guardian Evolver of all the systems of knowledge
7|68|“I fulfill towards you the duties of my Lord’s mission. I am to you a sincere and trustworthy adviser
7|69|“Do you wonder how there has come to you a message from your Lord through a person of your own people, to warn you? Call to mind that He made you inheritors after the people of Noah, and gave you great stature among the nations. Call to mind the benefits from God, that you may flourish.”
7|70|They said, “Do you come to us so that we may worship God alone, and give up the worship of our ancestors? Bring us what you threaten us with, if you tell the truth.”
7|71|He said, “Punishment upon punishment has already come upon you from your Lord. Do you dispute with me over names which you have devised, you and your ancestors, without authority from God. But wait, I am among you also waiting.”
7|72|We saved him and those who adhered with him, by Our mercy, and We cut off the roots of those who rejected Our signs and who did not believe
7|73|To the Thamud people We sent Salih, one of their own brothers. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. And now there has come to you guidance from your Lord. This she-camel of God is a sign to you. So leave it to graze in God's earth, and let no harm come to it, or you will be seized with a terrible punishment
7|74|“And remember how He made you inheritors after the ‘Ad people, and gave you houses in the land. You build for yourselves palaces and castles in open plains, and carve out homes in the mountains. So bring to remembrance the good from God, and refrain from harm and crime on the earth.”
7|75|The leaders of the arrogant group among his people said to those who were considered powerless, them among those who believed, “Are you sure that Salih is a messenger from his Lord?” They said, “We surely believe in the revelation that has been sent through him.”
7|76|The arrogant party said, “For our part, we reject what you believe.”
7|77|Then they hamstrung the she-camel, and insolently defied the order of their Lord saying, “O Salih, bring about your threats, if you are a messenger.”
7|78|So the earthquake took them unaware, and they lay prostrate in their homes
7|79|So Salih turned away from them saying, “O my people, I did indeed convey to you the message for which I was sent by my Lord. I gave you good counsel, but you love not good counselors.”
7|80|We also sent Lot. He said to his people, “Do you commit lewdness such as no people in creation committed before you
7|81|“For you practice your passions on men in preference to women. You are indeed a people transgressing beyond bounds.”
7|82|And his people gave no answer but this, “Drive them out of your city. These are indeed people who want to be clean and refined.”
7|83|But we saved him and his family, except his wife, she was of those who lagged behind
7|84|And we showered down on them rain. Then do you see what the end of those who indulged in harmful deeds and crime was
7|85|To the Madyan people We sent Shu’aib, one of their own brothers. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. Now there has come to you guidance from your Lord, so give just measure and weight, and do not withhold from the people the things due to them. And create no chaos on the earth after it has been set in order. That will be best for you, if you have faith
7|86|“And squat not on every road, breathing threats, hindering from the path of God, those who believe in Him, and seeking on it something wrong. But remember how you were small, and He gave you increase. And hold in your mind’s eye what the end of those who do wrong is
7|87|“And if there is a group among you who believes in the message with which I have been sent, and a group which does not believe, hold yourselves in patience until God decides between us, for He is the best to decide. 87 (End of Part)
7|88|The leaders of the arrogant group among his people said, “O Shu’aib, we will certainly push you out of our city, you and those who believe with you, or else you and they will have to return to our way.” He said, “What, even though we detest it
7|89|“We would indeed invent a lie against God if we returned to your way after God has rescued us from it. Nor could we, by any means, return to it unless it is by the will of God, Our Lord. Our Lord can reach out to the utmost recesses of things with His knowledge. In God we trust. Our Lord, decide between us and our people with truth, for You are the best to decide.”
7|90|The unbelieving leaders among his people said, “If you follow Shu’aib, be sure that you will be ruined.”
7|91|But the earthquake took them unaware, and they lay prostrate in their homes
7|92|The people who rejected Shu’aib were as if they had never been in the homes where they had prospered. The people who rejected Shu’aib were ruined
7|93|So Shu’aib left them saying, “O my people, I indeed conveyed to you the messages for which I was sent by my Guardian Evolver. I gave you good advice, but how can I grieve over a people who refuse to believe.”
7|94|Whenever We sent a messenger to a place, We raised up its people in suffering and adversity, in order that they might learn humility
7|95|Then We changed their suffering into prosperity, until they grew and multiplied, and began to say, “Our parents too were touched by adversity and prosperity.” Behold, We called them to account all of a sudden, while they realized it not
7|96|If the people of the towns had only believed and had been conscious of God, We would indeed have opened up to them blessings from heaven and earth, but they rejected it, and We brought them to account for their misdeeds
7|97|Did the people of the towns feel secure against the coming of Our punishment by night while they slept
7|98|Or did they feel secure against its coming in broad daylight while they played
7|99|Did they then feel immune concerning the plan of God? No one feels immune concerning the plan of God except those bound for failure
7|100|To those who inherit the earth in succession to its previous possessors, is it not a guiding lesson for them that if We so willed, We could punish them for their sins, and seal up their hearts so that they could not hear
7|101|These were the towns whose story We relate to you. Indeed there came to them their messengers with guidance, but they would not believe what they had before rejected. This is how God seals up the hearts of those who do not believe
7|102|We did not find most of them true to their covenant, but most of them We found rebellious
7|103|Then after them We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his leaders, but they wrongfully rejected them. So take notice of the end of those who do wrong
7|104|Moses said, “O Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of all the worlds
7|105|One who it is right to say nothing but truth concerning God. Now I have come to you from your Guardian Evolver with guidance. So let the Children of Israel exit along with me.”
7|106|Pharaoh said, “If indeed you have come with a sign, show it if you tell the truth.”
7|107|Then Moses threw his staff, and behold, it was a serpent, plain for all to see
7|108|And he pulled out his hand, and behold, it looked white to all beholders
7|109|Said the nomarchs of the people of Pharaoh, “This is indeed an illusionist well-versed
7|110|“His plan is to get you out of your land. So what is it you advise?”
7|111|They said, “Keep him and his brother in suspense, and send to the cities, people to collect
7|112|And bring up to you all illusionists well-versed.”
7|113|So the illusionists came to Pharaoh. They said, “Of course we will have a reward if we win?”
7|114|He said, “Yes, for you will, in that case, be nearest to me.”
7|115|They said, “O Moses, will you throw first, or shall we throw?”
7|116|Said Moses, “You throw.” When they threw, they tricked the eyes of people, and struck fear into them, for they showed great illusions
7|117|We put into Moses’ mind by inspiration, “Throw your staff.” And behold, it instantly made all the illusions that they faked disappear
7|118|So truth was confirmed, and all that they did was made of no effect
7|119|So they were thoroughly defeated there and then, crushed
7|120|But the illusionists fell down prostrate in adoration
7|121|Saying, “We believe in the Lord of all the worlds
7|122|“The Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
7|123|Pharaoh said, “Believe in Him before I give you permission? Surely this is a scheme plotted in the city to drive out its people, and soon will you come to know
7|124|“Be sure that I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I will cause you all to die on the cross.”
7|125|They said, “We will be sent back to our Guardian Evolver
7|126|“You wreak your vengeance on us simply because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they reached us”. “Our Lord, pour out on us patience and constancy, and take our souls to you in peace.”
7|127|Said the nomarchs of Pharaoh’s people, “Will you leave Moses and his people to spread sedition in the land, and to abandon you and your gods?” He said, “Their male children we will slay, and their females will we let live, and we have power over them, irresistible.”
7|128|Moses said to his people, “Pray for help from God, and patiently persevere, for the earth is God's to give as an inheritance to those of His servants He pleases, and the end is for the righteous
7|129|They said, “We have had troubles, both before and after you came to us.” He said, “It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the earth, so He may try you by your deeds.”
7|130|We punished the people of Pharaoh with years of drought and shortness of crops, that they might take the advice
7|131|But when good times came they said, “This is due to us,” When gripped by calamity, they ascribed it to evil omens connected with Moses and those with him. Behold, in truth, the omens of evil are theirs in God's sight, but most of them do not understand
7|132|They said, “No matter the signs you bring along with that which you use to deceive us, we will never believe in you
7|133|So We sent on them the flood, locusts, lice, frogs, and the blood. Signs openly self-explained, but they were steeped in arrogance, a people given to harmful deeds
7|134|Every time the penalty fell on them they said, “O Moses, call on your Lord on our behalf, calling on his promise to you. If you will remove the penalty from us, we will truly believe in you, and we will send away the Children of Israel with you.”
7|135|But every time We removed the penalty from them according to a fixed term which they had to fulfill, behold, they broke their promise
7|136|So We took retribution from them and We drowned them in the sea, because they rejected Our signs and failed to take warning from them
7|137|And We made a people considered weak, inheritors of lands in both East and West, lands where We sent down Our blessings. The promise of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel, because they had patience and constancy. And We destroyed what they designed and what Pharaoh and his people constructed
7|138|We took the Children of Israel across the sea. They came upon a people devoted entirely to the idols they had. They said, “O Moses, create for us a god like the gods they have.” He said, “Surely you are a people without knowledge
7|139|“As for these, the cult they are in is a piece of a ruin, and vain is that which they practice.”
7|140|He said, “Should I seek for you a god other than God, when it is God Who has endowed you with gifts above the nations?”
7|141|And remember We rescued you from Pharaoh’s people, who afflicted you with the worst of penalties, who slew your sons and kept alive your females. In that was a momentous trial from your Lord
7|142|We appointed for Moses thirty nights, and completed the period with ten more. So was completed the term with his Lord, forty nights, and Moses had charged his brother Aaron, “Represent me among my people, do right, and do not follow the way of those who do wrong.”
7|143|When Moses came to the place appointed by Us, and his Guardian Evolver addressed him, then he said, “O my Lord, show Yourself to me that I may look upon you.” God said, “By no means can you see Me, but look upon the mountain, if it remains in its place, then will you see Me.” When his Lord manifested His glory on the mountain, He made it as particles, and Moses fainted. When he returned to consciousness he said, “Glory be to You, to You do I turn, and I am the first to believe.”
7|144|God said, “O Moses, I have chosen you above others, by the mission I have given you and the words I have spoken to you. So take that which I give you, and be of those who give thanks.”
7|145|And We ordained the Commandments for him in the Tablets concerning all matters, both commanding and explaining all things, and he said, “Take and hold these with firmness, and encourage your people to hold fast by the best practices. Soon I will show you the homes of the wicked.”
7|146|Those who behave arrogantly on the earth in defiance of right, I will turn them away from My signs. Even if they see all the signs, they will not believe in them, and if they see the right way of conduct, they will not accept it as the way, but if they see the way of error, that is the way they will accept, for they have rejected our signs, and failed to take warning from them
7|147|Those who reject Our signs and the meeting in the hereafter, in vain are their deeds. Can they expect to be punished for anything except for what they have done
7|148|The people of Moses made out of their ornaments, in his absence, the image of a calf. It was low. Did they not see that it could neither speak to them, nor show them the way? They took it for worship and they did wrong
7|149|When they repented, and saw that they had erred, they said, “If our Lord does not have mercy upon us and does not forgive us, we will indeed be of those who perish.”
7|150|When Moses came back to his people displeased and grieved he said, “You have done wrong in my absence. Did you want to induce the judgment of your Lord?” He put down the tablets, seized his brother by his hair, and dragged him to himself. Aaron said, “Son of my mother, the people indeed saw me as nothing, and nearly murdered me. Do not allow the enemies to rejoice over my misfortune, nor count me among the people of sin.”
7|151|Moses prayed, “O my Lord, forgive my brother and me, admit us to Your mercy, for You are more mercifully redeeming than all of those who show mercy.”
7|152|Those who took the calf will indeed be overwhelmed with punishment from their Lord, and with shame in this life. This is how We reward those who deceive
7|153|But those who do wrong, but repent and believe, indeed your Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
7|154|When the displeasure of Moses subsided, he picked up the tablets. In the writing was guidance and mercy for those who are aware of their Guardian Evolver
7|155|And Moses chose seventy of his people for Our meeting place. When they were seized with violent quaking he prayed, “O my Lord, if it had been Your will, You could have caused to perish, long before, both them and me. Would You destroy us all for the deeds of the foolish ones among us? This is no more than Your trial. By it, You cause whom You will to stray, and You lead whom You will onto the right path. You are our Protector, so forgive us and give us Your mercy, for You are the best of those who forgive
7|156|“And ordain for us that which is good, in this life and in the hereafter, for we have turned to You.” He said, “With My punishment I visit whom I will, but My mercy extends to all things, and I will ordain My mercy for those who do right, and give zakat, and those who believe in Our signs
7|157|“Those who follow the messenger, the prophet of mother wit, who they find mentioned in their own scriptures, in the Torah and the gospel. For he commands them what is just and forbids them what is unjust, he encourages for them as permissible that which is good, and prohibits them from what is harmful. He releases them from their heavy burdens and from the chains that are upon them. So it is those who believe in him, honor him, help him, and follow the light which is sent down to him, it is these who will flourish.”
7|158|Say, “O humanity, I am sent to you all as the messenger of God, to Whom belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. It is He Who gives both life and death. So believe in God and His messenger, the prophet of mother wit, who believes in God and His words. Follow him that you may be guided.”
7|159|Of the people of Moses, a group of them guides and does justice in the light of truth
7|160|We divided them into twelve peoples. We directed Moses by inspiration, when his people asked him for water We said, “Split the rock with your staff.” Out of it, gushed forth twelve springs. Each group knew its place for water. We gave them the shade of clouds, and sent down to them manna and quails saying, “Eat of the good things We have provided for you.” Then to Us they did no harm, but they harmed their own selves
7|161|And remember it was said to them, “Dwell in this town and eat as you wish, but say a word of humility, and enter the gate in a posture of humility. We will forgive you your faults, and We will increase those who do right.”
7|162|But the transgressors among them changed the words from that which had been given them, so we sent on them a plague from heaven, because they repeatedly transgressed
7|163|Ask them concerning the town standing close by the sea. Behold, they transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath, for on the day of their Sabbath, the fish came to them openly, holding up their heads. But on the day they had no Sabbath, they did not come. We made a trial of them, for they were given to transgression
7|164|When some of them said, “Why do you advise a people who God will destroy or visit with a terrible punishment?” The advisers said, “To be absolved, fulfill your duty to your Lord, that they may be conscious.”
7|165|When they disregarded the warnings that had been given them, We then rescued those who made wrongdoing forbidden, but We visited the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment, because they were given to transgression
7|166|When, in their insolence, they transgressed prohibitions We said to them, “Be apes, despised and rejected.”
7|167|Behold, your Lord declared that He would send against them, until the Day of Accountability, those who would afflict them with a terrible penalty. Your Lord is quick in retribution, but He is also Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
7|168|We separated them into groups on this earth. There are among them some who are righteous, and some who are not. We have tried them with both prosperity and adversity, in order that they might change
7|169|After them succeeded another generation. They inherited the Book, but they chose the vanities of the present saying, “For us, everything will be forgiven.” If similar vanities came their way, they would again seize them. Was not the covenant of the Book taken from those who would not ascribe to God anything but the truth? And they study what is in the Book. But best for the righteous is the home in the hereafter. Will you not then understand
7|170|As for those who hold fast by the Book and establish prayer, never will We cause the reward of the righteous to perish
7|171|When We shook the Mount over them, as if it had been a canopy, and they thought it was going to fall on them We said, “Hold firmly to what We have given you, and bring to remembrance what is in there, so perhaps you may be conscious.”
7|172|When your Lord brought out from the children of Adam, from their loins, their descendants, and made them testify concerning themselves saying, “Am I not your Lord?” They said, “Yes, we do testify.” Lest you should say on the Day of Accountability, “Of this we were never mindful.”
7|173|Or lest you should say, “Our parents before us may have taken false gods, but we are their descendants. Will You then destroy us because of the deeds of people who were irresponsible?”
7|174|We explain the signs in detail that perhaps they may repent
7|175|Relate to them the story of the person to whom We sent Our signs, but he passed them by, so Satan followed him up, and he went astray
7|176|If it had been Our will, We would have elevated him with Our signs, but he inclined to the earth, and followed his own vain desires. His similitude is that of a dog. If you pet it, it lolls out its tongue, or if you ignore it, it still lolls out its tongue. That is the similitude of those who reject Our signs. So relate the story, perhaps they may reflect
7|177|Terrible for a similitude are the people who reject Our signs and wrong their own souls
7|178|Whom God guides, he is on the right path. Whom He rejects from His guidance, such people will perish
7|179|Many are the jinn and humans We have made for hell. They have hearts with which they feel not, eyes with which they see not, and ears with which they hear not. They are like cows, no, more apathetic, and they are heedless
7|180|The most beautiful names belong to God, so call on Him by them, and caution people who use profanity in His names, and that for what they do, they will soon be rewarded
7|181|Of those We have created, are those who direct with truth and dispense justice
7|182|Those who reject Our signs, We will gradually visit with punishment, in ways they cannot imagine
7|183|Respite will I grant to them, for My plan is strong and unfailing
7|184|Do they not reflect? Their companion is not seized with madness, he is only a clear warner
7|185|Do they see nothing in the systems of the heavens and the earth, and all that God has created? Do they not see that it may well be that their term is near and ending? In what message after this will they then believe
7|186|Those who God rejects from His guidance, there can be no guide. He will leave them in their trespasses, wandering in distraction
7|187|They ask you about the Hour, when will be its appointed time? Say, “The knowledge of it is with my Lord. None but He can reveal as to when it will occur. Heavy will be its burden through the heavens and the earth. All of a sudden it will come to you.” They ask you as if you were eager in search of it. Say, “The knowledge of it is with God." But most understand not
7|188|Say, “I have no power over any good or harm to myself except as God wills. If I had knowledge of the unknown, I would have multiplied all good, and no harm would have touched me. I am but a warner, and a bringer of good news to those who have faith.”
7|189|It is He Who created you from a single person, and made her mate of like nature, in order that he might dwell with her in love. When they are united, she bears a light burden and carries it about. When she grows heavy, they both pray to God their Lord saying, “If You give us an excellent child, we promise to be grateful.”
7|190|But when He gives them an excellent child, they ascribe to others a share in the gift they have received, but God is exalted high above the partners they ascribe to Him
7|191|Do they indeed ascribe to Him as partners, things that can create nothing but are themselves created
7|192|No aid can they give them, nor can they aid themselves
7|193|If you call them to guidance, they will not follow. For you it is the same whether you call them or you hold your peace
7|194|Indeed, those whom you call upon besides God are servants like you. Call upon them and let them respond to your prayer, if you are truthful
7|195|Have they feet with which to walk? Or hands with which to touch? Or eyes with which to see? Or ears with which to hear? Say, “Call your ‘god-partners’, scheme against me, and give me no respite
7|196|“For my protector is God, Who revealed the Book, and He will choose and befriend the righteous
7|197|“But those you call upon besides Him, are unable to help you, and indeed unable to help themselves.”
7|198|If you call them for guidance, they hear not. You will see them looking at you, but they see not
7|199|Hold to forgiveness, command what is right, and turn away from the ignorant
7|200|If a suggestion from Satan assails you, seek refuge with God, for He hears and knows all things
7|201|Indeed those who are conscious, when a thought of wrongdoing from Satan assaults them they bring God to remembrance until they see
7|202|But their brothers, the wrong-doers, plunge them ever deeper into error, and never relax their efforts
7|203|If you do not bring them a revelation they say, “Why do you not have it all together?” Say, “I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This is enlightenment from your Lord, and guidance, and mercy, for any who have faith.”
7|204|When the Quran is read, listen to it with attention, and hold your peace, that you may receive mercy
7|205|And do you, O reader, bring your Lord to remembrance in your very soul, with humility and in reverence, without audible words, in the mornings and evenings, and be not of those who are unheedful
7|206|Those who are near to your Lord, do not dislike worshipping Him. They praise Him, and bow down before Him
8|1|They ask you concerning spoils of war. Say, “Spoils are at the disposal of God and the messenger. So be conscious of God, and keep the relations between yourselves straight. And follow God and His messenger, if you do believe.”
8|2|The believers are those who, when God is mentioned, feel a tremble in their hearts, and when they hear His signs rehearsed, find their faith strengthened, and put all their trust in their Lord
8|3|They establish prayer and give out of the gifts We have given them for sustenance
8|4|Such in truth are the believers. They have degrees of dignity with their Lord, forgiveness and generous sustenance
8|5|Your Lord ordered you out of your house in truth, even though a group among the believers disliked it
8|6|They disputing with you concerning the truth after it was made clear, as if they were being driven to death and they saw it
8|7|Behold, God promised that one of the two enemy groups would be yours. You wished that the one unarmed would be yours, but God willed to justify the truth according to His words, and to cut off the roots of the unbelievers
8|8|That He might justify truth and prove falsehood false, distasteful as it is to those guilty
8|9|Remember you implored the assistance of your Guardian Evolver and He answered you, “I will assist you with a thousand of the angels, ranks upon ranks.”
8|10|God made it a message of hope, and an assurance to your hearts. There is no help except from God, and God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
8|11|Remember He covered you with a sort of drowsiness, to give you calm as from Him. And he caused rain to descend on you from heaven, to refine you, to remove from you the stain of Satan, to strengthen your hearts, and to plant your feet firmly
8|12|Remember your Lord inspired the angels with the message, “I am with you, give strength to the believers, and I will instill fear into the hearts of the unbelievers. Strike above their necks and strike every finger-tip from them.”
8|13|This is because they contended against God and His messenger. If any contend against God and His messenger, God is strict in punishment
8|14|Then it will be said, “Taste the punishment. For those who resist God, is the penalty of the fire.”
8|15|O you who believe, when you meet the unbelievers while advancing, never turn your backs to them
8|16|If any turn his back to them on such a day, unless it be in a strategy of war, or to retreat to join the other troops, he draws on himself the punishment of God, and his abode is hell, what a terrible place
8|17|It is not you who slew them, but it was God. When you threw a handful of dust, it was not your act, but God's, in order that He might challenge the believers by a gracious trial from Himself, for God is He Who hears and knows all things
8|18|That, and because God is He Who makes weak the plans and strategy of the unbelievers
8|19|If you prayed for victory and judgment, judgment has now come to you. If you stop, it will be best for you. If you return to the attack, so will We. Not the least good will your forces be to you even if they were multiplied, for indeed God is with those who believe
8|20|O you who believe, follow God and His messenger, and do not turn away from him when you hear him speak
8|21|Nor be like those who say, “We hear, but do not listen
8|22|For the worst of creatures in the sight of God are the deaf and the dumb, those who understand not
8|23|If God had found in them any good, He would indeed have made them listen. If He had made them listen, they would have turned back and rejected
8|24|O you who believe, respond to God and His messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life, and know that God hovers between a person and his heart, and to Him you all will be gathered
8|25|And be aware of trials which affects not only those of you who do wrong, and know that God is strict in punishment
8|26|Call to mind when you were a small group, despised throughout the land, and afraid that the people might harm you. He provided a safe asylum for you, strengthened you with His aid, and gave you good things for sustenance, that you might be grateful
8|27|O you who believe, do not betray the trust of God and the messenger, nor misappropriate knowingly, things entrusted to you
8|28|And know that your possessions and your progeny are a trial, and that it is God with whom lays your highest reward
8|29|O you who believe, if you are conscious of God, He will grant you a criterion, remove from you your sins and forgive you, for God is the Lord of grace unbounded
8|30|Remember how the unbelievers plotted against you, to keep you in bonds, or slay you, or get you out of your home. They plot and plan, and God too plans, but the best of planners is God
8|31|When Our signs are rehearsed to them they say, “We have heard this before. If we wished, we could say words like these. These are nothing but tales of the ancient.”
8|32|Remember how they said, “O God, if this is indeed the truth from You, rain down on us a shower of stones from the sky, or send us a terrible penalty.”
8|33|But God was not going to send them a penalty while you were among them, nor was He going to send it while they could still ask for forgiveness
8|34|But what plea do they have that God should not punish them, when they keep out the people from the Sacred Masjid, though they are not its guardians? No people can be its guardians except the righteous, but most of them do not understand
8|35|Their prayer at the House is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands, “Taste you the penalty because you blasphemed.”
8|36|The disbelievers give their wealth to hinder people from the path of God, and they will continue to give. But in the end, they will have regrets, then they will be overcome, and the disbelievers will be gathered together to hell
8|37|In order that God may separate the corrupt from the innocent. Putting the corrupt, one on another, heaping them together, and casting them into hell. They will be the ones who will lose
8|38|Say to those who disbelieve, that if they desist, their past will be forgiven, but if they persist, the punishment of those before them should serve as a warning to them
8|39|And fight them until there is no more oppression, and there prevails justice and faith in God, altogether and everywhere. But if they cease, indeed God sees all that they do
8|40|If they refuse, be sure that God is your Protector, the best to protect and the best to help. 40 (End of Part)
8|41|And know that out of all the spoils which you may acquire in war, a fifth belongs to God and to the messenger, and to near relatives, orphans, the needy, and to displaced persons, if you do in fact believe in God and the revelation that We sent down to Our servant on the day of testing. The day of the meeting of the two forces, for God has power over all things
8|42|You were on the near side of the valley, and they on the far side, and the caravan was on lower ground than you. Even if you had made a mutual appointment to meet, you would certainly have failed in that appointment. But you met, so that God might accomplish a matter destined. And that those who died might die after guidance had been given. And that those who lived might live after guidance had been given. And indeed God is He Who hears and knows all things
8|43|Remember in your dream God showed them to you as few. If He had shown them to you as many, you would surely have been discouraged, and you would surely have disputed in your decision, but God saved you, for He knows well the secrets of the chest
8|44|And remember when you met, He showed them to you as few in your eyes, and He made you appear as few in their eyes, so that God would accomplish a matter destined, for to God do all questions go back
8|45|O you who believe, when you meet a fighting-force, be strong and remember God much, that you can perhaps succeed
8|46|And follow God and His messenger, and do not fall into any disputes, lest you lose heart and your power leaves you. And be patient and persevering, for God is with those who patiently persevere
8|47|And do not be like those who started from their homes arrogantly, to be seen of people, and to hinder people from the path of God, for God encompasses all that they do
8|48|Remember Satan made their acts seem alluring to them and said, “No one among humanity can overcome you this day, while I am near to you.” But when the two forces came in sight of each other, he turned on his heels and said, “Indeed, I am clear of you. Indeed, I see what you do not see. Indeed I fear God, for God is strict in punishment.”
8|49|Then the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said, “These people, their way has misled them.” But if any trust in God, behold, God is the Exalted in Might, the Wise
8|50|If you could see when the angels take the souls of the unbelievers, and they strike their faces and their backs saying, “Taste the penalty of the blazing fire
8|51|“Because of what your hands sent forth, for God is never unjust to His servants
8|52|“Like the way of the people of Pharaoh and of those before them. They rejected the signs of God, and God punished them for their wrong doing, for God is strong and exact in punishment
8|53|“And God will never change the favor which He has bestowed on a people until they change what is in themselves, and indeed God is He Who hears and knows all things.”
8|54|The way of the people of Pharaoh and those before them, is that they treated the signs of their Lord as false. So We caused them to perish for their wrongdoing, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh, for they were all oppressors and wrongdoers
8|55|For the worst of creatures in the sight of God are those who reject Him and will not believe
8|56|They are those with whom you have made a covenant, but they break their covenant every time, because they are not regardful
8|57|If you gain an advantage over them in war, then remind those who follow them, so they may consider
8|58|If you fear treachery from any group, throw back their covenant to them, in order to be on equal terms, for God does not love the treacherous
8|59|Do not let the unbelievers think that they can get the better of you, they will never prevail
8|60|Against them, make your strength ready to the utmost of your power, including steeds of war, to strike fear into the hearts of the enemies of God, who are also your enemies, and others besides you, whom you may not know, but whom God knows. Whatever you give in the cause of God will be repaid to you, and you will not be treated unjustly
8|61|But if the enemy reaches out for peace, you should reach out for peace, and trust in God, for He is One who hears and knows all things
8|62|If they intend to deceive you, indeed God suffices. He strengthened you with His aid and with the company of the believers
8|63|And He has put affection between their hearts. Not even if you had offered all that is in the earth could you have produced that affection. But God has done it, for He is Exalted in Might, the Wise
8|64|O messenger, enough for you is God, and for those who follow you among the believers
8|65|O messenger, rouse the believers to the fight. If there are twenty among you, patient and persevering, they will defeat two hundred. If a hundred, they will defeat a thousand of the unbelievers, for these are people without understanding
8|66|For the time being, God has lightened your task, for He knows that there is a soft-spot in you, but if there are a hundred of you, patient and persevering, they will defeat two hundred, and if a thousand, they will defeat two thousand, by the permission of God, for God is with those who patiently persevere
8|67|It is not fitting for a prophet to have prisoners of war until he has fought in the land. You look for the temporary goods of the present, but God looks to the hereafter, and God is Exalted in Might, the Wise
8|68|Had it not been for previous ordainment from God, a severe penalty would have reached you for that which you took
8|69|But enjoy what you took in war, permissible and good, but be conscious of God, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
8|70|O messenger, say to those who are captives in your hands, “If God finds any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than that which has been taken from you, and He will forgive you, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
8|71|But if they have deceptive plans against you, they have already committed treason against God, so He has given you power over them, and God is He Who has knowledge and wisdom
8|72|Those who believed, and accepted exile, and fought for the faith with their property and their persons in the cause of God, as well as those who gave them asylum and aid, these are friends and protectors of each other. As for those who believed but did not go into exile, you owe no duty of protection, until they go into exile. But if they seek your aid, it is your duty to help them. Except against a people with whom you have a treaty of mutual alliance. And God sees all that you do
8|73|The unbelievers are protectors, one of another. So unless you protect each other, there will be tumult and oppression on earth, and great crimes
8|74|Those who believe and go into exile, and fight for the faith in the cause of God, as well as those who give them asylum and aid, these are all, in truth, the believers. For them is the forgiveness of sins and a provision most generous
8|75|And those who then accept faith and go into exile, and fight for the faith in your company, they are of you. But family by blood has first rights over the others in the book of God, and indeed God is well acquainted with all things
9|1|Announce a declaration of immunity from God and His messenger to the pagans with whom you have contracted a mutual alliance
9|2|Go then for four months, backward and forward throughout the land, but know that you cannot stop God, but that God will cover with shame those who reject Him
9|3|And announce from God and His messenger, to the people on the day of the Great Hajj, that God and His messenger dissolves your obligations to the pagans. If you then repent, it is best for you. But if you turn away, know that you cannot stop God. And proclaim a terrible penalty to those who do not believe
9|4|But the treaties are not dissolved with those pagans with whom you have entered into an alliance, and who have not since failed you concerning anything, nor aided anyone against you. So fulfill your responsibility to them to the end of their term, for God loves the righteous
9|5|But when the forbidden months have passed, fight and slay the pagans wherever you find them. And seize them, surround them, and lie and wait for them with every strategy of war. But if they repent, establish prayer, and give zakat, then open the way for them, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
9|6|If anyone among the pagans asks you for asylum, grant it to him, so that he may hear the word of God. Then escort him to where he can be secure, because they are people without knowledge
9|7|How can there be an alliance before God and His messenger with the pagans, except those with whom you made a treaty near the Sacred Masjid? As long as they stand true to you, stand true to them, for God loves the righteous
9|8|And how can there be such an alliance, seeing that if they get an advantage over you, they will not respect the ties of family or covenant? With words from their mouths they entice you, but their hearts are averse to you, and most of them are rebellious and wicked
9|9|They have sold the signs of God for a miserable price, and many have they hindered from His way. Wrong indeed are the deeds they have done
9|10|They do not respect believers’ ties of family or covenant. They have transgressed all bounds
9|11|But if they repent, establish prayer, and give zakat, then they are your brothers and sisters in faith. We explain the signs in detail, for those who understand
9|12|But if they violate their promises after their covenant, and taunt you for your faith, fight the leaders of disbelief, for their promises mean nothing to them. Do this so that they may be restrained
9|13|Will you not fight the people who violated their promises, plotted to expel the messenger, and took the offensive by being the first to assault you? Do you fear them? No, it is God Whom you should fear, if you believe
9|14|Fight them, and God will punish them by your hands, cover them with shame, help you to victory over them, heal the chest of believers
9|15|And remove anger from their hearts, for God will turn to whom He wills, and God is All Knowing, All Wise
9|16|Or do you think that you will be abandoned, as though God did not know those among you who strive? And take none for friends and protectors except God, His messenger, and the believers? But God is well acquainted with all that you do
9|17|It is not for those who join gods with God to visit or maintain the places of worship of God, while witnessing against their own selves to unbelief. The works of such people bear no fruit, and they will dwell in fire
9|18|The place of worship of God will be visited and maintained by those who believe in God and the Last Day, establish prayer, give zakat, and who fear none except God. They should expect to be on true guidance
9|19|Do you make the giving of drink to pilgrims, or the maintenance of the Sacred Masjid, equal to the deeds of those who believe in God and the Last Day, and strive in the cause of God? They are not comparable in the sight of God, and God does not guide those who do wrong
9|20|Those who believe, suffer exile, and strive in God's cause with their goods and their persons, have the highest rank in the sight of God. They are the people who will achieve salvation
9|21|Their Lord gives them good news of mercy from Himself, of His blessings, and of gardens for them, wherein are pleasures that endure
9|22|They will dwell therein forever. Indeed in God's presence is a great reward
9|23|O you who believe, do not take your parents and your siblings for protectors, if they love unbelief above faith. If any of you do so, they do wrong
9|24|Say, if your parents, your children, your siblings, your spouses, your extended family, the wealth that you have gained, the commerce in which you fear a decline, or the homes in which you love, are dearer to you than God or His messenger, or the striving in His cause, then wait until God brings about His decision. And God does not guide the rebellious
9|25|Surely God helped you in many battlefields, and on the day of Hunain. Remember, your great numbers elated you, but they availed you nothing. The land, as wide as it is, constrained you and you turned back in retreat
9|26|But God poured His calm on the messenger and on the believers, and sent down forces which you did not see. He punished the unbelievers. And that is the punishment for those without faith
9|27|Again, after this, God will turn to whom He wills. For God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
9|28|O you who believe, truly the pagans are corrupt, so do not let them, after this year of theirs, approach the Sacred Masjid. And if you fear poverty, soon God will enrich you, if He wills, out of His bounty, for God is All Knowing, All Wise
9|29|Fight those who do not believe in God, nor the Last Day, nor hold forbidden which has been forbidden by God and His messenger, nor acknowledge the way of truth, even if they are of the people of the Book, until they pay the jizyah with willingness, even though they are of modest means
9|30|The Jews call ‘Uzair a son of God, and the Christians call Christ the son of God. That is a saying from their mouth. They only imitate what the unbelievers in the past used to say. God's curse is on them. Indeed they are deluded
9|31|They take their scholarly and religious to be their lords instead of God, as well as Christ the son of Mary, although they were asked to worship only One God. There is no god but He. Praise and Glory be to Him, and far is He from having the partners they associate with Him
9|32|They try to extinguish God's light with their mouths, but God will not allow that, but only that His light should be brightened, even though the unbelievers hate it
9|33|It is He Who has sent His messenger with guidance and the natural way of life, to proclaim it over all ways of life, even though the pagans detest it
9|34|O you who believe, there are indeed many among the religious scholars and religious leaders, who unjustly take the sustenance of people and hinder them from the way of God, and there are those who bury gold and silver and do not give it in the way of God. Announce to them a most terrible penalty
9|35|On the day when heat will be produced out of that wealth in the fire of hell, and with it their foreheads will be branded, their sides, and their backs, “This is the treasure which you buried for yourselves. Now taste of the treasures you buried.”
9|36|The number of months in the sight of God is twelve, ordained by Him the day He created the heavens and the earth. Of them four are sacred. That is the upright religion. Thus do not wrong yourselves, and fight the pagans together as they fight you together, but know that God is with those who restrain themselves
9|37|Indeed postponing it is additional unbelief. The unbelievers are led to wrong by it, for they make it permissible one year and forbidden another year, in order to change the number of months forbidden by God, and to make forbidden ones permissible. Their wrong way seems right to them, but God does not guide those who do not believe
9|38|O you who believe, what is the matter with you, that when you are asked to go forward in the cause of God, you cling heavily to the earth? Do you prefer the life of the present to the hereafter? But little are the comforts of this life, as compared with the hereafter
9|39|Unless you move forward, He will punish you with a terrible penalty and put others in your place, but you would not harm Him in the least, for God has power over all things
9|40|Since you would not help him, God indeed helped him when the unbelievers drove him out. He had no more than one companion, the two were in the cave, and he said to his companion, “Have no fear, God is with us.” Then God sent down His peace upon him, and strengthened him with forces which you did not see, and humbled the word of the unbelievers, but the word of God is exalted to the heights, for God is Exalted in Might, the Wise
9|41|Move forward, whether lightly equipped or heavily equipped, and strive and struggle with your goods and your persons, in the cause of God. That is best for you, if you only knew
9|42|If there had been immediate gain, and the journey was easy, they would all, without doubt, have followed you, but the distance was long. They indeed swear by God, “If we could, we would certainly have come out with you.” They ruin their own-selves, for God knows that they are certainly lying
9|43|God forgives you, but why did you not grant leave to them until it became evident to you those who were truthful, and you knew indeed who the liars were
9|44|Those who believe in God and the Last Day do not ask you for exemption from fighting with their goods and persons, and God knows well those who do their duty
9|45|The only ones who asks you for exemption are those who do not believe in God and the Last Day, or whose hearts are in doubt, so that they are tossed in their doubts, back and forth
9|46|If they had intended to come, they would certainly have prepared. But God was against their coming, so He made them lag behind, and they were told, “Sit among those who sit.”
9|47|If they had come with you, they would not have contributed anything but disorder, hurrying back and forth in your presence, and sowing sedition among you. And there would have been among you, some who would have listened to them. But God knows well those who do wrong
9|48|Indeed they had plotted sedition before, and upset matters for you, until the truth arrived, and the decree of God became manifest, much to their disappointment
9|49|Among them are the people who say, “Grant me exemption, and draw me not into a trial.” Have they not fallen into a trial already? And indeed hell surrounds the unbelievers
9|50|If good befalls you, it grieves them, but if a misfortune befalls you they say, “We indeed took precautions beforehand,” And they turn away rejoicing
9|51|Say, “Nothing will happen to us except what God has decreed. He is our protector.” And on God let the believers put their trust
9|52|Say, “Can you expect for us any fate other than one of two glorious things? But we can expect that for you either that God will send His punishment from Himself, or by our hands. So wait, we too will wait with you.”
9|53|Say, “Give willingly or unwillingly, but it will not be accepted from you, for you are indeed a people rebellious and wicked.”
9|54|The reasons their contributions are not accepted are that they reject God and His messenger. They come to prayer without earnestness, and they offer contributions unwillingly
9|55|Let not their wealth nor their children dazzle you. In reality, God's plan is to punish them with these things in this life, and that their souls may perish in their denial of God
9|56|They swear by God that they are indeed with you, but they are not with you. So they are afraid
9|57|If they could find a place to flee to, a cave or some other place to hide, they would rush there
9|58|And among them are the people who criticize you concerning charity. If they are given part of it they are pleased, but if not behold, they are indignant
9|59|If only they had been content with what God and His messenger gave them and said, “Sufficient for us is God. God and His messenger will soon give us of His bounty. To God we turn our hopes.”
9|60|Sadaqah is for the poor and the needy, those employed to administer it, those whose hearts have been reconciled, those in bondage and in debt, and are in the cause of God, and for displaced persons. This is ordained by God, and God is full of knowledge and wisdom
9|61|Among them are the people who harass the Prophet and say, “He is all ears.” Say, “He listens to what is best for you. He believes in God, has faith in the believers, and is a mercy to those of you who believe.” But those who harass the messenger will have a terrible penalty
9|62|To you they swear by God, in order to please you. But it is more fitting that they should please God and His messenger, if they are believers
9|63|Do they not know that for those who oppose God and His messenger is the fire of hell where they will dwell forever? That is the terrible disgrace
9|64|The hypocrites are afraid that a Surah will be sent down about them, revealing what is in their heart. Say, “You mock, but indeed God will bring to light all that you fear.”
9|65|If you question them they declare, “We were only talking, we were playing.” Say, “Was it God, His signs, and His messenger which you were mocking?”
9|66|Make you no excuses. You have rejected faith after you had accepted it. If We pardon some of you, We will punish others among you, because they are wrongdoers
9|67|The hypocrites, men and women, are with each other. They encourage evil and forbid what is just, and close their hands. They have forgotten God, so He has forgotten them. Indeed the hypocrites are rebellious
9|68|God has promised the hypocrites, men and women, and the rejecters of faith, the fire of hell. Therein will they dwell. Appropriate is it for them. For them is the curse of God and an enduring punishment
9|69|As in the case of those before you. They were mightier than you were, and more abundant in wealth and children. They enjoyed their portion, as you enjoy yours. As did those before you. And you indulge in idle talk as they did. Their work is fruitless in the present and in the hereafter, and they lose much
9|70|Has the story not reached them of those before them, like the people of Noah, ‘Ad, Thamud, the people of Abraham, the people of Midian, and the cities overthrown? To them came their messengers with clear signs. God did not wrong them, but they wrong their own souls
9|71|The believers, men and women, are protectors one of another. They encourage what is right and forbid what is wrong. They observe prayer, give zakat, and follow God and His messenger. On them God will pour His mercy, for God is Exalted in Power, the Wise
9|72|God has promised to believers, men and women, gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein. And beautiful mansions in gardens of everlasting bliss. But the greatest bliss is the blessings of God, that is the ultimate accomplishment
9|73|O prophet, strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm against them. Their abode is hell, an evil refuge indeed
9|74|They swear by God that they said nothing, but indeed they uttered blasphemy, and they did it after accepting Al-Islam. And they devised a plot which they were unable to carry out. The revenge of theirs was the return for the bounty with which God and His messenger had enriched them. If they repent, it will be best for them, but if they turn back, God will punish them with a terrible penalty in this life and in the next. They will have none on earth to protect or help them
9|75|Among them are the people who made a covenant with God, that if He bestowed on them His bounty, they would give in charity, and be truly among those who are righteous
9|76|But when He bestowed His bounty, they became consumed with greed, and turned back aversely
9|77|So He has put hypocrisy into their hearts, until the day they will meet Him, because they broke their covenant with God, and because they lied
9|78|Do they not know that God knows their secret and their secret counsels, and that God knows well all things unknown
9|79|Those who slander those believers who give freely in charity, as well as those who can find nothing to give except the fruits of their labor, and those who throw ridicule on them, God will throw back their ridicule, and they will have a terrible penalty
9|80|Whether you ask for their forgiveness or not. Even if you ask seventy times for their forgiveness, God will not forgive them, because they have rejected God and His messenger, and God does not guide those who are rebellious
9|81|Those who were left behind rejoiced in their inaction behind the back of the messenger of God, and they hated to strive and fight with their goods and their persons in the cause of God. They said, “Do not go forward in the heat.” Say, “The fire of hell is fiercer in heat.” If only they could understand
9|82|Let them laugh a little, much will they weep. A reward for what they do
9|83|If God then brings you back to any of them, and they ask your permission to go say, “Never will you come with me, nor fight an enemy with me, for you preferred to sit inactive the first time. So sit with those who lag behind.”
9|84|Nor should you ever pray for any of them that die, nor stand at their grave, for they rejected God and His messenger, and died rejecting
9|85|Nor let their wealth nor their children dazzle you. God's plan is to punish them with the things of the present, and for their souls to perish for their rejecting it
9|86|When a Surah comes down, encouraging them to believe in God and to strive and fight along with His messenger, those with wealth and influence among them ask you for exemption. Say, “Leave us. We will be with those who sit.”
9|87|They prefer to be with those who remain behind. Their hearts are sealed, so they do not understand
9|88|But the messenger, and those who believe with him, strive and fight with their wealth and their persons, for them are all good things, and they will flourish
9|89|God has prepared for them gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell therein forever. That is the ultimate accomplishment
9|90|And there were among the desert Arabs, those who made excuses and came to claim exemption. And those who lied to God and His messenger sat inactive. Soon a terrible penalty will seize the unbelievers among them
9|91|There is no blame on those who are infirm or ill, or who find no resources to give. If they are sincere to God and His messenger, no ground of complaint can there be against those who do right, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
9|92|Nor on those who came to you to be provided with mounts and when you said, “I can find no mounts for you,” they eventually left, their eyes streaming with tears of grief, because they could not find the resources
9|93|The grounds of complaint are against those who claim exemption while they are rich. They prefer to stay with those who remain behind. God sealed their hearts, but they knew not. 93 (End of Part)
9|94|They will present their excuses to you when you return to them. Say, “Make no excuses, we will not believe you. God has already informed us of the true state of affairs concerning you. God and His messenger will observe your actions. In the end you will be brought back to He Who knows what is secret and what is open. Then He will show you the truth of all that you did.”
9|95|They will swear to you by God when you return to them so that you may leave them alone. So leave them alone, for they are a disgrace, and hell is their dwelling-place, a fitting reward for what they did
9|96|They will swear to you so that you may be pleased with them, but even if you are pleased with them, God is not pleased with those who are defiant
9|97|The Arabs of the desert are more stark in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more likely than not, they know the limits concerning what God has sent down to His messenger, but God is All Knowing, All Wise
9|98|Some of the desert Arabs look at their payments as a fine, and watch for a disaster to reach you. On them will be the terrible disaster, for God is He Who hears and knows all things
9|99|But some of the desert Arabs believe in God and the Last Day, and look at their payment as a pious gift bringing them nearer to God and for obtaining the prayers of the messenger. Yes, indeed it brings them closer. Soon God will admit them to His mercy, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
9|100|The forerunners are the first of those who abandoned their homes, those who gave them aid, and those who follow them in good deeds. Well-pleased is God with them, as are they with Him. He has prepared for them gardens through which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. That is the greatest accomplishment
9|101|Some of the desert Arabs around you are hypocrites, as well as those among the residents of Medina. They persist in hypocrisy. You do not know them, but We know them. Twice will We punish them, and they will be sent to a terrible penalty
9|102|Others have acknowledged their wrongdoing. They have mixed an act that was beneficial with another that was harmful. Perhaps God will turn to them, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
9|103|Of their wealth, accept contributions from them, that you might refine them and cause them increase, and pray on their behalf. Indeed your prayers are a source of peace for them, and God is One Who hears and knows
9|104|Do they not know that God accepts repentance from His devotees and receives their contributions, and that God is indeed the Oft-Returning, the Merciful Redeemer
9|105|And say, “Strive, and soon will God acknowledge your striving, as will His messenger and the believers. Soon you will be brought back to the Knower of what is hidden and what is open. Then He will show you the truth of all that you did.”
9|106|There are others held in suspense by the command of God, whether He punishes them, or turns to them in mercy, God is All Knowing, All Wise
9|107|And there are those who establish a masjid by way of wrong and rejection, to divide the believers, and for those who warred against God and His messenger. They will indeed declare that their intentions are nothing but good, but God declares that they are certainly liars
9|108|Never stand there. For certainly there is a masjid whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety, it is more worthy of your standing. In it are people who love to be refined. And God loves those who refine themselves
9|109|Which then is best? He who lays his foundation on piety to God and His blessings, or he who lays his foundation on an unstable sand-cliff waiting to collapse? And it will crumble to pieces with him into the fire of hell, and God does not guide people while they do wrong
9|110|The foundation of those who build it is never free from suspicion in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces. And God is All Knowing, All Wise
9|111|God has purchased from the believers, their persons and their goods, and for this, the garden is theirs. They fight in His cause, they slay and are slain. A promise binding on Him in reality, through the Law, the gospel, and the Quran. And who is more faithful to his covenant than God? So rejoice in the transaction which you have contracted. That is the ultimate achievement
9|112|Those who turn in repentance, who serve and praise Him, who move about in devotion in the cause of God, who bow down and prostrate themselves in prayer, who encourages good and forbids wrong, and observe the limit set by God, proclaim the good news to these believers
9|113|It is not fitting for the Prophet and those who believe, that they should pray for forgiveness for pagans, even if they are family, after it is clear to them that they are companions of the fire
9|114|And Abraham prayed for his father’s forgiveness, only because of a promise he made to him, but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy to God, he dissociated himself from him, though Abraham was most loving and loyal
9|115|And God will not mislead a people after He has guided them, in order that He may make clear to them what to be conscious of, for God has knowledge of all things
9|116|To God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and He takes it. Except for Him, you have neither protector nor helper
9|117|God turned with favor to the Prophet, the Muhajirs, and the Ansar who followed him in a time of distress. After that, the hearts of some of them nearly strayed, but He turned to them, for He is to them Most Kind, Mercifully Redeeming
9|118|To the three who were left behind, they felt that the earth was constraining them, even in all its spaciousness. And their souls also seemed to be constraining them. Then they understood that there was no refuge from God, only with Him. Then He turned to them, so that they could repent, for God is Oft-Returning, Mercifully Redeeming
9|119|O you who believe, be aware of God, and be with those who are authentic
9|120|It was not fitting for the people of Medina and the Bedouin Arabs of the community to refuse to follow God's messenger, or to prefer their own lives to his. Because nothing could they suffer or do that was not added to their credit as a deed of righteousness, whether they suffered thirst, or fatigue, or hunger, in the cause of God, or trod paths to anger the unbelievers, or received injury from an enemy. God does not cause the reward to be lost, for those who do right
9|121|Nor could they give anything small or great, nor cut across a valley, but the deed is inscribed to their credit, that God may repay their deeds with the best
9|122|Nor should the believers go forth all together. A contingent from every deployment should remain behind and devote themselves to understanding the ways of life, that they may advise their people when they return to them, and so that they may stay current
9|123|O you who believe, fight the unbelievers who are close to you, and let them find resolve in you, and know that God is with those who are conscious of Him
9|124|Whenever a Surah comes down, some of them say, “Which of you has had his faith increased by it?” Yes, those who believe, their faith has increased and they rejoice
9|125|But those in whose hearts are a disease, it will add doubt to their doubt, and they will die in a state of unbelief
9|126|Do they not see that they are challenged every year once or twice? Yet they do not turn in repentance, and they do not review it
9|127|Whenever a Surah is revealed, they look at each other saying, “Does anyone see you?” Then they turn away, so God has turned their hearts away, for they are a people who do not understand
9|128|Now there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves. It grieves him that you suffer. He is concerned about you. To the believers he is most kind and merciful
9|129|But if they turn away say, “God suffices me. There is no god but Him. With Him is my trust, He the Lord of the throne, Supreme.”
10|1|Alif, Laam, Raa. These are the signs of the Book of Wisdom
10|2|Is it a matter of wonder to humanity that We have sent Our inspiration to a person from among them? That he should advise humanity, and give the good news to the believers, that they have before their Lord the lofty rank of truth. The unbelievers say, “He is indeed an obvious deceiver.”
10|3|Indeed your Lord is God, Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and is firmly established on the throne, regulating and governing all things. No intercessor can plead with Him, except after He gives permission. This is God your Lord, therefore serve Him. Will you not remember this
10|4|To Him will all of you return. The promise of God is true and sure. It is He Who begins the process of creation and repeats it, that He may reward with justice those who believe and work righteousness. But those who reject Him will have drinks of boiling fluids, and a penalty terrible because they rejected Him
10|5|It is He Who made the Sun to be a shining light, and the Moon to be a reflected light, and measured out stages for it, that you might know the number of years by counting. God did not create this except in truth and righteousness. He explains His signs in detail, for those who understand
10|6|Indeed in the alternation of the night and the day, and in all that God has created in the heavens and the earth, are signs for those who are conscious
10|7|Those who do not rest their hope on their meeting with Us, but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the present, and those who do not heed Our signs
10|8|Their abode is the fire. This is the misery they earned
10|9|Those who believe, and work righteousness, their Lord will guide them because of their faith. Beneath them will flow rivers in gardens of bliss
10|10|Their cry will be, “Glory to You, O God.” And “Peace” will be their greeting, and the end of their prayer will be, “Praise God, Lord of all the worlds.”
10|11|If God were to hasten for humanity the wrong they have earned, as they would have hastened on the good, then would their respite be settled at once. But We leave in their trespasses those who refuse to rest their hope on their meeting with Us, wandering in distraction
10|12|When trouble touches a person, they pray to Us lying down on their side, sitting, or standing. But when We have solved their problem, they go on as if they had never prayed to Us for the trouble that touched them. Thus the deeds of transgressors seem fair in their eyes
10|13|Generations before you We caused to perish when they did wrong. Their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they would not believe. This is how We repay those who do wrong
10|14|Then We made you heirs in the land after them, to see how you would behave
10|15|But when Our clear signs are rehearsed to them, those who do not rest their hope on their meeting with Us say, “Bring us a reading other than this, or change this.” Say, “It is not for me, of my own volition, to change it. I follow nothing but what is revealed to me. If I were to ignore my Lord, I should myself fear the penalty of a great and dreadful day.”
10|16|Say, “If God had so willed, I should not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. A whole lifetime before this have I lived among you. Will you not then believe?”
10|17|Who does more wrong than one who forges a lie against God, or deny His signs? But never will succeed, those who are corrupt
10|18|They serve besides God, things that cannot hurt them nor profit them, and they say, “These are our intercessors with God.” Say, “Do you indeed inform God of something He does not know of, in the heavens or on earth? Glory be to Him, and far is He above the partners they ascribe.”
10|19|Humanity was once one people, and then became diverse. Had it not been for a word that went forth before from your Lord, their differences would have been settled between them
10|20|They say, “Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, “The unknown is only for God. But wait, I too will wait with you.”
10|21|When We make humanity taste mercy after adversity has touched them, behold, they take to planning against Our signs. Say, “Faster to plan is God.” Indeed Our messengers record all the plans that you make
10|22|He is the One Who enables you to traverse through land and sea. Then when you board ships, they sail with them with a favorable wind, and they rejoice. But then comes a stormy wind, and the waves come to them from all sides, and when they think they are being overwhelmed they cry to God sincerely, offering their devotion to Him saying, “If you deliver us from this, we will truly show our gratitude.”
10|23|But when He delivers them, behold, they transgress insolently through the earth in defiance of right. O humanity, your insolence is against your own souls, and though you may enjoy the life of the present, in the end, you will return to Us and We will show you the truth of all that you did
10|24|The likeness of the life of the present is as the rain which We send down from the skies. By its mingling, arises the produce of the earth which provides food for humanity and animals. It grows until the earth is clad with its golden ornaments and is beautified. The people to whom it belongs think they have power of disposal over it. Then it reaches Our command by night or by day, and We make it like a harvest clean-mown, as if it had not flourished only the day before. Thus do We explain the signs in detail for those who reflect
10|25|But God calls to the home of peace. He guides whom He pleases to a way that is straight
10|26|To those who do right is good indeed, more and more. Neither darkness nor shame will cover their faces. They are companions of the garden, and they will live therein forever
10|27|But those who have earned misery will have a reward of like misery. Disgrace will cover them. No defender will they have from God. Their faces will be covered, as with pieces from the depth of the darkness of night. They are companions of the fire. They will dwell therein forever
10|28|One day We will gather them all together. Then We will say to those who joined gods with Us, “To your place. You and those you joined as partners.” We will separate them, and their partners will say, “It was not us that you worshipped
10|29|“Enough is God for a witness between us and you. We certainly knew nothing of your worship of us.”
10|30|There will every soul be put to trial for every deed they did. They will be brought back to God, their rightful Lord, and that which they made up will leave them
10|31|Say, “Who is it that sustains you from the sky and from the earth? And who is it that has power over hearing and sight? And who is it that brings the living from the dead, and the dead from the living? And who is it that rules and regulates all affairs?” They will soon say, “God.” Say, “Will you not then be regardful?”
10|32|Such is God your true Lord. Apart from truth what remains but error? How then are you turned away
10|33|So the word of your Lord is proved true against those who rebel, indeed they will not believe
10|34|Say, “Of your partners, can any originate creation and repeat it?” Say, “It is God Who originates creation and repeats it. So how are you deluded?”
10|35|Say, “Of your partners, are there any that can give any guidance towards truth?” Say, “It is God Who gives guidance towards truth. Then is He Who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be followed, or he who finds no guidance unless he is guided? What then is the matter with you, and oh how you judge?”
10|36|But most of them follow nothing but their desire, and truly desire can be of no avail against truth. Indeed God is well aware of all that they do
10|37|This Quran could not be produced by any other than God. It is a reflection of the truth that came before it, and an explanation of the Bible, it is no doubt from the Guardian Evolver of all the systems of knowledge
10|38|Or do they say, “He fabricated it?” Say, “Well, bring a Surah like it, and call anyone you can, besides God, if you speak the truth.”
10|39|No, they charge with falsehood him whose knowledge they cannot encompass, even before the understanding of it has reached them. And those before them made similar charges of falsehood. Then consider what the end of those who did wrong was
10|40|Of them, there are some who believe in it, and some who do not, and your Lord knows best those who are out to do wrong
10|41|If they charge you with falsehood say, “My deeds to me, and yours to you. You are free from responsibility for what I do, and I for what you do.”
10|42|Among them are some who hear you, but can you cause the deaf to hear when they are without understanding
10|43|And among them are some who look at you, but can you guide the blind when they will not see
10|44|Indeed God will not deal unjustly with people. It is the people who wrong their own selves
10|45|One day He will gather them together as if they had stayed but an hour of a day. They will recognize each other. Surely those will be lost who denied the meeting with God, and refused to receive true guidance
10|46|Whether We show you some part of what We promise them, or We take your soul beforehand, in any case, to Us is their return. And God is witness to all that they do
10|47|For every people is a messenger, and when their messenger comes, the matter will be judged between them with justice, and they will not be wronged
10|48|They say, “When will this promise come to pass, if you speak the truth?”
10|49|Say, “I have no power over any harm or profit even to myself, except as God wills. To every people is a term appointed. When their term is reached, not an hour can they delay it or advance it.”
10|50|Say, “Do you see that if His punishment should come to you by night or by day, what portion of it would those who are corrupt wish to hasten
10|51|“Would you then believe in it at last, when it actually comes to pass as you wanted to hasten it?”
10|52|“Then it will be said to the wrongdoers, ‘Taste the enduring punishment. You get only the reward you earned.’ ”
10|53|They ask you, “Is that true?” Say, “Yes, by my Lord, it is true, and you cannot escape it.”
10|54|Every soul that has sinned, if it could possess all that is on earth, could not give it in ransom. They would declare repentance when they see the penalty, but the judgment between them will be with justice, and no wrong will be done to them
10|55|Is it not that to God belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth? Is it not that God's promise is surely true? Yet most of them do not understand
10|56|It is He Who gives life and takes it, and to Him will you all be brought back
10|57|O humanity, there has come to you direction from your Lord and healing for your hearts. And for those who believe, it is guidance and mercy
10|58|Say, “In the bounty of God, and in His mercy, in those let them rejoice.” That is better than what they hoard
10|59|Say, “See what God has sent down to you for sustenance? Yet you hold forbidden some of it and some things permissible.” Say, “Has God indeed permitted you to do this, or do you create things to attribute to God.”
10|60|And what do they think, those who invent lies against God, of the Day of Accountability? Indeed God is full of bounty to humanity, but most of them are ungrateful
10|61|In whatever activity you may be engaged, and whatever portion you may be reciting from the Quran, and whatever deed you may be doing, We witness it, when you are deeply engaged in it. Nothing is hidden from your Lord, not even something the weight of an atom on the earth or in heaven. The least and the greatest of these things are recorded in a clear record
10|62|Behold, on the friends of God there is no fear, nor will they grieve
10|63|Those who believe and guard against wrong
10|64|For them is good news, in the life of the present and in the hereafter. No change can there be in the words of God. This is indeed the ultimate accomplishment
10|65|Do not let their speech grieve you. All power and honor belong to God. It is He Who hears and knows all things
10|66|Behold, to God belong all creatures in the heavens and on earth. What do they follow, those who worship as His partners things other than God? They follow nothing but their desires, and they do nothing but lie
10|67|He is the One Who has made for you the night that you may rest therein, and the day to make things visible, indeed in this are signs for those who listen
10|68|They say, “God has taken a son, glory is to him.” No, He is Self-Sufficient. His are all things in the heavens and on earth. No permission do you have for this. Do you say about God what you know not
10|69|Say, “Those who create a lie against God will never prosper.”
10|70|They will find enjoyment in the present, then to Us will be their return, and then will We make them taste the severest penalty for their blasphemy
10|71|Relate to them the story of Noah. Behold, he said to his people, “O my people, if it is hard on you that I should stay and commemorate the signs of God, and that I put my trust in God, then get an agreement about your plan from among your partners. Your plan is dark and dubious, and pass your sentence on me, and give me no respite
10|72|“But if you turn away, no reward have I asked of you. My reward is only due from God, and I have been asked to be of those who submit to God's will.”
10|73|They rejected Him, but We delivered him, and those with him in the Ark. And We made them inheritors, while We overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected Our signs. Then see what the end of those who were warned was
10|74|Then after him, We sent messengers to their peoples. They brought them clear signs, but they would not believe in what they had already rejected beforehand. Thus do We seal the hearts of the transgressors
10|75|Then after them, We sent Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his nomarchs with Our signs, but they were arrogant. They were a corrupt people
10|76|When the truth came to them from Us, they said, “These are indeed lies.”
10|77|Said Moses, “Say this about the truth when it has reached you? Are lies like this? And those who lie will not prosper.”
10|78|They said, “Have you come to us to turn us away from the ways we found our parents following, in order that you and your brother may have greatness in the land? We will not believe you two.”
10|79|Said Pharaoh, “Bring me every illusionist well-versed.”
10|80|When the illusionists came, Moses said to them, “Throw you what you wish to throw.”
10|81|Once they had thrown, Moses said, “What you have brought are illusions. God will surely make it of no effect, for God causes not to prosper the work of those who do wrong
10|82|“And God, by His words, does prove and establish His truth, however much those who are corrupt may hate it.”
10|83|But none believed in Moses except offspring of his people, because of the fear of Pharaoh and his nomarchs, lest they should persecute them, and certainly, Pharaoh was mighty on the earth, and one who transgressed all bounds
10|84|Moses said, “O my people, if you do believe in God, then put your trust in Him, if you are Muslims.”
10|85|They said, “In God we trust.” Our Lord, make us not a trial for those who oppress
10|86|“And remove us, by Your mercy, from those who reject You.”
10|87|We inspired Moses and his brother with this message, “Provide houses for your people in Egypt, make your houses into places of worship, and establish prayer, and give good news to those who believe.”
10|88|Moses prayed, “Our Lord, You have indeed bestowed on Pharaoh and his nomarchs splendor and wealth in the life of the present, and Our Lord, they mislead the people from Your path. Deface, Our Lord, the features of their wealth, and send hardness to their hearts, so that they will not believe until they see the terrible penalty.”
10|89|God said, “Accepted is your prayer. So stand straight, and do not follow the path of those who know not.”
10|90|We took the Children of Israel across the sea. Pharaoh and his legions followed them in insolence and spite. Then, when overwhelmed with the flood he said, “I believe that there is no god except Him Whom the Children of Israel believe in. I am of the Muslims.”
10|91|“Ah, but a little while ago you were in rebellion, and you did wrong
10|92|“This day will We preserve your body, that you may be a sign to those who come after you. But indeed many among humanity are heedless of Our signs.”
10|93|We settled the Children of Israel in a beautiful dwelling-place, and provided for them sustenance of the best. It was after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into disagreements, indeed God will judge between them as to the disagreements among them, on the Day of Accountability
10|94|If you are in doubt as to what We have revealed to you, then ask those who have been reading the Book before you. The truth has indeed come to you from your Lord. So be in no way of those in doubt
10|95|Nor be among those who reject the signs of God, or you will become one of those who perish
10|96|Those whom the word of your Lord, predicted would refuse to believe
10|97|Even if every sign was brought to them, until they see the terrible penalty
10|98|Why was there not a single township that believed? Its faith would have profited it. Except the people of Jonah, when they believed, We removed from them the penalty of disgrace in the life of the present, and permitted them much enjoyment
10|99|If it had been your Lord’s will, they would all have believed, all who are on earth. Will you then compel the people against their will to believe
10|100|No soul can believe, except by the will of God, and He will place doubt on those who do not wish to understand
10|101|Say, “Behold, all that is in the heavens and on earth,” but neither signs nor warners profit those who believe not
10|102|Do they then expect anything other than what happened in the days of people who passed away before them? Say, “Then wait, I will wait with you.”
10|103|In the end, We deliver Our messengers and those who believe. Thus, it is fitting on Our part that We should deliver those who believe
10|104|Say, “O you people, if you are in doubt as to my way, I worship not what you worship other than God. I worship God, Who will take your souls. I am asked to be of the believers
10|105|“And set your face towards the way with true piety, and never, in any way, be of the unbelievers
10|106|“Nor call on any other than God. Such will neither profit you nor harm you. If you do, behold, you will certainly be of those who do wrong.”
10|107|If God inflicts you with pain, there are none that can remove it but Him. If He designs some benefit for you, there is none that can keep back His favor. He causes it to reach whomever of His servants He pleases, and He is the Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
10|108|Say, “O you people, truth has reached you from your Lord. Those who receive guidance do so for the good of their own souls, those who stray, do so to their own detriment, and I am not put over you to arrange your affairs.”
10|109|Follow the inspiration sent to you, and be patient and constant until God decides, for He is the best to decide
11|1|Alif, Laam, Raa. A book with verses of wisdom, further explained in detail, from the One who is Most Wise and All Aware
11|2|Should you worship any other than God? Say, “Indeed I am sent to you from Him to warn and to bring good news
11|3|“Seek the forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him in repentance, so that He may grant you good enjoyment for a term appointed, and bestow His abundant grace on all who have abundant merit. But if you turn away, then I fear for you the penalty of a momentous day
11|4|“To God is your return, and He has power over all things.”
11|5|Behold, they close up their hearts so that they may lie hidden from Him. Even when they cover themselves with their garments, He knows what they conceal, and what they reveal, for He knows the heart well. 5 (End of Part)
11|6|There is no moving creature on earth whose sustenance does not depend on God. He knows the time and place of its activity and its place of rest. All is in a clear record
11|7|He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His throne was over the waters, so that He would make evident which of you is best in conduct. But if you were to say to them, “You will indeed be raised up after death,” the unbelievers would be sure to say, “This is nothing but obvious delusion.”
11|8|If We delay the penalty for them for a definite term, they are sure to say, “What keeps it back?” On the day it reaches them, nothing will keep it back, and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock
11|9|If We give a man a taste of mercy from Ourselves, and then withdraw it from him, behold, he is in despair and falls into blasphemy
11|10|But if We give him a taste of Our favors after adversity has touched him, he is sure to say, “All problems have left me.” Behold, he falls into exultation and pride
11|11|Not so do those who show patience and constancy, and work righteousness, for them is forgiveness and a great reward
11|12|Perhaps you may want to give up a part of what is revealed to you, and your heart feels distressed when they say, “Why is a treasure not sent down to him, or why does an angel not come down with him?” But you are there only to warn, God manages everything
11|13|Or they may say, “He fabricated it.” Say, “Bring then ten Surahs fabricated like it, and call whoever you can, other than God, if you speak the truth
11|14|If then they do not answer you, know that this revelation is sent down with the knowledge of God, and that there is no god but He. Will you then submit?”
11|15|Those who desire the life of the present and its glitter, we will pay them for their deeds, without diminishment
11|16|They are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire. Vain are the designs which they drafted, and of no effect are the deeds that they do
11|17|Can they be like those who accept guidance from their Lord, and who a witness from Himself teaches, as did the Book of Moses before it? For it was a guide and a mercy. They believe in it. But those of the sects who reject it, the fire will be their promised meeting place. So do not be in doubt, for it is the truth from your Lord. Yet many among humanity do not believe
11|18|Who does more wrong than those who invent a lie against God? They will be turned back to the presence of their Lord, and the witnesses will say, “These are the ones who lied about their Lord. Behold, the curse of God is on those who do wrong
11|19|“Those who would hinder people from the path of God and would seek in it something crooked, these were those who denied the hereafter.”
11|20|They will in no way escape His design on earth, nor have they protectors besides God. Their penalty will be doubled. They lost the power to hear, and they could not see
11|21|They are the ones who have lost themselves, and the desires they invented have abandoned them
11|22|Without a doubt, these are the very ones who will lose most in the hereafter
11|23|But those who believe and work righteousness, and humble themselves before their Lord, they will be companions of Paradise, and will dwell therein forever
11|24|These two types of people can be compared to the blind and deaf, and those who can see and hear. Are they equal when compared? Will you not then take notice
11|25|We sent Noah to his people, “I have come to you with clear advice,”
11|26|“That you should serve none but God, and indeed I fear for you the penalty of a terrible day.”
11|27|But the leaders of the unbelievers among his people said, “We see you as nothing but a human being like ourselves. And the only ones we see following you are the lowest among us, with immature judgment. Nor do we see in you any merit above us. In fact we think you are liars.”
11|28|He said, “O my people, do you see that I have guidance from my Lord, and that He has sent mercy to me from His own presence, and that the mercy escapes you? Can we compel you to accept it when you have become averse to it
11|29|“And O my people, I ask you for no wealth in return. My reward is from none but God, but I will not drive away those who believe, for indeed they are to meet their Lord, and you, I see as the ignorant ones
11|30|“And O my people, who would help me against God if I drove them away? Will you not then take heed
11|31|“I do not tell you that with me are the treasures of God, nor do I know what is hidden, nor do I claim to be an angel, nor do I say of those whom your eyes despise that God will not grant them all that is good. God knows best what is in their souls. I would, if I did, indeed be a wrongdoer.”
11|32|They said, “O Noah, you have disputed with us long enough. Now bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you speak the truth.”
11|33|He said, “Truly God will bring it on you if He wills, and then you will not be able to stop it
11|34|“Of no profit will my advice be to you, as much as I desire to give you advice, if God wills to leave you astray. It is He Who is your Lord, and to Him will you return.”
11|35|Or do they say, “He has fabricated it”? Say, “If I had fabricated it, on me is my sin, and I am free of the sins of which you are guilty
11|36|It was revealed to Noah, “None of your people will believe except those who have already believed. So grieve no longer over their wrongful deeds
11|37|“But construct an ark under Our eyes and Our inspiration, and address Me no further on behalf of those who do wrong, for they will soon be overwhelmed.”
11|38|Immediately, he starts constructing the Ark. Every time the leaders of his people passed by him, they threw ridicule on him. He said, “If you ridicule us now, we will likewise look down on you with ridicule
11|39|“But soon will you know on whom will descend a penalty that will cover them with shame, and on whom will be unleashed a lasting penalty.”
11|40|Then behold, there came Our command, and the fountains of the earth gushed forth. We said, “Embark therein, two of each kind, male and female, and your family, except those against whom the word has already gone forth, and the believers.” But only a few believed with him
11|41|So he said, “Embark on the Ark with the name of God, whether it move or be at rest, for my Lord is surely Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
11|42|So the Ark floated with them on the waves, and Noah called out to his son who had separated himself from them, “O my son, embark with us, and be not with the unbelievers.”
11|43|The son replied, “I will take myself to some mountain. It will save me from the water.” Noah said, “This day nothing can be saved from the command of God, none except those on whom He has mercy, “And the waves came between them, and the son was among those overwhelmed in the flood
11|44|Then the word came forth, “O earth, swallow up your water, and O sky, withhold your water.” And the water subsided, and the event ended. The Ark rested on Mount Judi, and the word came forth, “Away with those who do wrong.”
11|45|And Noah called upon his Lord and said, “O my Lord, surely my son is of my family, and Your promise is true, and You are the Most Just of Judges.”
11|46|He said, “O Noah, he is not of your family, for his conduct is unrighteous. So ask not of Me that of which you cannot know. I give you counsel, lest you should act like the ignorant.”
11|47|Noah said, “O my Lord, I do seek refuge with You, lest I ask You for that of which I cannot understand, and unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will indeed be lost.”
11|48|The word came, “O Noah, come down with peace and those with you, some to whom We will grant their desires, but in the end, a terrible penalty will reach them from Us.”
11|49|Such are some of the stories of the unknown which We have revealed to you. Before this, neither you nor your people knew them. So persevere patiently, for the end is for those who are righteous
11|50|To the ‘Ad people We sent Hud, one of their own brothers. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. You do nothing but create the others
11|51|“O my people, I ask of you no reward for this. My reward is from none but He who created me. Will you not then understand
11|52|“And O my people, ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him. He will send you the skies pouring abundant rain, and add strength to your strength. So do not turn back to error.”
11|53|They said, “O Hud, no clear sign have you brought us, and we are not the ones to desert our gods on your word, nor will we believe in you
11|54|“We say nothing but that some of our gods may have seized you with imbecility.” He said, “I call God to witness, and do you bear witness, that I am free from the wrong of ascribing–
11|55|“Partners to Him? So scheme against me, all of you, and give me no respite
11|56|“I put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is not a moving creature, but He has grasp of its sensitivities, indeed my Lord is on a straight path
11|57|“If you turn away, I have conveyed the message with which I was sent. My Lord will make another people to succeed you, and you will not harm Him in the least, for my Lord has care and watch over all things.”
11|58|So when Our decree issued, We saved Hud and those who believed with him, by grace from Ourselves. We saved them from a severe penalty
11|59|Such were the ‘Ad people. They rejected the signs of their Lord, and did not follow His messengers, but followed the command of every powerful, obstinate transgressor
11|60|And they were pursued by a curse in this life, and on the Day of Accountability. Behold, because the ‘Ad rejected their Lord behold, removed from sight were ‘Ad, the people of Hud
11|61|To the Thamud people We sent Salih, one of their own brothers. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. It is He Who has produced you from the earth and settled you therein. Then ask forgiveness of Him, and turn to Him, for my Lord is near, ready to answer.”
11|62|They said, “O Salih, You have been for us the center of our hopes. Do you forbid us the worship of what our parents worshipped? But we are really in suspicious doubt as to that which you invite us.”
11|63|He said, “O my people, do you see that I have guidance from my Lord, and He has sent mercy to me from Himself, who then can help me against God if I were to ignore Him? What then would you add to my portion but perdition
11|64|“And O my people, this she-camel of God is a symbol to you. Leave it to feed on God's earth, and inflict no harm on it, or a swift penalty will seize you.”
11|65|But they hamstrung it. So he said, “Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days. Behold, then will come a promise without fail.”
11|66|When Our decree issued, We saved Salih and those who believed with him, by grace from Ourselves, and from the disgrace of that day. For your Lord, He is strong and able to enforce His will
11|67|The mighty blast overtook the wrongdoers, and they lay prostrate in their homes–
11|68|As if they had never lived and flourished there. Behold, for the Thamud rejected their Lord. Behold, removed were the Thamud
11|69|Our messengers came to Abraham with good news they said, “Peace.” He replied, “Peace.” And hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf
11|70|But when he saw that their hands did not go towards the meal, he felt uncomfortable towards them, and conceived a fear of them. They said, “Fear not, we have been sent against the people of Lot.”
11|71|And his wife was standing there, and she laughed when we gave her good news of Isaac, and after him, of Jacob
11|72|She said, “Oh my, will I bear a child, being that I am an old woman, and my husband here is an old man? That would indeed be a wonderful thing.”
11|73|They said, “Do you wonder at God's decree? The grace of God and His blessings are upon you, O you people of the House, for He is indeed worthy of all praise, full of all glory.”
11|74|When fear had left Abraham and the good news had reached him, he began to plead with Us for Lot’s people
11|75|For Abraham was, without doubt, forbearing, compassionate, and given to look to God
11|76|O Abraham, do not seek this. The decree of your Lord has gone forth, for them there comes a penalty that cannot be turned back
11|77|When Our messengers came to Lot, he was grieved on their account, and felt himself powerless to protect them. He said, “This is a distressful day.”
11|78|And his people came rushing towards him, and they had been long in the habit of practicing abominations. He said, “O my people, here are my daughters. They are more pure for you. Now be regardful of God, and cover me not with shame around my guests. Is there not among you a single, right-minded man?”
11|79|They said, “You know well we have no need of your daughters. Indeed you know quite well what we want.”
11|80|He said, “I wish that I had power to suppress you, or that I could go to some great refuge.”
11|81|The messengers said, “O Lot, we are messengers from your Lord. By no means will they reach you, now travel with your family while a part of the night still remains, and let not any of you look back, but your wife will remain behind. What will happen to her is what happened to others. Morning is their time appointed, and is not the morning near?”
11|82|When Our decree issued, We turned them upside down, and rained down on them brimstone hard as baked clay, spread layer on layer
11|83|Marked from your Lord, nor is this ever far from those who do wrong
11|84|To the Madyan people We sent Shu’aib, one of their own brothers. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him, and give not short measure or weight. I see you in prosperity, but I fear for you the penalty of a day that will encompass all
11|85|“And O my people, give just measure and weight, nor withhold from the people the things that are their due. And do not cause harm in the land with intent to do wrong
11|86|“That which has left you, by God, is best for you if you believe, but I am not put over you to keep watch.”
11|87|They said, “O Shu’aib, does your prayer ask that we abandon the worship that our parents practiced, or that we stop doing what we like with our property? Truly you are forbearing and right-minded.”
11|88|He said, “O my people, do you see whether I have guidance from my Lord, and whether He has given me good provisions from Himself? I do not wish, in opposition to you, to do that which I forbid you to do. I only desire your betterment to the best of my ability, but my success can only come from God, in Him I trust, and I look to Him
11|89|“And O my people, do not let my dissent cause you to sin, lest you suffer a fate similar to that of the people of Noah, Hud, or Salih, nor are the people of Lot far off from you
11|90|“But ask forgiveness from your Lord, and turn to Him, for my Lord is indeed full of mercy and love.”
11|91|They said, “O Shu’aib, much of what you say we do not understand, and compared to us we see that you have no strength. Were it not for your family, we would certainly have stoned you, for you have among us no great position.”
11|92|He said, “O my people, is my family of more concern to you than God, for you cast Him away behind your backs, but indeed my Lord encompasses, on all sides, all that you do
11|93|“And O my people do whatever you can. I will do my part. Soon you will know who it is on whom descends the penalty of disgrace, and who is a liar, and watch, I too am watching with you.”
11|94|When Our decree issued, We saved Shu’aib and those who believed with him, with mercy from Ourselves, but the mighty blast seized the wrongdoers, and they lay prostrate in their homes
11|95|As if they had never lived and flourished there. Behold, how the Madyan were removed, as were removed the Thamud
11|96|And we sent Moses with guidance and an authority manifest
11|97|To Pharaoh and his nomarchs, but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and the command of Pharaoh was not the right guide
11|98|He will go before his people on the Day of Accountability, and lead them into the fire, and terrible indeed will be the place to which they are led
11|99|And they are followed by a curse in this life and on the Day of Accountability, and terrible is the gift which will be given to them
11|100|These are some of the stories about societies which We relate to you. Of them, some are standing, and some have fallen
11|101|It was not Us Who wronged them, they wronged their own souls, and the deities other than God whom they invoked profited them nothing when there issued the decree of your Lord, nor did they add anything but perdition
11|102|Such is the chastisement of your Lord. When He chastises societies in the middle of their wrong, terrible indeed and severe is His chastisement
11|103|In that is a sign for those who are aware of the penalty of the hereafter. That is a day for which humanity will be gathered together. That will be a day of testimony
11|104|Nor will We delay it, except for a while
11|105|The day it arrives, no soul will speak except by His permission. Of those, some will feel agony and some will feel blessed
11|106|Those in agony will be in the fire. There will be for them therein the sound of moans and sobs
11|107|They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord wills, for your Lord accomplishes what He wills
11|108|And those who are blessed will be in the garden. They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord wills, a gift without pause
11|109|So do not be in doubt as to what these people worship. They worship nothing but what their parents worshipped before them, but indeed We will pay them back their portion without reduction
11|110|We certainly gave the Book to Moses, but differences arose. Had it not been that a word had gone forth before from your Lord, the matter would have been decided between them, but they are in suspicious doubt concerning it
11|111|And indeed your Lord will pay everyone back for all of their deeds, for He knows well all that they do
11|112|Therefore stand firm as you are asked, you and those with you who respond, and do not transgress, for He sees well all that you do
11|113|And do not incline to those who do wrong, or the fire will seize you, and you have no protectors other than God, nor will you be helped
11|114|And establish prayer at the two ends of the day and at the approaches of the night, for those things that are good repel those that are harmful. That is a saying to remember for those who want to remember
11|115|And be steadfast with patience, for indeed God will not cause the reward of the righteous to perish
11|116|Why were there not among the generations before you, people of balance and good sense, prohibiting the people from doing wrong on the earth, except a few among them whom We saved? But the wrongdoers pursued the enjoyment of the good things in life which was given to them, and persisted in harmful deeds
11|117|Nor would your Lord be the One to destroy communities for a single wrongdoing, if its members were likely to repent
11|118|If your Lord had so willed, He could have made humanity one people, but they will not cease to dispute
11|119|Except those on whom your Lord has bestowed His mercy, and for this He created them, and the word of your Lord will be fulfilled, “I will fill hell with jinn and humans all together.”
11|120|All of what we relate to you of the stories of the messengers is for Us to make your heart firm with it. In them, there comes to you the truth, as well as an exhortation and a message of remembrance to those who believe
11|121|Say to those who do not believe, “Do whatever you can. We will do our part
11|122|“And wait. We too will wait.”
11|123|To God belongs the unknown of the heavens and the earth, and to Him every affair goes back. Then worship Him, and put your trust in Him, and your Lord is not unmindful of anything that you do
12|1|Alif, Laam, Raa. These are the symbols of the Clear Book
12|2|We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran, in order that you may learn wisdom
12|3|We relate to you the most beautiful of stories, in that We reveal to you this Quran. Before this, you too were among those who knew it not
12|4|Behold, Joseph said to his father, “O my father, I saw eleven stars and the Sun and the Moon, I saw them prostrate themselves to me.”
12|5|He said, “My son, do not share your vision with your brothers, lest they make a plan against you, for Satan is to humanity a sworn enemy
12|6|“Thus will your Guardian Evolver choose you and teach you the interpretation of stories and events, and perfect His favor on you and on the posterity of Jacob, even as He perfected it to your fathers Abraham and Isaac, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom.”
12|7|Indeed in Joseph and his brothers are signs for seekers
12|8|They said, “Truly Joseph and his brother are loved more by our father than we are, though we are an excellent group. Indeed our father is clearly in error
12|9|“Slay Joseph or cast him out to some unknown land, so the favor of your father may be given to you alone. There will be enough time for you to be righteous after that.”
12|10|One of them said, “Do not slay Joseph, but if you must do something, throw him down to the bottom of the well. He will be picked up by some caravan of travelers.”
12|11|They said, “O our father, why do you not trust us with Joseph, seeing we are indeed his sincere well-wishers
12|12|“Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and we will take care of him.”
12|13|Jacob said, “Really it saddens me that you should take him away. I fear the wolf should devour him while you are not watching him.”
12|14|They said, “If the wolf were to devour him while we are such a large group, then we would indeed have also perished.”
12|15|So they took him away, and they all threw him down to the bottom of the well, and We put into his heart this message, “Indeed you will tell them the truth about this act of theirs, while they know you not.”
12|16|Then they came to their father in the early part of the night, weeping
12|17|They said, “O our father, we went racing with one another, and left Joseph with our things, and the wolf devoured him, but you will never believe us even though we tell the truth.”
12|18|They stained his shirt with fake blood. He said, “No, your minds have made up a tale that may pass with you, but for me patience is most fitting against that which you assert, it is only God Whose help can be sought.”
12|19|Then there came a caravan of travelers. They sent their water-carrier to the well, and he let down his bucket. He said, “Look here, good news. Here is a young man.” So they hid him like merchandise, but God knows well all that they do
12|20|They sold him for a miserable price, for a few coins counted out. In such low estimation did they hold him
12|21|The man in Egypt who bought him said to his wife, “Make his stay honorable. Maybe he will bring us much good, or we will take him as a son.” Thus did We establish Joseph in the land that We might teach him the interpretation of stories and events, and God has full power and control over His affairs, but most among humanity do not know
12|22|When Joseph reached maturity, We gave him power and knowledge. Thus do We reward those who do right
12|23|But she in whose house he stayed, sought to seduce him from himself. She locked the doors and said, “Come now.” He said, “God forbid, truly he is my lord. He made my sojourn comfortable. Truly no good comes to those who do wrong.”
12|24|And indeed she desired him, and he would have desired her, but he saw the evidence of his Lord, so that We might avert from him harm, and immorality, for he was one of Our servants, sincere and innocent
12|25|So they both raced each other to the door, and she tore his shirt from the back. The two found her lord near the door. She said, “What is the punishment for one who committed a wrongful act against your wife, only prison or some other terrible chastisement?”
12|26|He said, “It was she who sought to seduce me from myself.” Then one from her household saw this and bore witness, “If it be that his shirt is torn from the front, then her story is true, and he is a liar
12|27|“But if it be that his shirt is torn from the back, then she is the liar, and he is telling the truth.”
12|28|So when he saw that his shirt was torn from the back her husband said, “Indeed the seduction was yours, truly extreme is your deception
12|29|“O Joseph, pass this over. O wife, ask forgiveness for your wrong, for truly you have been at fault.”
12|30|The ladies in the city said, “The wife of the great Aziz has sought to seduce her slave from himself. Truly he has inspired her with violent love. We see she is evidently going astray.”
12|31|When she heard of their gossip, she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them. She gave each of them a knife and said, “Come out before them.” When they saw him, they applauded him, and cut their hands. They said, “God preserve us, no mortal is this, this is none other than a noble angel.”
12|32|She said, “There before you is the man for whom you blamed me. I did seek to seduce him from himself but he firmly saved himself guiltless, and now, if he does not as I wish, he will certainly be cast into prison, and be of the company of the hardest.”
12|33|He said, “O my Lord, the prison is more to my liking than that which they invite me. Unless You turn away their temptation from me, I should feel inclined towards them and join the ranks of the ignorant.”
12|34|So his Lord responded to him, and turned away their temptation from him, indeed He hears and knows all things
12|35|Then it occurred to the people, after they had seen the signs, to imprison him for a time
12|36|With him there came into the prison two young people. One of them said, “I see myself pressing wine.” Said the other, “I see myself carrying bread on my head, and birds are eating from it. Tell us the true meaning of it, for we see you are one who does right.”
12|37|He said, “Before any food comes to feed either of you, I will surely reveal to you the truth and meaning of this, and before it befalls you. That is part of the duty which my Lord has taught me. I have abandoned the ways of a people who do not believe in God and who deny the hereafter
12|38|“And I follow the ways of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and never could we attribute any partners to God. That is from the grace of God to us and to humanity, yet most people are not grateful
12|39|“O my two companions of the prison. Are many lords differing among themselves better, or One God, Supreme and Irresistible
12|40|“If not Him, you worship nothing but names which you have named, you and your parents, for which God has sent down no authority. The command is for none but God. He has asked that you worship none but Him. That is the right way, but most people do not understand
12|41|“O my two companions of the prison. As for one of you, he will pour out the wine for his lord to drink. As for the other, he will hang from the cross, and the birds will eat from off his head. So is decreed the matter which you two inquire.”
12|42|And of the two, to the one who he considers about to be saved he said, “Mention me to your lord.” But Satan made him forget to mention him to his lord, and Joseph lingered in prison a few more years
12|43|The king said, “I see seven fat cows which seven lean ones devour, and seven green ears of corn, and seven withered. O advisors, explain to me my vision if you can interpret visions.”
12|44|They said, “A confused medley of dreams, and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams.”
12|45|But the person who had been released, one of the two, now remembered him after a period of time and said, “I will tell you the truth of its interpretation. Bring me
12|46|“O Joseph, O person of truth, expound to us concerning the seven fat cows that the seven lean ones devour, and the seven green ears of corn and withered ones. That I may return to the people, and that they may understand.”
12|47|Joseph said, “For seven years you will diligently sow as you will, and the harvests of what you reap, you will leave in the ear, except a little of which you will eat
12|48|“Then will come after that seven dreadful years which will devour what you will have saved in anticipation for them, all except a little which you will have stored
12|49|“Then will come after that, a year in which the people will have abundant water, and in which they will use to produce.”
12|50|So the king said, “Bring him to me.” But when the messenger came to him Joseph said, “Go back to your lord, and ask him what state of mind the ladies who cut their hands is? For my Lord is certainly well aware with their temptation.”
12|51|The king said to the ladies, “What was your state when you sought to seduce Joseph from himself?” The ladies said, “God preserve us, we do not know anything bad about him.” Said the Aziz’s wife, “Now the truth is manifest. It was I who sought to seduce him from himself. He is indeed of those who are truthful
12|52|“That in order that he may know that I have never betrayed him in his absence, and that God will never assist the plans of betrayal. (End of Part)
12|53|“Nor do I absolve myself, though the soul is certainly prone to difficulty, unless my Lord bestows His mercy. But surely my Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
12|54|So the king said, “Bring him to me, I will appoint him to myself.” Therefore, when he spoke to him he said, “Be assured this day that you are in our presence with ranks firmly established, and integrity fully proven
12|55|Joseph said, “Appoint me over the treasury of the land. I will indeed guard it as an expert.”
12|56|Thus We gave power to Joseph in the land to take possession when or where he pleased. We bestow Our mercy on whom We please, and We cause not to be lost, the reward of those who do right
12|57|But indeed the reward of the hereafter is best for those who believe and are constant in righteousness
12|58|Then Joseph’s brothers came. They entered his presence and he knew them, but they knew him not
12|59|And once he supplied their provisions he said, “Bring to me a brother you have, of the same father as you. Do you not see that I give a good amount, and that I provide the best hospitality
12|60|“Now, if you do not bring him to me, you will no longer receive any amount from me, nor will you even come near me.”
12|61|They said, “We will certainly seek to get permission concerning him from his father, indeed we will.”
12|62|And Joseph told members of his staff to put their goods with which they had bartered into their saddlebags so they would find it only when they returned to their people, in order that they might return
12|63|Now when they returned to their father they said, “O our father, no amount of grain will we get unless you send our brother with us, only then will we receive our measure. We will indeed take every care of him.”
12|64|He said, “Shall I trust you with him to any end other than when I trusted you with his brother? But God is the best Caretaker, and He is a better redeemer than all who redeem.”
12|65|Then when they opened their luggage they found their goods had been returned to them and they said, “O our father, what more can we ask for? These goods have been returned to us. We will get food for our family, we will take care of our brother, and add a full camel’s load. This is just a small quantity
12|66|Jacob said, “Never will I send him with you until you swear a solemn oath to me, in the name of God, that you will indeed bring him back to me, unless you yourselves are captured. Once they swore their solemn oath he said, “Over all that we say, God is Witness and Guardian.”
12|67|Further he said, “O my sons, do not enter all through one gate. Enter through different gates. Not that I can help you over God. None can determine anything except for God. On Him do I put my trust, and let all who trust, put their trust in Him.”
12|68|And when they entered in the manner their father had advised, it did not profit them in the least against God. It was only helpful for Jacob’s soul which he carried out. For he was, by our instruction, full of knowledge. But most people do not understand
12|69|Then when they came into Joseph’s presence, he invited his brother to stay with him. He said to him, “Behold, I am your brother, so do not grieve about any of their doings.”
12|70|Then when he had given them provisions, he put the drinking cup into his brother’s saddlebag. Then someone shouted, “You in that caravan! Indeed you are thieves!”
12|71|They said turning towards them, “What is it you miss?”
12|72|They said, “We miss the great goblet of the king. For him who produces it, is a camel’s load. I will be bound by it.”
12|73|The brothers said, “By God, you know full well that we did not come to commit crimes in the land, and that we are not thieves.”
12|74|They said, “What then will be the penalty for this if you are proved to have lied?”
12|75|They said, “The penalty should be that he in whose saddle-bag it is found should be held to pay for the crime. This is how we punish criminals.”
12|76|So he began to search their baggage, then he came to the baggage of his brother, and brought it out of his brother’s bag. We planned this for Joseph. He could not take his brother by the law of the king except that God willed it. We raise in degrees who We please. But over all, endued with knowledge is One, All Knowing
12|77|They said, “He steals. And there was a brother of his who stole before him.” But these things did Joseph keep locked in his heart, not revealing the secrets to them. He said, “You are worse situated, and God knows best the truth of what you assert.”
12|78|They said, “O exalted one, behold, he has a father who is very old, so take one of us in his place, for we see that you graciously do good.”
12|79|He said, “God forbids that we take other than him with whom we found our property. Indeed, we would be acting wrongfully
12|80|Now, when they saw no hope of him changing, they held a conference in private. The eldest among them said, “Do you not know that your father took a promise from you in God's name, and how, before this, you failed in your duty with Joseph? Therefore, I will not leave this land until my father permits me, or God commands me, and He is the best to command
12|81|“Turn back to your father and say, ‘O our father, behold, your son committed theft. We bear witness only to what we know, and we cannot testify against the unknown
12|82|“Ask at the town where we have been, and the caravan in which we returned, and you will find that we are indeed telling the truth.”
12|83|Jacob said, “No, but you have contrived a story for you. Patience is most fitting. Maybe God will bring them to me together, for He is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom.”
12|84|And he turned away from them and said, “How great is my grief for Joseph.” And his eyes became white with sorrow, and he fell into silence
12|85|They said, “By God, will you not cease to remember Joseph until you reach the last extremity of illness, or until you die.”
12|86|He said, “I only complain of my suffering and grief to God, and I learned from God that which you know not
12|87|“O my sons, go and inquire about Joseph and his brother, and never give up hope of God's mercy. Truly no one despairs of God's mercy, except those who have no faith.”
12|88|Then when they came back into Joseph’s presence they said, “O exalted one, distress has seized us and our family. We have come with goods of little value. So pay us full measure. Consider it as charity to us, for God rewards the charitable.”
12|89|He said, “Do you know how you dealt with Joseph and his brother knowingly?”
12|90|They said, “Are you indeed Joseph?” He said, “I am Joseph, and this is my brother. God has indeed been gracious to us all. Behold, he who is righteous and patient, never will God cause his reward to be lost on those who do right.”
12|91|They said, “By God, God has indeed preferred you above us, and we certainly have been guilty of wrong.”
12|92|He said, “This day let no blame be on you. God will forgive you, and He is the Most Redeeming of those who redeem
12|93|“Go with this, my shirt, and cast it over the face of my father. He will come to see. Then come to me together with all your family.”
12|94|As the caravan left, their father said, “I indeed smell the presence of Joseph. And do not think that I am weak of mind.”
12|95|They said, “By God, truly you are in your old wandering mind.”
12|96|Then when the bearer of the good news came, he cast the shirt over his face, and he immediately regained clear sight. He said, “Did I not say to you, ‘I know from God that which you know not?’ ”
12|97|They said, “O our father, ask for us forgiveness for our sins, for we are truly at fault.”
12|98|He said, “Soon will I ask my Lord for forgiveness for you, for he is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
12|99|Then when they entered the presence of Joseph, he provided a home for his parents with himself and said, “Enter Egypt in peace, if it is the will of God.”
12|100|And he raised his parents high on the throne, and they all fell down in prostration before him. He said, “O my father, this is the fulfillment of my vision in the past. God has made it come true. He was indeed good to me when He took me out of prison and brought you out of the desert, even after Satan had sown enmity between my brothers and me. Indeed my Lord understands best, the mysteries of all that He plans, for indeed He is full of knowledge and wisdom
12|101|“O my Lord, You have indeed bestowed on me some power, and taught me something of the interpretation of dreams and events, O Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are my Protector in the present and in the hereafter. Take my soul as one submitting to Your will, and unite me with the righteous.”
12|102|Such is one of the stories unknown, which We reveal by inspiration to you, nor were you with them when they concerted their plans and while they plotted
12|103|But most of humanity will not believe, no matter how much you desire it
12|104|And no reward do you ask of them for this. It is no less than a message for all worlds
12|105|And how many signs in the heavens and the earth do they pass by? Yet they turn away from them
12|106|And most of them do not believe in God without associating partners with Him
12|107|Do they then feel secure from the coming against them of the covering veil of punishment from God, or of the coming against them of the Hour all of a sudden, while they expect it not
12|108|Say, “This is my way. I invite to God, with evidence as clear as the seeing with one’s eyes, I and whoever follows me. Glory is to God, and never will I join gods with God.”
12|109|Nor did We send before you any except human beings whom we inspired. People living in human societies. Do they not travel through the earth and see what the end of those before them was? But the home of the hereafter is best for those who do right. Then will you use reason
12|110|Until the messengers give up hope and think that they are treated as liars, Our help will come to them, and those that We wish to be delivered into safety, will be delivered, but never will our punishment be warded off from those who are in sin
12|111|There is in their stories instruction for people of understanding. It is not a narrative made up, but a confirmation of that which came before it, a detailed explanation of all things, and a guide and a mercy to people who believe
13|1|Alif, Laam, Miim, Raa. These are the signs of the Book that has been revealed to you from your Lord as the truth, but most people do not believe
13|2|God is He who has raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see, and is firmly established on the throne, and He has subjected the Sun and the Moon, each one orbits for a term appointed. He regulates all affairs, and explains the signs in detail, that you may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord
13|3|And it is He Who has spread out the earth, and set mountains standing firm, and rivers. And fruit of every kind has He made in pairs, two and two. He draws the night as a veil over the day. Behold, in these things are signs for those who reflect
13|4|And in the earth are tracts neighboring, and gardens of vines and fields sown with corn, and palm trees growing out of a single root or otherwise, watered with the same water, yet some of them We make better than others to eat. Behold, in this are signs for those who understand
13|5|You are astonished at their saying, “When we are dust, will we indeed be in a new creation?” They are those who deny their Lord. They are those around whose necks will be chains. They will be companions of the fire, to dwell therein forever
13|6|They ask you to hasten on the wrong in preference to the good, although there has occurred before them exemplary punishments, but indeed your Lord is full of forgiveness to humanity for their wrongdoing, but indeed your Lord is also strict in punishment
13|7|And the unbelievers say, “Why is a sign not sent down to him from his Lord?” But you are truly a warner, and to every people a guide
13|8|God knows what every pregnant female bears, and by how much the wombs fall short or exceeds. Everything is before His sight in proportion
13|9|He knows the unknown and that which is open. He is the Great, the Most High
13|10|It is the same whether any of you conceal his speech or declare it openly, whether he lie hidden by night or goes out freely by day
13|11|For each there are others in succession before and behind him. They guard him by command of God. Certainly God will never change the condition of a people until they change themselves. But when God wills a people’s punishment, there can be no turning it back, nor will they find besides Him any to protect
13|12|It is He Who shows you the lightning by way of fear and of hope. It is He Who raises up the clouds, heavy with rain
13|13|And thunder repeats His praises, as do the angels with awe. He sends the thunderbolts, and with it He strikes whomever He wills. Yet there are people who dispute about God, even with the strength of His power
13|14|To Him belongs prayer in truth. Any others who they call upon besides Him hear them no more than if they were to stretch out their hands for water to reach their mouth but it reaches it not, for the prayer of those without faith is nothing but error
13|15|Whatever beings there are in the heavens and the earth, prostrate themselves to God with good will or in spite of themselves. As do their shadows in the morning and evenings
13|16|Say, “Who is the Guardian Evolver of the heavens and the earth?” Say, “God”. And say, “Do you then take protectors other than Him, those who have no power themselves to either benefit or to do harm?” Say, “Are the blind equal to those who see? Or the depths of darkness equal with light?” Or do they assign to God partners who have created something like He has created, so that their creation seemed similar to them? Say, “God is the Creator of all things. He is the One, the Supreme, and Irresistible.”
13|17|He sends down water from the skies. And the channels flow, each according to its measure. But the torrent washes away foam that mounts up to the surface. Even so, from that which they heat in the fire to make ornaments or utensils, there is a scum likewise, similarly does God reveal truth and falsehood. For the scum disappears as froth cast out, while that which is for the good of humanity remains on the earth
13|18|For those who respond to their Lord are all good things, but those who do not respond to Him, even if they had all that is in the heavens and on earth, and that much more, in vain would they offer it for ransom, for them will the reckoning be terrible. Their abode will be hell, what a place of agony
13|19|Is a person who knows that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, like one who is blind? It is those who are blessed with understanding who receive advice
13|20|Those who fulfill the covenant of God and fail not in their promise
13|21|Those who join those things which God has asked to be joined, hold their Lord in awe, and fear the terrible reckoning
13|22|Those who patiently persevere, seeking the Countenance of their Lord, establish prayer, give out of the gifts We have bestowed for their sustenance secretly and openly, and repel evil with good, for such there is the final attainment of the Home
13|23|They will enter gardens of perpetual bliss, with the righteous among their parents, their spouses, and their offspring, and angels will enter upon them from every gate
13|24|“Peace to you, because you persevered in patience. Now how excellent is the Final Home.”
13|25|But those who break the covenant with God, after having given their word, and severed that which God has asked to be joined, and commit crimes in the land, on them is the curse, for them is the Terrible Home
13|26|God enlarges, or grants by measure, sustenance to whom He pleases. They rejoice in the life of the present, but the life of the present is but little comfort in the future
13|27|The unbelievers say, “Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, “Truly God leaves to stray whomever He wills, but He guides to Himself those who turn to Him in repentance
13|28|“Those who believe and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of God, for without doubt in the remembrance of God do hearts find satisfaction
13|29|“For those who believe and work righteousness is blessedness, and a beautiful place of return.”
13|30|We have sent you to the people as We sent others to people who have passed away before them, in order that you might rehearse to them what We send down to you by inspiration, yet they reject Him, the Merciful Benefactor. Say, “He is my Lord, there is no god but He. Upon Him is my trust, and to Him do I turn.”
13|31|If there were a Quran with which mountains could be moved, or the earth was split apart, or the dead were made to speak, this would be the one, but truly the command is with God in all things. Do the believers not know that had God so willed, He could have guided all of humanity? But never will disaster cease to seize the unbelievers for their deeds or to settle close to their homes, until the promise of God comes to pass, for indeed God will not fail in His promise
13|32|Mocked were messengers before you, but I granted respite to the unbelievers, then finally I punished them. And how terrible was my punishment
13|33|Is then He who stands over every soul and knows all that it does like any others? And yet they ascribe partners to God. Say, “So name them. And is it that you will inform Him of something He does not know on earth, or is it just words?” No, to those who do not believe, the unbelievers’ pretense seems pleasing, but they are kept back from the path, and those whom God leaves to stray, no one can guide
13|34|For them is a penalty in the life of the present, but truly more trying is the penalty of the future. They have no defender against God
13|35|In the description of the Paradise that the righteous are promised, is that beneath it rivers flow, and perpetual is the enjoyment of it and the shade therein. Such is the end of the righteous, and the end of the unbelievers is the fire
13|36|Those to whom We have given the Book will rejoice at what has been revealed to you, but there are among the groups, those who reject a part of it. Say, “I am asked to worship God, and not to join partners with Him. To Him do I call, and to Him is my return.”
13|37|So We have revealed it to be a judgment of authority in Arabic. If you were to follow their desires after the knowledge has reached you, then you would find neither protector nor defender against God
13|38|We sent messengers before you, and appointed for them spouses and children, and it was never the job of a messenger to bring a sign except as God permitted, for each era is a book
13|39|God excludes and keeps what He pleases. With Him is the Mother of the Book
13|40|Whether We will show you part of what we promised them or take your soul, your duty is to make the message reach them. It is Our job to call them to account
13|41|Do they not see that We gradually reduce the land in their control from its borders? Where God commands, there is none to change His command, and He is swift in calling to account
13|42|Those before them devised plans, but in all things, the Master Planner is God. He knows the doings of every soul, and soon will the unbelievers know who gets home in the end
13|43|The unbelievers say, “You are no messenger.” Say, “Enough for a witness between you and me is God and those who have knowledge of the Book.”
14|1|Alif, Laam, Raa. This is the Book that We have revealed to you, in order that you might lead humanity out of the depths of darkness into the light, by the permission of their Lord, to the way of Him, the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
14|2|It is God to Whom belongs all things in the heavens and on earth, but unfortunately for the unbelievers, their disbelief will bring them a terrible penalty
14|3|Those who love the life of the present more than the future, who hinder others from the path of God, and who seek therein something crooked. They are far astray
14|4|We did not send a messenger except to teach in the language of their people, in order to make things clear to them. And God leaves those to stray whom He pleases, and guides whom He pleases, and He is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
14|5|We sent Moses with Our signs, “Bring your people from the depths of darkness into light, and teach them to remember the Days of God.” Indeed in this there are signs for those who are firmly patient and constant, grateful and appreciative
14|6|Remember Moses said to his people, “Call to mind the favor of God to you, when He delivered you from the people of Pharaoh. They gave you hard work and punished you, slaughtered your sons, and let your females live. This was a tremendous trial from your Lord.”
14|7|And remember, your Lord caused to be declared, “If you are grateful, I will give you more, but if you show ingratitude, truly My punishment is terrible indeed.”
14|8|And Moses said, “Do not show ingratitude, you and all those on earth, but God is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
14|9|Has the story not reached you of those who went before? Of the people of Noah, ‘Ad, Thamud, and of those after them? None knows of them but God. To them came messengers with clear signs, but they put their hands up to their mouths and said, “We deny the mission which you have been sent, and we are really in suspicious doubt as to that which you invite us.”
14|10|Their messengers said, “Is there any doubt about God, the Creator of the heavens and the earth? It is He Who invites you in order that He may forgive you your sins, and give you respite for a term appointed.” They said, “You are no more than human, like us. If you wish to turn us away from the gods our parents used to worship, then bring us some clear authority.”
14|11|Their messengers said to them, “True, we are human beings like you, but God grants His grace to whichever of his servants He pleases. It is not for us to bring you an authority except as God permits, and on God let all people of faith put their trust
14|12|“No reasons do we have why we should not put our trust in God. Indeed He has guided us to the ways we follow. We will certainly bear with patience all the hurt you may cause us, for those who are trusting should put their trust on God.”
14|13|And the unbelievers said to their messengers, “We will certainly drive you out of our land, or you will return to our way.” But their Lord inspired this message to them, “Indeed We will cause the wrongdoers to perish
14|14|“And indeed We will cause you to live in the land and succeed them. This is for those who fear the time when they will stand before My tribunal, those who fear My punishment.”
14|15|Although they sought victory, disappointed was every powerful, obstinate dictator
14|16|In front of them is hell, and he is given for drink foul water
14|17|In gulps will he drink it, but never will he be near swallowing it. Death will come to him from every angle, yet he will not die, and in front of him will be an unrelenting chastisement
14|18|The parable of those who reject their Lord is that their works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a tempestuous day. No power do they have over anything that they have earned, that is a straying far and away
14|19|Do you not see that God created the heavens and the earth? In truth, if He wills, He can remove you and put in your place a new creation
14|20|Nor is that for God any great matter
14|21|They will all be brought before God together. Then the weak will say to those who were arrogant, “We followed you, can you then avail us against the punishment of God?” They will reply, “If we had received the guidance of God, we would have given it to you. For us it makes no difference whether we rage, or bear it with patience, for us there is no way to escape.”
14|22|And Satan will say when the matter is decided, “It was God Who gave you a promise of truth. I too promised, but I failed in my promise to you. I had no authority over you except to call you, but you listened to me. So do not blame me, but blame your own selves. I cannot listen to your cries, nor can you listen to mine. I reject your previous act of associating me with God, for wrongdoers there must be a terrible penalty.”
14|23|But those who believe and work righteousness will be admitted to gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell therein forever by the permission of their Lord. Their greeting there will be “Peace.”
14|24|Do you not see how God sets forth a parable? An excellent word is like an excellent tree, whose roots are firmly fixed, and its branches reach to the heavens of its Lord. Thus God sets forth parables for humanity, in order that they may receive advice
14|25|It brings forth its fruit at all times, by the leave of its Lord. So God sets forth parables for humanity, in order that they may receive advice
14|26|And the parable of an evil word is that of a harmful tree. It is torn up by the roots from the surface of the earth. It has no stability
14|27|God will establish in strength those who believe with the word that stands firm, in the present and in the hereafter, but God will leave to stray those who do wrong. God does what He wills
14|28|Have you not turned your vision to those who have changed the favor of God into blasphemy, and caused their people to descend to the House of Perdition
14|29|Into hell, they will burn therein, a miserable place to live
14|30|And they set up others as equal to God, to mislead the people from the path. Say, “Enjoy, because indeed you are heading to hell.”
14|31|Say to my servants who have believed, that they should establish prayer, and give out of the sustenance we have given them, secretly and openly, before the coming of a day in which there will be neither bargaining nor befriending
14|32|It is God Who has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down rain from the skies, and with it He brings out fruits with which to feed you. It is He Who has made the ships subject to you, that they may sail through the sea by His command, and the rivers has He made subject to you
14|33|And He has made subject to you the Sun and the Moon, both diligently pursuing their courses, and the night and the day has he made subject to you
14|34|And He gives you all that you ask for, even if you count the blessings of God, never will you be able to number them, indeed humanity is given to injustice and ingratitude
14|35|Remember Abraham said, “O my Lord, make this city one of peace and security, and save me and my sons from worshipping idols
14|36|“O my Lord, they have indeed led astray many among humanity. Then he who follows my ways is like me, but he who did not follow me, well, You are indeed Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
14|37|“O our Lord, I have made some of my offspring to dwell in a valley without cultivation, by Your sacred house, in order O Our Lord, that they may establish prayer. So fill the hearts of some among humanity with love towards them, and feed them with fruits so that they may give thanks
14|38|“O Our Lord, truly You know what we conceal and what we reveal, for nothing is hidden from God, whether on earth or in heaven
14|39|“Praise God, Who has granted to me in old age Ishmael and Isaac, for truly my Lord is He, the Hearer of Prayer
14|40|“O my Lord, make me one who establishes prayer, and among my offspring, O Our Lord, and accept my prayer
14|41|“O our Lord, cover with Your forgiveness, me, my parents, and all believers on the day that the reckoning will be established
14|42|Think not that God does not heed the deeds of those who do wrong. He only gives them respite for a day when the eyes will fixedly stare in horror
14|43|They run forward with necks outstretched, their heads uplifted, their gaze returning not towards them, and in their hearts, a void
14|44|So warn humanity of the day when the punishment will reach them. Then the wrongdoers will say, “Our Lord, respite us for a short-term. We will answer Your call, and follow the messengers.” “What, had you not sworn before, to no end
14|45|“And you lived in the dwellings of people who wronged their own souls. You were clearly shown how We dealt with them, and We put forth parables for you.”
14|46|Mighty indeed were the plots which they hatched, but their plots were within the Sight of God, even though they were enough to shake the hills
14|47|Never think that God would fail His messengers in His promise, for God is Exalted in Power, the Lord of Retribution
14|48|One day the earth will be changed to a different earth, and so will the heavens, and the people will be brought out before God, the One, the Irresistible
14|49|And you will see those who are corrupt that day, bound together in chains
14|50|Their garments of liquid pitch, and their faces covered with fire
14|51|That God may repay each soul according to what it deserves, and indeed God is swift in calling to account
14|52|Here is a message for humanity. Let them take warning from it, and let them know that He is One God. Let the people of understanding take heed
15|1|Alif, Laam, Raa. These are the verses of the Book and Quran that makes things clear. 1 (End of Part)
15|2|Again and again will those who disbelieve wish that they had made peace
15|3|Leave them alone to consume and to enjoy themselves. Let false hope amuse them. Soon will they come to know
15|4|Never did We destroy a population that did not have a term decreed that We did not assign beforehand
15|5|Neither can the people anticipate its term nor delay it
15|6|They say, “O you to whom the message is being revealed, you are certainly insane
15|7|“Why do you not bring angels to us if you have the truth?”
15|8|We do not send the angels down except for just cause. If they had come, behold, no respite would those people have
15|9|We have, without doubt, sent down the message, and We will certainly protect it
15|10|We sent messengers before you among the ancient religions
15|11|But there never came a messenger to them that they did not mock
15|12|And we let creep into the hearts of those who are wrong
15|13|That they should not believe in it, as certain as those from the past have passed away
15|14|Even if We opened up to them a gate from heaven, and they were to continue ascending therein
15|15|They would only say, “Our eyes have been intoxicated. No, we have been possessed by deception.”
15|16|It is We Who have set out the constellations in the heavens, and made them attractive to all gazers
15|17|And We have guarded them from every rejected devil
15|18|But any who gains a hearing by stealth, is pursued by a bright burning flame
15|19|And We have spread out the earth, set stable mountains, and produced there all kinds of things balanced
15|20|And We have provided means of subsistence there, for you and for those for whose sustenance you do not supply
15|21|And there is nothing that does not have its treasures with Us, but We only send it down in an amount known
15|22|And We send the pollinating winds, and then cause the rain to descend from the sky, and it provides you with water, though you are not the guardians of its stores
15|23|And indeed, it is We who give life, and Who give death. It is We who remain inheritors
15|24|To Us are known those of you who hasten forward, and those who lag behind
15|25|Surely your Lord will gather them together, for He is perfect in wisdom and knowledge
15|26|We created the human from sounding clay, from mud molded into shape
15|27|And the jinn, We had created previously, from the scorching fire
15|28|Behold, your Lord said to the angels, “I am about to create a human being from sounding clay, from earth molded into shape
15|29|“When I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down, prostrating to him.”
15|30|So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together
15|31|But not Lucifer. He refused to be among those who prostrated themselves
15|32|God said, “O Lucifer, what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves?”
15|33|Lucifer said, “I am not one to prostrate myself to the human being whom You created from sounding clay, from earth molded into shape.”
15|34|God said, “Then get out from here, for you are rejected, accursed
15|35|“And the curse will be on you until the Day of Accountability.”
15|36|Lucifer said, “O my Lord, then give me respite until the day they are raised.”
15|37|God said, “Respite is granted to you
15|38|“Until the day of the time appointed.”
15|39|Lucifer said, “O my Lord, because You have put me in the wrong, I will make wrong attractive to them on the earth, and I will put them all in the wrong
15|40|“Except Your devotees among them, sincere and innocent.”
15|41|God said, “This is indeed a way that leads straight to Me
15|42|“For over My servants, no authority will you have, except those who put themselves in harm’s way by following you.”
15|43|And indeed hell is the promised abode for them all
15|44|For there are seven gates, for each of those gates is a group assigned
15|45|The righteous will be among gardens and fountains
15|46|“Enter here in peace and security.”
15|47|And We will remove from their chests any hatred. They will be a community facing each other on thrones
15|48|There, no sense of fatigue will touch them, nor will they ever be asked to leave
15|49|Tell My servants that I am indeed the Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
15|50|And that My penalty will indeed be the most terrible penalty
15|51|Tell them about the guests of Abraham
15|52|When they entered his presence and said, “Peace.” He said, “We feel afraid of you.”
15|53|They said, “Fear not, we give you good news of a son endowed with wisdom.”
15|54|He said, “Do you give me good news that old age has seized me? Then what is your good news about?”
15|55|They said, “We give you good news in truth. So do not be in despair.”
15|56|He said, “And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord except those who stray?”
15|57|Abraham said, “What then is the business on which you have come, O you messengers?”
15|58|They said, “We have been sent against a people in sin
15|59|“Not the adherents of Lot. Them we are certainly charged to save, all
15|60|“Except his wife, who We have learned will be among those who will lag behind.”
15|61|Then when the messengers arrived among the adherents of Lot
15|62|He said, “Certainly you are a people unknown.”
15|63|They said, “Yes, we have come to you to accomplish that which they doubt
15|64|“We have brought to you that which is inevitably due, and surely we tell the truth
15|65|“So travel by night with your household, when a portion of the night yet remains, and bring up the rear. Let no one among you look back, but go to where you are ordered.”
15|66|And We made known this decree to him, that the last remains of them will be cut off by the morning
15|67|The inhabitants of the city came gaily
15|68|Lot said, “These are my guests, do not disgrace me
15|69|“Be conscious of God, and do not embarrass me.”
15|70|They said, “Did we not forbid you from that world?”
15|71|He said, “Here are my daughters, if you must do so.”
15|72|Indeed, by your life, in their wild intoxication, they wander in distraction, going both ways
15|73|But the mighty blast overtook them before morning
15|74|And We turned them upside down, and rained down on them brimstone hard as baked clay
15|75|Behold, in this are signs for those who understand
15|76|And they were on the high road
15|77|Behold, in this is a sign for those who believed
15|78|And the Companions of the Wood were wrongdoers
15|79|So We took retribution from them. They were both on an open highway, plain to see
15|80|The companions of the Rocky Tract also rejected the messengers
15|81|We sent them Our signs, but they persisted in turning away from them
15|82|Out of the mountains, they carved secure edifices
15|83|But the mighty blast seized them one morning
15|84|And of no avail to them was all that they did
15|85|We did not create the heavens, the earth, and all between them, except for just ends, and the Hour is surely coming. So overlook with gracious forgiveness
15|86|For indeed it is your Lord who is the Master, the Creator, the All Knowing
15|87|And We have bestowed upon you the seven oft-repeated verses and the great Quran
15|88|Do not strain your eyes at what We have bestowed on certain classes of them, nor grieve over them, but lower your wing to the believers
15|89|And say, “I am indeed he who warns openly and without ambiguity.”
15|90|As We have sent down on those who divided it
15|91|And have made the Quran into shreds
15|92|Therefore, by the Lord, We indeed will call them to account–
15|93|For all their deeds
15|94|Therefore, answer openly what you are asked, and turn away from those who join false gods with God
15|95|For sufficient are We for you against those who ridicule
15|96|Those who take with God another god. But soon will they come to know
15|97|We certainly know how your heart is distressed at what they say
15|98|But praise your Lord, and be of those who prostrate themselves in adoration
15|99|And serve your Lord until there comes to you the Hour that is certain
16|1|Inevitably the command of God will come. So do not seek to hasten it. Glory be to Him, and far is He above having the partners they ascribe to Him
16|2|He sends down His angels with inspiration by His command, to those of His servants as He pleases saying, “Warn that there is no god but I, so do your duty to Me.”
16|3|He has created the heavens and the earth. In truth He is far above having the partners they ascribe to Him
16|4|He has created the human being from a zygote, and behold, he becomes an open disputer
16|5|And livestock has He created for you. From them you derive warmth and numerous other benefits, and of them you eat
16|6|And you have a sense of pride in them, as you drive them home in the evening, and as you let them out to pasture in the morning
16|7|And they carry your heavy loads to lands that you could not otherwise reach, except with souls distressed, for your Lord is indeed Most Kind, the Merciful Redeemer
16|8|And horses, mules, and donkeys are for you to ride and show, and He has created things of which you have no knowledge
16|9|And the way leads straight to God, but there are also ways which turn you away. If God had willed, He could have guided all of you
16|10|It is He who sends down rain from the sky. From it you drink, and out of it grows the vegetation from which you feed your livestock
16|11|With it He produces for you corn, olives, date palms, grapes, and every kind of fruit. Indeed in this is a sign for those who give thought
16|12|He has made subject to you the night and the day, the Sun and the Moon, and the stars are subjected to His command, indeed in this are signs for people who are wise
16|13|Also the things on this earth which He has multiplied in varying colors, indeed in this is a sign for people who praise God
16|14|It is He Who has made the sea subject to you, that you may eat of its flesh which is fresh and tender, and that you may extract from it ornaments to wear, and you see the ships in it that can plow the waves, that you may seek the bounty of God and that you may be grateful
16|15|And He has set up on the earth, mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with you, also rivers and roads, that you may guide yourselves
16|16|And also landmarks. And by the stars you guide yourselves
16|17|Then is He Who creates like one who does not create? But will you not remember
16|18|If you tried to count the blessings of God, you would never be able to count them, indeed God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
16|19|And God knows what you conceal and what you reveal
16|20|Those that they invoke besides God create nothing and are themselves created
16|21|They are dead, lifeless, and they do not know when they will be raised up
16|22|Your God is one God. As for those who do not believe in the hereafter, their hearts refuse, and they are arrogant
16|23|Undoubtedly, God knows what they conceal and what they reveal, indeed He does not love the arrogant
16|24|When it is said to them, “What is it that your Lord has revealed?” They say, “Tales of the ancients.”
16|25|They will bear, on the Day of Accountability, their burdens in full, as well as the burdens of those without knowledge, whom they misled. Oh, how terrible the burdens are that they will bear
16|26|Those before them also plotted, but God took their structures from their foundations, and the roof fell down on them from above, and the punishment seized them from directions they did not perceive
16|27|Then, on the Day of Accountability, He will cover them with shame and say, “Where are My partners that you used to confide?” Those endued with knowledge will say, “This day, the unbelievers are indeed covered with shame and misery
16|28|“Those whose lives the angels take in a state of doing wrong to their souls.” They will then offer submission and they will say, “We meant no harm.” No, but indeed God knows all that you did
16|29|“So enter the gates of hell, to dwell therein forever. Terrible indeed is the abode of the arrogant.”
16|30|To the righteous it is said, “What is it that your Lord has revealed?” They will say, “All that is good.” To those who do right, there is good in the present, and the home of the hereafter, and that is better and more excellent indeed, the home of the righteous are
16|31|Gardens of eternity which they will enter. Beneath them rivers flow. They will have there all that they wish. This is how God rewards the righteous
16|32|Those whose lives the angels take in a state of innocence saying, “Peace be on you. Enter the garden, because of that which you did.”
16|33|Do they wait until the angels come to them, or there comes the command of your Lord, as those who went before them did? But God wronged them not. No, they wronged their own selves
16|34|But the harmful results of their deeds overtook them, and the very punishment at which they mocked captured them
16|35|The worshippers of false gods say, “If God had so willed, we would not have worshipped anything but Him, neither we nor our parents, nor would we have created prohibitions other than His,” as did those who went before them say. But what is the mission of messengers except to convey the message clearly
16|36|For We surely sent among every people a messenger who said, “Serve God, and avoid harm.” Of the people were some whom God guided, and some on whom error became inevitable. So travel through the earth and see what the end of those who rejected the message was
16|37|You anticipate their guidance, but God does not guide those He leaves to stray, and there are none to help them
16|38|They swear their strongest oaths by God, that God will not raise up those who die. No, but it is a promise binding on Him in truth, but most among humanity realize it not
16|39|In order that He may show them the truth of that which they differ, and that the rejecters of truth may realize that they only have falsehood
16|40|Because anything We wish, We need only say the word: “Be”. And it is
16|41|To those who leave their homes in the cause of God after suffering oppression, We will surely give an excellent home in the present, but truly the reward of the hereafter will be greater, if they only knew
16|42|They are those who persevere in patience and put their trust in their Lord
16|43|And before you, the messengers We sent were also merely human beings, but We granted them inspiration. If you do not understand this, ask those who have the message
16|44|We sent them with clear signs, and We have sent down to you the message, so that you may explain clearly to humanity what is sent to them, and that they may give it thought
16|45|Then do those who devise harmful plans feel secure that God will not cause the earth to swallow them, or that the punishment will not seize them from directions they hardly expect
16|46|Or that He will not call them to account in the middle of their goings back and forth, without a chance of them stopping Him
16|47|Or that He may not call them to account by a process of slow wastage? For your Lord is indeed full of kindness and mercy
16|48|Do they not look at God's creations, how their shadows move from the right and the left, prostrating themselves to God in the humblest manner
16|49|And to God submits all that is in the heavens and on earth, whether animate objects or the angels, for none are arrogant
16|50|They all revere their Lord high above themselves, and they do all that they are asked
16|51|God has said, “Take not two gods, for He is only one God, and be conscious of Me.”
16|52|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and on earth, and to Him is duty always due. Will you then fear other than God
16|53|And you have nothing good but what is from God, and when you are touched by distress, you cry to Him
16|54|Yet, when He removes the distress from you behold, some of you turn to other gods to join with their Lord
16|55|Showing their ingratitude for the favors We have bestowed on them. So enjoy, but soon will you come to know
16|56|And they assign to things they do not know, a portion out of that which We have bestowed for their sustenance. By God, you will certainly be called to account for your false claims
16|57|And they assign daughters to God. Glory belongs to Him, but their desires are selfish
16|58|When news is brought to one of them of a female, his face darkens, and he is filled with inward grief
16|59|With shame, he hides himself from his people, because of the news he has received. Shall he keep her despite all this, or bury her in the ground? What an evil decision they make
16|60|Those who do not believe in the hereafter are an example of wrong. But to God applies the highest example, for He is the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
16|61|And if God were to punish humanity for their wrongdoing, He would not leave a single living creature, but He gives them respite for a stated term. When their term expires, they will not be able to delay it for a single hour or to anticipate it
16|62|They attribute to God what they hate, and their tongues assert the lie that all good is for them. Without doubt for them is the fire, and they will be the first to be pushed into it
16|63|By God, We certainly sent Our messengers to peoples before you, but Satan made their acts seem fine. He is also their patron today, but they will have a most terrible penalty
16|64|And We sent down the Book to you for the express purpose that you should make clear to them those things in which they differ, and that it should be a guide and a mercy to those who believe
16|65|And God sends down rain from the skies, and gives with it life to the earth after its death, indeed in this is a sign for those who listen
16|66|And indeed in livestock will you find an instructive sign. From what is within their bodies between excretions and blood, We produce for your drink, milk pure and agreeable to those who drink it
16|67|And from the fruit of the date palm and the vine, you get out wholesome drink and food. Behold, in this also is a sign for those who are wise
16|68|And your Lord inspired the bee to build their homes in hills, on trees, and in human habitations
16|69|Then to eat of all the produce, and find, with skill, the spacious paths of it’s Lord. There issues from within their bodies a drink of varying colors, wherein is that which promotes health for humanity, indeed in this is a sign for those who give thought
16|70|It is God who creates you and takes your souls at death. And of you, there are some who are sent back to a feeble age, so that they do not know after having known much, for God is All Knowing, All Powerful
16|71|God has bestowed His gifts of sustenance more freely on some of you than on others. Those more favored are not going to give their gifts to those whom their right hands possess, so as to be equal in that respect. Will they then deny the favors of God
16|72|And God has made for you mates of your own nature, and made for you, out of them, children and grandchildren, and provided for you sustenance of the best. Will they then believe in vain things, and be ungrateful for God's favors
16|73|And worship others with God, those who have no power of providing for them with sustenance, anything in the heavens or on the earth, and who cannot possibly have such power
16|74|Invent not a similitude for God, for God knows and you know not
16|75|God sets forth the parable of a servant under the control of another, He has no power of any sort, and a person on whom We have bestowed excellent favors from Ourselves, and he gives of it, privately and publicly. Are the two equal? Praise God, but most of them do not understand
16|76|God sets forth a parable of two people. One of them having no voice, with no power of any sort, a wearisome burden is he to his overseer. Whichever way he directs him, he brings no good. Is such a person equal with one who commands justice, and is on a straight way
16|77|To God belongs the mystery of the heavens and the earth, and His decision on the Hour is as the twinkling of an eye, or even quicker, for God has power over all things
16|78|It is He Who brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when you knew nothing, and He gave you hearing, sight, intelligence, and affection. That you may give thanks
16|79|Do they not look at the birds held in the sky? Nothing holds them up but God, indeed in this are signs for those who believe
16|80|It is God Who made your houses homes of rest and quiet for you, and made for you, out of the skin of animals, dwellings which you find light on the day you travel and the day of encampment, and out of their wool, and their soft-fibers, and their hair, comforts and articles of convenience for a time
16|81|It is God Who made out of the things He created, things to give you shade, of the hills He made some for your shelter, He made you garments to protect you from heat, and armor to protect you from violence. Thus, He completes His favors on you that you may bow to His will
16|82|But if they turn away, your duty is only to proclaim the clear message
16|83|They recognize the favors of God. Then they ignore them, and most of them are ungrateful
16|84|One day We will raise from all peoples a witness. Then will no excuse be accepted from unbelievers, nor will they receive any favors
16|85|When the wrongdoers see the penalty, there will neither be a way to mitigate, nor will they receive respite
16|86|When those who gave partners to God see their partners they will say, “Our Lord, these are our partners, those whom we used to invoke besides You.” But they will throw back their word at them and say, “Indeed you are liars.”
16|87|That day will they show submission to God, and all their creations will leave them
16|88|Those who reject God and hinder people from the path of God, on them will We heap penalty upon penalty, because they used to spread corruption
16|89|One day We will raise from all peoples a witness against them from among themselves, and We will bring you as a witness against them, and We have sent down to you the Book explaining all things, a guide, a mercy, and good news to the Muslims
16|90|God commands justice, the doing of good, and generosity to friends and family, and He forbids shameful deeds, injustice, and rebellion. He instructs you, that you may receive advice
16|91|Fulfill the covenant of God when you have entered into it, and do not break your promises after you have confirmed them. Indeed you have made God your hope, for God knows all that you do
16|92|And be not like a woman who breaks into untwisted strands the yarn which she has spun, after it has become strong, nor take promises to practice deception between yourselves, lest one group should be more numerous than another, for God will challenge you by this, and on the Day of Accountability He will certainly make clear to you that which you disagree
16|93|If God had willed, He could make you all one people again, but He leaves straying whom He pleases, and He guides whom He pleases, but you will certainly be called to account for all your actions
16|94|And do not make promises to practice deception between yourselves with the result that someone’s foot may slip after it was firmly planted, or you will taste the wrong of having hindered the people from the path of God, and a mighty punishment will descend on you
16|95|Nor sell the covenant of God for a miserable price, for with God are goods far better for you, if you only knew
16|96|What is with you will vanish. What is with God will endure, and We will certainly bestow on those who patiently persevere, their reward according to the best of their actions
16|97|Whoever works righteousness, male or female, and has faith, indeed to them will We give a new life, a life that is good and pure, and We will bestow on them their reward according to the best of their actions
16|98|When you read the Quran, seek God's protection from Satan the rejected enemy
16|99|No authority has he over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
16|100|His authority is only over those who take him as patron and who join partners with God
16|101|When We substitute one revelation with another, and God knows best what He reveals, they say, “You are only a forger.” But most of them understand not
16|102|Say, the Holy Spirit has brought the revelation from your Lord in truth, in order to strengthen those who believe, and as a guide and good news to Muslims
16|103|Indeed We know that they say, “It is a human being who teaches him.” The tongue of him they point to as notably foreign, while this is Arabic, refined and clear
16|104|Those who do not believe in the signs of God, God will not guide them, and theirs will be a terrible penalty
16|105|It is those who do not believe in the signs of God that misrepresent and deceive. It is they who lie
16|106|Anyone who after accepting faith in God, speaks unbelief, except under compulsion while their heart remaining firm in faith, yes those who open their breast to unbelief, on them is punishment from God, and theirs will be a dreadful penalty
16|107|This is because they love the life of the present better than the hereafter, and God will not guide those who do not believe
16|108|Those are they whose hearts, ears, and eyes God has sealed up, and they are heedless
16|109|Without doubt, they will perish in the hereafter
16|110|But indeed your Lord, to those who leave their homes after trials and persecutions, and who thereafter strive and fight for the faith and patiently persevere, to them your Lord after all this is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
16|111|One day every soul will come up struggling for itself, every soul will be rewarded for all of its actions, and none will be dealt with unjustly
16|112|God sets forth a parable, a city enjoying security and quiet, abundantly supplied with sustenance from every place. Yet it was ungrateful for the favors of God, so God made it taste the garb of hunger and fear, because of the wrong they did
16|113|And there came to them a messenger from among themselves, but they rejected him, so the punishment seized them in the middle of their wrongdoings
16|114|So eat of the sustenance which God has provided for you, permissible and good, and be grateful for the favors of God, if it is He Whom you serve
16|115|He has only forbidden you animals found dead, blood, the flesh of swine, and that over which a name other than God has been invoked, but if one is forced by necessity, with neither outright rejection, nor transgressing due limits, then God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
16|116|But do not say, for it would be a lie that you would have your tongues assert, “This is permissible, and this is forbidden,” So as to ascribe false things to God. For those who ascribe false things to God, will never prosper
16|117|They would get a little profit, but a most terrible penalty
16|118|To the Jews We prohibited such things as We have mentioned to you before, We did them no harm, but they did harm to themselves
16|119|But indeed your Lord is to those who do wrong in ignorance, but who thereafter repent and make amends, your Lord is after all this, Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
16|120|Abraham is indeed a model, devoutly obedient to God, intelligent in faith, and he did not join gods with God
16|121|He showed his gratitude for the favors of God, He chose him, and guided him to a straight way
16|122|And We gave him good in the present, and he will be in the hereafter, in the ranks of the righteous
16|123|We have taught you by inspiration, “Follow the ways of Abraham, the intelligent in faith, and he did not join gods with God.”
16|124|The Sabbath was only made for those who disagreed, but God will judge between them on the Day of Accountability as to their differences
16|125|Invite all to the way of your Lord with wisdom and beautiful teaching, and converse with them in ways that are best and most gracious, for your Lord knows best who have strayed from His path, and who have received guidance
16|126|And if you retaliate, then retaliate no worse than with what you were afflicted, but if you show patience, that is indeed best for those who are patient
16|127|And be patient, for your patience is from God, nor grieve over them, and do not distress yourself because of their plots
16|128|For God is with those who restrain themselves and who do right. 128 (End of Part)
17|1|Glory be to God, Who took His servant on a night journey, from the Sacred Masjid, to the farthest masjid, whose surroundings We blessed, in order that We might show him some of Our signs, while it is He Who hears and sees all things
17|2|We gave Moses the Book, and made it a guide to the Children of Israel and it read, “Take none other than Me as a manager of your affairs.”
17|3|O you who descend from those who We carried with Noah, know that indeed he was a devotee most grateful
17|4|And We gave the warning to the Children of Israel in the Book, that twice they would do wrong on the earth and be awfully arrogant
17|5|When the first of the warnings came, We sent against you Our servants given to terrible warfare. They entered the very in-most parts of your homes, and it was a warning fulfilled
17|6|Then We gave you victory over them. We gave you increase in resources and children, and made you the more mighty in power
17|7|If you did good, you did good for yourselves. If you did wrong, you did it against yourselves. Then when the second of the warnings came, We permitted your enemies to disfigure your faces, to enter your temple as they had entered it before, and to visit with destruction all that fell into their power
17|8|It may be that your Lord may show mercy to you. But if you change, We will change, and We have made hell a prison for those who reject it
17|9|Indeed this Quran guides to that which is most right, and gives hope to the believers who do deeds of righteousness, that they will have a magnificent reward
17|10|And to those who do not believe in the hereafter, it announces that We have prepared for them a terrible penalty
17|11|The prayer that their people should make for good, they make for evil, for people are given to haste
17|12|We have made the night and the day as two signs. The sign of the night We have obscured, while the sign of the day We have made to enlighten you, that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and that you may count and know the number of years. All things have We explained in detail
17|13|Every person’s fate have We fastened to his own neck. On the Day of Accountability We will bring out for him a scroll which he will see spread open
17|14|Read your record. Sufficient is your soul this day to make an argument against you
17|15|He who receives guidance receives it for his own benefit. He who goes astray does so to his own loss. No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another, and We would not come with Our punishment until We had sent a messenger
17|16|When We decide to destroy a population, We send a definite order to those among them who are given the good things of this life, and yet transgress, so that the word is proved true against them. Then We completely destroy them
17|17|How many generations have We caused to perish after Noah? And enough is your Lord to see and note the sins of His servants
17|18|If any wish for the temporary things, We readily grant such things as We will, to such people as We will. In the end, We have provided hell for them. They will burn therein, disgraced and rejected
17|19|Those who wish for the hereafter, strive there with all necessary striving, and have faith, they are the ones whose striving is accepted
17|20|Of the bounties of your Lord, We bestow them freely on all these as well as those. The bounties of your Lord are not closed to anyone
17|21|See how We have bestowed more on some than on others? But indeed the hereafter is more lofty, and more excellent
17|22|Do not take with God another god, or you will sit disgraced and forsaken
17|23|Your Guardian Evolver has decreed that you worship none but Him, and that you be kind to parents, whether one or both of them attain old age in your lifetime. Do not say to them a word of contempt, nor disrespect them, but address them in terms of honor
17|24|And out of kindness, lower the wing of humility to them and say, “My Lord, bestow on them your mercy as they cherished me in childhood.”
17|25|Your Lord knows best what is in your heart. If you do deeds of righteousness, indeed He is Most Forgiving to those who turn to Him consistently
17|26|And give to family their due rights, and to those in want, and to displaced persons, and do not spend extravagantly
17|27|Indeed those who spend extravagantly are companions of the devils, and Satan is to his Lord ungrateful
17|28|And even if you have to turn away from them in pursuit of the mercy from your Lord which you expect, still speak to them a word of kindness
17|29|Do not tie your hand to your neck, nor stretch it out to its farthest reach, so that you become blameworthy and destitute
17|30|Indeed your Lord provides resources in abundance for whom He wills, and He provides it in just measure, for He knows and is regardful of all His servants
17|31|Do not kill your children for fear of want. We care for them as well as for you. Indeed killing them is a great sin
17|32|And do not put yourself in a situation that impermissible sex can easily occur, it is indeed an incorrect and harmful route
17|33|Nor kill the soul which God has made sacred, except for just cause, and if anyone is killed wrongfully, We have given his heir authority, but do not let him exceed bounds in the matter of taking life, for he will be helped
17|34|Do not come near the orphans’ property except to increase it, until they attain the age of full strength. And fulfill your covenant, for covenants will be inquired into
17|35|Give the full amount when you are to give, and weigh with a balance that is straight. That is the most fitting and the most advantageous in the final determination
17|36|And do not pursue that which you cannot know, for every act of hearing, seeing, or feeling in the heart will be inquired into
17|37|Nor walk on the earth with arrogance, for you cannot tear the earth apart, nor reach the mountains’ height
17|38|Of all such things, these wrongs are most hateful in the sight of your Lord
17|39|These are among the sayings of wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you. Do not appoint with God another god, or you will be thrown into hell, blameworthy and rejected
17|40|Has your Lord then preferred for you sons and taken for Himself daughters among the angels? Truly you utter a senseless saying
17|41|We have explained things in various ways in this Quran, in order that they will remember, but it only increases their flight
17|42|Say, if there had been gods with Him, as they say, then certainly they would have sought out a way to the owner of the throne
17|43|Glory be to Him, He is high above all that they say, Exalted and Great
17|44|The seven heavens and the earth, and all beings therein declare His glory. There is not a thing that does not glorify and praise Him, and yet you do not understand how they declare His glory, indeed He is Understanding, Most Forgiving
17|45|When you recite the Quran, We put between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter, an invisible veil
17|46|And We put coverings over their hearts, lest they should understand the Quran, and deafness into their ears. When you commemorate your Lord and Him alone, with the Quran, they turn their backs—fleeing
17|47|We know best why they listen, when they listen to you, and when they meet in private. Behold the wicked say, “You follow none other than a man possessed.”
17|48|See what comparisons they make for you, but they have gone astray, and never can they find a way
17|49|They say, “What, when we are reduced to bones and dust, shall we really be raised up as a new creation?”
17|50|Say, “Whether you are stones or iron
17|51|“Or created matter which, in your minds, is hardest.” Then they will say, “Who will cause us to return?” Say, “He who created you first.” Then they will shake their heads at you and say, “When will that be?” Say, “Perhaps it will be soon
17|52|“It will be on a day when He will call you, and you will answer with His praise, and you will think that you stayed only a little while.”
17|53|Say to My servants that they should say those things which are best, for Satan sows dissensions among them, for Satan is to humanity a sworn enemy
17|54|It is your Lord Who knows you best. If He pleases, He grants you mercy, or if He pleases, punishment. We have not sent you to be a manager of their affairs for them
17|55|And it is your Lord Who knows best all beings that are in the heavens and on earth. We bestowed on some prophets more gifts than on others, and We gave to David the Psalms
17|56|Say, “Call on others besides Him if you desire. They have neither the power to remove your troubles from you nor to change them.”
17|57|Those who they call on desire ways to access their Lord, even those who are nearest. They hope for His mercy and fear His punishment, for the punishment of your Lord is that which you should remain aware
17|58|There is not a population that We will not cause to perish before the Day of Accountability, or punish with a dreadful penalty. That is written in the record
17|59|And We refrain from sending the signs only because the people of previous generations treated them as false. We sent the she-camel to the Thamud to open their eyes, but they treated it wrongfully. We only send the signs as a warning
17|60|And when We told you that your Lord encompasses humanity, We granted the vision which We showed you as a trial for humanity, and the Cursed Tree in the Quran. We put fear into them, but it only increases their transgression
17|61|Behold, We said to the angels, “Bow down to Adam.” They all bowed down, except Lucifer. He said, “Shall I bow down to one whom You created from mud?”
17|62|He said, “See this one whom You have honored above me? If You give me respite until the Day of Accountability, I will surely bring his descendants under my sway, all but a few.”
17|63|God said, “Go your way, if any of them follow you, indeed hell will be the reward of you all, a sufficient reward
17|64|“Lead to destruction with your voice, those among them whom you can, make assaults on them with your cavalry and your infantry, share with them in their wealth and children, and make promises to them.” But Satan promises them nothing but deceit
17|65|“As for My servants, no authority will you have over them.” Enough is your Lord for a manager of affairs
17|66|Your Lord is He Who makes the ship sail smoothly for you through the sea, in order that you may seek of His bounty, for He is to you the Merciful Redeemer
17|67|When distress seizes you at sea, those who you call upon besides Him leave you there, but when He brings you back safely to land, you turn away. Most ungrateful is the human being
17|68|Do you then feel secure that He will not cause you to be swallowed up beneath the earth when you are on land, or that He will not send against you a violent tornado so that you can find no one to carry out your affairs for you
17|69|Or do you feel secure that He will not send you back to sea a second time, and send against you a storm to drown you because of your ingratitude, so that you find no helper therein against Us
17|70|We have honored the children of Adam, provided them with transport on land and sea, given them for sustenance things good and pure, and preferred them above a great part of Our creation
17|71|One day We will call together all human beings with their leaders. Those who are given their record in their right hand will read it, and will not be dealt with unjustly in the least
17|72|And those who were blind in the present will be blind in the hereafter, and most astray from the path
17|73|And their purpose was to lure you away from that which We had revealed to you, to substitute in Our name something quite different, and then they would certainly have made you their friend
17|74|And had We not given you strength, you would have inclined to them a little
17|75|Then We would have made you taste an equal portion in this life, to the equal portion at death, and you would have found none to help you against Us
17|76|Their purpose was to scare you off the land, in order to expel you, and they would not have stayed after you, except for a little
17|77|This was Our way with the messengers We sent before you. You will find no change in Our way
17|78|Establish prayer at the Sun’s decline until the darkness of night, and during the morning Quran recitation, for indeed the morning Quran recitation is a testimony
17|79|And in the night, arise from sleep. And do a little extra. Soon your Lord will raise you to a station of praise and glory
17|80|Say, “O my Lord, let my entry be by the gate of truth and honor, and likewise, let my exit be by the gate of truth and honor, and grant me, from Your presence, an authority to aid me.”
17|81|And say, “Truth has arrived and falsehood has perished, for falsehood is bound to perish.”
17|82|We send down in the Quran, that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe. To the unjust, it causes nothing but loss
17|83|Yet when We bestow Our favors on human beings, they turn away, lying on their side, and when harm seizes them, they give themselves up to despair
17|84|Say, “Everyone acts according to their own disposition, but your Lord knows best who it is who is best guided on the way.”
17|85|They ask you concerning the Spirit. Say, “The Spirit comes by command of my Lord. Of knowledge, there is only a little that is communicated to you.”
17|86|If it were Our will, We could take away that which We have sent you by inspiration. Then you would find nothing to plead your affair in that matter against Us
17|87|It is only a mercy from your Lord. For His bounty to you is plentiful
17|88|Say, “If all of humanity and jinn were to gather together to produce the like of this Quran, they could not produce the like of it, even if they backed up each other with help and support
17|89|And We have explained to humanity in this Quran every kind of lesson. Yet the greater part of them refuse it, except with ingratitude
17|90|They say, “We will not believe in you, until you cause a spring to gush forth for us from the earth
17|91|“Or until you have a garden of date trees and vines, and cause rivers to gush forth in their presence, carrying abundant water
17|92|“Or you cause the sky to fall into pieces on us as you say, or you bring God and the angels before us face to face
17|93|“Or you have a house adorned with gold, or you raise a ladder into the universe. No, we will not even believe in your raising a ladder until you bring down to us a book that we can read.” Say, “Glory to my Lord. Am I not only a human being, a messenger?”
17|94|What kept the people back from belief when guidance came to them was nothing but this, they said, “Has God sent a human to be His messenger?”
17|95|Say, “If there were settled on earth angels walking about in peace and quiet, We should certainly have sent down from the heavens an angel for a messenger.”
17|96|Say, “Enough is God for a witness between you and me, for He is well acquainted with His servants, and He sees all things.”
17|97|He who God guides is on true guidance, but he whom He leaves astray, never will you find for them a protector besides Him. On the Day of Accountability We will gather them together, lying on their faces, blind, dumb, and deaf. Their abode will be hell. Every time it subsides, We will increase for them the fierceness of the fire
17|98|That is their reward, because they rejected Our signs and said, “When we are reduced to bones and dust, will we really be raised up as a new creation?”
17|99|Do they not see that God, Who created the heavens and the earth, has power to create the likes of them? He has decreed a term appointed, of which there is no doubt, but the unjust refuse to accept it, except with ingratitude
17|100|Say, “If you had control of the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, then you would have kept them back, for fear of losing them, for human beings are indeed greedy.”
17|101|To Moses We gave nine clear signs, and to the Children of Israel. When he came to them Pharaoh said to him, “O Moses, I consider you indeed to have been worked upon by spells
17|102|Moses said, “You know full well that these things have been sent down by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth, as eye-opening evidence, and I consider you indeed, O Pharaoh, to be one doomed to destruction.”
17|103|So He chose to remove them from the face of the earth, so We drowned him and all who were with him
17|104|Then We said to the Children of Israel, “Live securely in the land.” But when the second of the warnings came to pass, We gathered you together in a crowd
17|105|We sent it down in truth, and in truth has it descended, and We sent you only to give hope and to warn
17|106|It is a Quran which We have divided in order that you might recite it to people in intervals as We revealed it in stages
17|107|Say, “Whether you believe in it or not, it is true that those who were given the knowledge beforehand, when it is recited to them, fall down on their faces in humble prostration
17|108|“And they say, ‘glory to Our Lord, truly has the promise of our Lord been fulfilled.’ ”
17|109|They bow on their faces in tears, and it increases their humility
17|110|Say, “Call upon God, or call upon the Merciful Benefactor, or by whatever name you would like to call upon Him, because to Him belong the most beautiful names. Neither say your Salat loudly, nor say it in a low tone, but seek a way in between.”
17|111|Say, “Praise God, who does not have a son, and has no partner in His control, nor does He need any to protect Him out of weakness. Yes, exalt Him for His Greatness and Glory.”
18|1|Praise God, Who has sent to His servant the Book, and has allowed therein no crookedness
18|2|No, only that which is straight. In order that He may warn of a terrible punishment from Him, and that He may give hope to the believers who work righteous deeds, that they will have an excellent reward
18|3|Where they will remain forever
18|4|Further, that He may warn those who say, “God has a son.”
18|5|They have no knowledge of such a thing, nor had their ancestors. It is a terrible thing that issues from their mouths as a saying which is nothing but falsehood
18|6|You would only worry yourself to death, following after them in grief if they do not believe in this message
18|7|That which is on earth we have made only as a glittering show for the world, in order that We may make evident which of them are best in conduct
18|8|Indeed that which is on earth We will make as only dust and dry earth
18|9|Do you reflect that the Companions of the Cave and of the Inscription were wonders among Our signs
18|10|Behold, the youths retreated to the cave. They said, “Our Lord, bestow on us mercy from Yourself, and manage our affair for us in the right way.”
18|11|Then We drew a veil over their ears for a number of years while in the cave
18|12|Then We woke them, in order to make evident which of the two groups were best at calculating the term of years they had stayed
18|13|We relate to you their story in truth. They were youths who believed in their Guardian Evolver, and We advanced them in guidance
18|14|We gave strength to their hearts. Behold, they stood up and said, “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and of the earth. Never will we call upon any god other than Him. If we did, indeed we would have spoken an enormity
18|15|“Our people have taken for worship gods other than Him. Why do they not bring forward a clear authority for what they do? Who does more wrong than those who invent a lie against God
18|16|“When you turn away from them and the things they worship other than God, retreat to the cave. Your Lord will shower His mercies on you and manage your affair towards comfort and ease.”
18|17|You would have seen the Sun when it rose, setting to the right from their cave, and when it set, turning away from them to the left, while they lay in the open space in the middle of the cave. Such are among the signs of God. He whom God guides is rightly guided, but he whom God leaves to stray, for him will you find no protector to lead him to the right way
18|18|You would have thought them awake, as they slept, and We turned them on their right and on their left sides. Their dog stretching out his two forelegs at the entrance. If you had come up on them, you would have certainly turned back from them in flight, and would certainly have been filled with fear of them
18|19|So we raised them up, that they might question each other. A voice said, “How long have you stayed here?” They said, “We have stayed a day or part of a day.” They said, “God knows best how long you have stayed here. Now send one of you with this money of yours to the town. Let him find out which is the best food and bring some to you, that you may satisfy your hunger, and let him behave with care and courtesy, and let him not inform anyone about you
18|20|“Because if they find you, they would stone you or force you to return to their cult, then you will never succeed.”
18|21|Then We made their story known, that they would understand that the promise of God is true, and that there can be no doubt about the Hour of Accountability. Behold, they dispute among themselves as to their story. They said, “Construct a building over them.” Their Lord knows best concerning them. Those who would dispute over their affair said, “Let us at least build a place of worship over them.”
18|22|Some will say they were three, the dog being the fourth among them, others say they were five, the dog being the sixth, doubtfully guessing at the unknown, still others say they were seven, the dog being the eighth. Say, “My Lord knows best their number, it is only a few others who know.” Therefore, do not enter into controversies concerning them, except on a matter that is clear, nor consult any of them about the Sleepers
18|23|Nor say of anything, “I will be sure to do so and so tomorrow
18|24|“Without adding, ‘God willing’. And call your Lord to mind when you forget and say, ‘I hope that my Lord will guide me even closer than this to the right way.’ ”
18|25|So they stayed in their cave three hundred years, plus nine
18|26|Say, “God knows best how long they stayed. With Him are the secrets of the heavens and the earth. How clearly He sees, how well He hears. They have no protector other than Him, nor does He share His command with anyone.”
18|27|And recite what has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord. None can change His words, and none will you find as a refuge other than Him
18|28|And keep your soul content with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face, and do not let your eyes pass beyond them, seeking the glitter of this life, nor follow any whose heart We have permitted to neglect the remembrance of Us, one who follows his own desires, whose case has gone beyond all bounds
18|29|Say, “The truth is from your Lord.” Let them who want to believe, believe. And let them who want to reject it, reject it. For the wrongdoers, We have prepared a fire like the walls and roof of a tent, it will hem them in. If they ask for relief they will be granted water like melted brass which will scald their faces, how dreadful the drink, how miserable a destination
18|30|As for those who believe and work righteousness, indeed We will not cause to perish, the reward of any who does a righteous deed
18|31|For them will be gardens of eternity, beneath them rivers will flow, they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and they will wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade. They will recline therein on raised thrones. How good the reward, how comfortable a destination
18|32|Set forth for them the parable of two people, for one of them We provided two gardens of grapevines, and surrounded them with date palms, in between the two We placed cornfields
18|33|Each of those gardens brought out its produce, and did not fail in the least. In the middle of them We caused a river to flow
18|34|Abundant was the produce this man had. He said to his neighbor in the course of a discussion, “More wealth have I than you, and more honor, and powerful is my following.”
18|35|He went into his garden in a state harmful to his soul. He said, “I think that this will never perish
18|36|“Nor do I think that the Hour will ever come. Even if I am brought back to my Lord, I will surely find something better in exchange.”
18|37|His neighbor said to him in the course of the discussion, “Do you deny Him Who created you out of dust, then out of a zygote, then fashioned you into a human being
18|38|“I think for my part that He is God, my Lord, and none will I associate with my Lord
18|39|“Why did you not, as you went into your garden say by God, ‘There is no power but with God,’ if you see me with less than you in wealth and children
18|40|“It may be that my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and that He will send on your garden thunderbolts from the sky, making it as quick sand
18|41|“Or the water of the garden will run off underground so that you will never be able to find it.”
18|42|Then his fruits were ruined, and he went on grabbing and raking his hands through what he had spent on his property which had tumbled to pieces to its very foundations, and he could only say, “Oh my God, I wish I had never ascribed partners to my Lord.”
18|43|Nor had he any to help him other than God, nor was he able to support himself
18|44|There, the protection comes from God, the True One. He is the Best to reward, and the Best to give success
18|45|Set forth to them the simile of the life of the present. It is like the rain which we send down from the skies. The earth’s vegetation absorbs it, but soon it becomes dry stubble which the winds scatter. It is God who prevails over all things
18|46|Wealth and children are the adornments of the life of the present, but the things that endure are good deeds, and are best in the sight of your Lord as rewards, and best as hopes
18|47|One day We will remove the mountains, and you will see the earth flattened, and We will gather them all together, and We will not leave out any one of them
18|48|And they will be marshaled before your Lord in ranks, “Now you come to Us as We created you initially. Yes, you thought We would not fulfill the appointment made to you to meet Us.”
18|49|And the book will be placed before you, and you will see the sinful full of fear because of what is in it. They will say, “Woe to us, what a book this is. It leaves out nothing small or large, and explains it.” They will find all that they did placed before them, and not one will your Lord treat with injustice
18|50|Behold, We said to the angels, “Bow down to Adam,” They bowed down, except Lucifer. He was one of the jinn, and he ignored the command of his Lord. Will you then take him and his dupes as protectors rather than Me? They are enemies to you. Miserable will be the reward for the wrongdoers
18|51|I did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation, nor do I take helpers who lead the people astray
18|52|One day He will say, “Call on those whom you thought to be My partners,” And they will call on them, but they will not listen to them, and We will make for them a place of common perdition
18|53|And the sinful will see the fire and realize that they must fall therein. No way will they find to get away from it
18|54|We have explained in detail in this Quran, for the benefit of humanity, every kind of example, but the human being is in most things contentious
18|55|And what is there to keep back the people from believing, now that guidance has come to them, or from praying for forgiveness from their Lord, but they asked that the ways of those who came before be repeated, or the punishment be brought to them face to face
18|56|We only send the messengers to give hope and to give warnings, but the unbelievers dispute with vain argument in order to weaken the truth, and they treat My signs without regard, although they are warned
18|57|And who does more wrong than one who is reminded of the verses of his Lord, but turns away from them, forgetting that which his hands have sent forth? Indeed We have set veils over their hearts lest they should understand this, and over their ears is deafness, if you call them to guidance, even then will they never accept guidance
18|58|But your Lord is most forgiving, full of mercy. If He was to call them to account for what they have earned, then surely He would have hastened their punishment, but they have their appointed time, beyond which they will find no refuge
18|59|These were the populations we caused to perish when they committed injustices, but we fixed an appointed time for their destruction
18|60|Behold, Moses said to his attendant, “I will not give up until I reach the junction of the two seas or until I spend years and years in travel.”
18|61|But when they reached the junction, they forgot their fish which took its course through the sea as in a tunnel
18|62|When they had moved on, Moses said to his companion, “Bring us our morning meal, truly we have suffered much fatigue at this stage of our journey.”
18|63|He replied, “Do you remember when we climbed the rock? At that time I indeed forgot about the fish. None but Satan made me forget about it. It took its course through the sea in a mesmerizing way.”
18|64|Moses said, “That was what we were seeking.” So they retraced their steps
18|65|Then they found one of Our servants on whom We had bestowed mercy from Ourselves, and whom We had taught
18|66|Moses said to him, “May I follow you, so that you may teach me something of the truth which you have been taught?”
18|67|The other said, “Indeed you will not be able to have patience with me.”
18|68|“And how can you have patience with things about which your understanding is not complete?”
18|69|Moses said, “You will find me, if God so wills, patient, nor will I ignore your instructions.”
18|70|The other said, “But if you follow me, ask me no questions about anything until I speak to you concerning it.”
18|71|So the two proceeded, until they were on the boat, he scuttled it. Said Moses, “Have you scuttled it in order to drown those on it? Truly a strange thing have you done.”
18|72|He answered, “Did I not tell you that you can have no patience with me?”
18|73|Moses said, “Do not blame me for forgetting, nor be hard on me, thus making me feel worse.”
18|74|Then they proceeded until they met a young man, he slew him. Moses said, “Have you slain an innocent soul who had killed no one? A truly disturbing thing have you done.” 74 (End of Part)
18|75|He answered, “Did I not tell you that you can have no patience with me?”
18|76|Moses said, “If ever I ask you about anything after this, do not keep me in your company, for you would have received enough excuses from me.”
18|77|Then they proceeded, until they came to the inhabitants of a town, they asked them for food, but they refused them hospitality. They found there a wall at the point of falling down, so he set it up straight. Moses said, “If you had wished, surely you could have received some compensation for it.”
18|78|He answered, “This is the parting between you and me. Now I will tell you the reasons for that which you were unable to have patience
18|79|“As for the boat, it belonged to people in dire want. They plied on the water, so I wished to render it unserviceable, for there was after them a king who had every boat seized by force
18|80|“As for the youth, his parents were people of faith, and we feared that he would grieve them by rebellion and ingratitude
18|81|“So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange, one better in refinement and closer in affection
18|82|“As for the wall, it belonged to two youths, orphans in the town. There was beneath it a buried treasure to which they were entitled. Their father had been a righteous man, so your Lord desired that they should attain the age of maturity and retrieve their treasure, a mercy from your Lord. I did not do this of my own volition, but those are the reasons for that which you were unable to have patience.”
18|83|They ask you concerning Dhul-Qarnayn say, “I will rehearse to you something of his story.”
18|84|Indeed We established his power on earth, and We gave him the ways and means to all ends
18|85|He went in one direction
18|86|Until he reached the setting of the Sun, he found it set in a spring of murky water. Near it he found a people, and We said, “O Dhul-Qarnayn, either punish them or treat them with kindness.”
18|87|He said, “Whoever does wrong, we will punish him, then will he be sent back to his Lord, and He will punish him with a punishment unheard-of
18|88|“But whoever believes and works righteousness, he will have an excellent reward, and easy will be his task as We order it by our command.”
18|89|Then he went in another direction
18|90|Until he came to the rising of the Sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no covering protection against the Sun
18|91|He left them as they were. We completely understood what was before him
18|92|Then he went in another direction
18|93|Until he reached a valley between two mountains, he found between them a people who hardly understood a word
18|94|They said, “O Dhul-Qarnayn, the Gog and Magog do wrong on earth. Shall we then pay you in order that you might erect a barrier between them and us
18|95|He said, “That which my Lord has given me is better. Just help me with strength. I will erect a strong barrier between you and them
18|96|“Bring me blocks of iron.” Then, when he had filled up the space between the two steep mountainsides he said, “Blow!” Then, when he had made it as fire he said, “Bring me molten lead to pour over it.”
18|97|From this they were made powerless to scale it, or to break through it
18|98|He said, “This is a mercy from my Lord, but when the promise of my Lord comes to pass, He will make it into dust, and the promise of my Lord is true.”
18|99|On that day We will leave them to surge like waves on one another. The trumpet will be blown, and We will gather them all together
18|100|And We will present hell that day for unbelievers to see
18|101|Those whose eyes had been under a veil from remembrance of Me, and who even had been unable to hear
18|102|Do the unbelievers think that they can take My servants as protectors besides Me? Indeed We have prepared hell for the unbelievers as a destination
18|103|Say, “Shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect to their deeds
18|104|“Those whose efforts have been wasted in this life, while they thought that they were acquiring good by their works?”
18|105|They are those who deny the signs of their Lord, and the fact of their having to meet Him. Vain will be their works, nor will We on the Day of Accountability, give them any consideration
18|106|Hell is their reward, because they rejected faith, and took My signs and My messengers, and ridiculed them
18|107|As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, they have for their destination the gardens of paradise
18|108|Wherein they will dwell forever. No changes will they want
18|109|Say, “If the ocean were ink with which to write the words of my Lord, sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my Lord.” Even if We added another ocean like it to supplement it.”
18|110|Say, “I am but a human being like yourselves. The inspiration has come to me that your God is one God. Whoever expects to meet his Lord let him work righteousness, and in the worship of his Lord, admit no one as partner
19|1|Kaaf, Haa, Yaa, Ayn, Saud
19|2|This is a recital of the mercy of your Lord to His servant Zechariah
19|3|Behold, he prayed to his Lord in private
19|4|He said, “O my Lord, infirm indeed are my bones, and the hair on my head glistens with grey, but never am I unblessed, O my Lord, in my prayer to You
19|5|“And I indeed fear what my people will do after me, but my wife is barren, so give me an heir as from You
19|6|“One who will represent me, and represent the posterity of Jacob, and make him, O my Lord, one with whom You are well-pleased.”
19|7|“O Zechariah, We give you good news of a son. His name will be Yahya, to none by that name have We given before.”
19|8|He said, “O my Lord, how will I have a son, when my wife is barren and I have grown quite decrepit from old age?”
19|9|He said, “So it will be. Your Lord says, ‘that is easy for Me. I indeed created you before, when you were nothing.’ ”
19|10|Zechariah said, “O my Lord, give me a sign.” “Your sign,” he answered, “Shall be that you will not speak to any person for three nights, even though you are not mute.”
19|11|So Zechariah came out to his people from his chamber, and he conveyed to them, “Praise God in the morning and in the evening”
19|12|“O Yahya, take hold of the Book with might.” And We gave him wisdom even as a youth
19|13|As well as piety as from Us, and refinement. He was devout
19|14|And kind to his parents, and he was not overbearing or rebellious
19|15|So peace be upon him the day he was born, the day he dies, and the day that he will be raised up to life
19|16|Relate in the Book, Mary. When she withdrew from her family to a place in the East
19|17|She screened herself from them, then We sent her our angel, and he appeared before her as a human being
19|18|She said, “I seek refuge from you with the Merciful Benefactor if you are a conscious being.”
19|19|He said, “I am a messenger from your Guardian Evolver, sent to announce to you the gift of an innocent son
19|20|She said, “How will I have a son, seeing that no man has touched me, and I am not unchaste?”
19|21|He said, “Your Lord says, ‘that is easy for Me, and We wish to appoint him as a sign to humanity and a mercy from Us, it is a matter decreed.’ ”
19|22|So she conceived him, and she retired with him to a remote place
19|23|And the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She cried, “O, I wish that I had died before this, I wish that I had been a thing forgotten and out of sight.”
19|24|But a voice cried to her from beneath the palm tree, “Grieve not, for your Guardian Evolver has provided a rivulet beneath you
19|25|“And shake towards yourself the trunk of the palm tree. It will make fresh, ripe dates fall upon you
19|26|“So eat and drink, and cool your eye, and if you see any person say, ‘I have vowed a fast to God, the Merciful Benefactor, and this day I will not enter into any conversation with any human being’ ”
19|27|Then she brought him to her people carrying him. They said, “O Mary, truly a curious thing have you brought.”
19|28|“O sister of Aaron, your father was not a man of wrong doing, nor your mother a woman unchaste.”
19|29|But she pointed to the baby and they said, “How can we talk to one who is a baby in the cradle?”
19|30|He said, “I am indeed a servant of God, He has given me revelation and made me a prophet
19|31|“And He has made me blessed wherever I am, and has recommended to me prayer and the paying of zakat as long as I live
19|32|“He has made me kind to my mother, and not overbearing or miserable
19|33|“So peace be upon me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the day that I will be raised up to life again.”
19|34|Such was Jesus the son of Mary. It is a statement of truth, about which they dispute
19|35|It is not befitting to God that He should have a son. Glory be to Him. When He determines a matter, He only says to it “Be” and it is
19|36|Indeed God is my Lord and your Lord. Therefore serve Him, this is a way that is straight
19|37|But the sects differ among themselves, and woe to the unbelievers because of the judgment of a momentous day
19|38|How plainly will they see and hear, the day that they will appear before Us, but the unjust, this day they are clearly in error
19|39|But warn them of the day of distress, when the matter will be determined, for they are negligent and they do not believe
19|40|It is We Who will inherit the earth, and all beings. To Us they will all be returned
19|41|Abraham, he was a man of truth, a prophet
19|42|Behold, he said to his father, “O my father, why worship that which hears not and sees not, and can profit you nothing
19|43|“O my father, knowledge has come to me which has not reached you. So follow me, I will guide you to a way that is balanced and straight
19|44|“O my father, serve not Satan, for Satan is a rebel against God, the Merciful Benefactor
19|45|“O my father, I fear lest a penalty afflict you from God, the Merciful Benefactor, and that you will become a friend to Satan.”
19|46|He replied, “Do you hate my gods, O Abraham? If you do not cease, I will indeed stone you. So get away from me now.”
19|47|Abraham said, “Peace be on you. I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness, for He is to me the Merciful Benefactor
19|48|“And I will turn away from you all, and from those whom you invoke besides God. I will call on my Lord, perhaps because of my prayer to my Lord, I will not be unblessed.”
19|49|Once he had turned away from them and from those whom they worshipped besides God, We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and each one of them We made a prophet
19|50|And We bestowed Our mercy on them, and We granted them honor on the tongues of truth
19|51|Also, mention in the Book, Moses, for he was specially chosen, and he was a messenger, a prophet
19|52|And We called him from the right side of the Mountain, and made him draw near to Us to converse
19|53|And out of Our mercy, We gave him his brother Aaron, a prophet
19|54|Also mention in the Book, Ishmael. He was true to what he promised, and he was a messenger, a prophet
19|55|He would recommend to his people prayer and zakat, and he was most acceptable in the sight of his Lord
19|56|Also mention in the Book the story of Idris. He was a person of truth, a prophet
19|57|And We raised him to a lofty station
19|58|Those were some of the prophets on whom God bestowed His grace, from the posterity of Adam, and of those who We carried with Noah, and from the posterity of Abraham and Israel, from those whom We guided and chose. Whenever the signs of God, the Merciful Benefactor, were rehearsed to them, they would fall down in adoration and in tears
19|59|But after them followed a generation who neglected prayers and followed their lusts, soon will they face destruction
19|60|Except for those who repent and believe, and work righteousness, for these will enter the garden and they will not be wronged in the least
19|61|Gardens of eternity, those that God, the Merciful Benefactor, has promised to His servants, though unseen, His promise must come to pass
19|62|They will not hear any vain discourse, but only salutations of peace, and they will have therein their sustenance, morning and evening
19|63|Such is the garden which We give as an inheritance to those of Our servants who guard against wrong
19|64|“We do not descend, except by the command of your Guardian Evolver. To Him belongs what is before us and what is behind us, and what is in between, and your Guardian Evolver never forgets
19|65|“Evolver of the heavens and of the earth, and of all that is in between, so worship Him, and be constant and patient in His worship. Do you know any who are worthy of the same name as He?”
19|66|Some people say, “What, when I am dead, will I then be raised up alive?”
19|67|But do people not remember that We created them before, out of nothing
19|68|So by your Lord, without doubt, We will gather them together, and the devils, then will We bring them forth on their knees around hell
19|69|Then We will certainly drag out from every sect, all those who were worse in obstinate rebellion against God, the Merciful Benefactor
19|70|And certainly We know best those who are most worthy of being burned in there forever
19|71|And none of you will avoid passing by it. This is a decree with your Lord which must be accomplished
19|72|But We will save those who guarded against wrong, and We will leave the wrongdoers in there, on their knees
19|73|When Our clear signs are rehearsed to them, the unbelievers say to those who believe, “Which of the two sides is in a better position? Which makes the best call?”
19|74|And how many generations before them have we caused to perish, those who were even better off in possessions and appearance
19|75|Say, “If any people go astray, God the Merciful Benefactor, allows it until they see the warning of God, either during punishment or on the Hour, they will finally realize who is worse in position, and weakest in force
19|76|“And God advances in guidance, those who seek guidance, and the things that endure are good deeds, these are best in the sight of your Lord as a reward, and best for their return.”
19|77|Have you then seen the person who rejects Our signs and says, “I will certainly be given wealth and sons?”
19|78|Has he seen the unseen, or has he taken a contract with God, the Merciful Benefactor
19|79|No, We will record what he says, and We will add repeatedly to his punishment
19|80|To Us will return all that he speaks of, and he will appear before Us bare and alone
19|81|And they have taken gods other than God, to give them power and glory
19|82|Instead, they will reject their worship, and become enemies against them
19|83|Do you not see that We have sicked Satan on the unbelievers to incite them with fury
19|84|So do not rush them, for We count out for them a number
19|85|The day We will gather the righteous to God, the Merciful Benefactor, as a dependent
19|86|And We will drive those who are corrupt to hell, like thirsty livestock driven down to water
19|87|None will have the power of intercession except those who received permission from God, the Merciful Benefactor
19|88|They say, “God, the Merciful Benefactor, has a son.”
19|89|Indeed you have put forward a thing most atrocious
19|90|At this the skies are ready to burst, the earth to split asunder, and the mountains to fall down in utter ruin
19|91|That they should invoke a son for God, the Merciful Benefactor
19|92|For it is not consistent with the majesty of God, the Merciful Benefactor, that He should have a son
19|93|Not one of the beings in the heavens and the earth come to God, the Merciful Benefactor, except as a servant
19|94|He takes account of them all, and has numbered them all exactly
19|95|And every one of them will come to Him alone on the Day of Accountability
19|96|On those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, God the Merciful Benefactor, will bestow love
19|97|We have made it easy in your own tongue, that with it you may give hope to the righteous, and warnings to people given to hostility
19|98|But how many generations before them have We caused to perish? Can you find a single one of them, or hear so much as a whisper of them
20|1|Taa, Haa
20|2|We have not sent down the Quran to cause you distress
20|3|But only as a reminder to those who fear
20|4|A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the heavens on high
20|5|God, the Merciful Benefactor, is firmly established on the throne
20|6|To Him belongs what is in the heavens and on earth, and all between them, and all beneath the ground
20|7|Whether you speak the word aloud or not, indeed He knows what is secret and what is even more hidden
20|8|God, there is no god but He, to Him belong the most beautiful names
20|9|Has the story of Moses reached you
20|10|Behold, he saw a fire. So he said to his family, “Stay here, I perceive a fire, perhaps I can bring a torch from it, or find some guidance at the fire.”
20|11|But when he came to the fire, a voice was heard, “O Moses
20|12|“Indeed I am your Guardian Evolver, so remove your shoes. You are in the sacred valley Tuwa
20|13|“I have chosen you. Listen then to the inspiration
20|14|“Indeed I am God. There is no god but Me. So serve Me, and establish prayer to remember me
20|15|“Indeed the Hour is coming. My design is to keep it hidden in order for every soul to receive its reward by the amount of its endeavor
20|16|“Therefore do not let believers follow their lusts, avoid them, or you will perish.”
20|17|“And what is that in your right hand, O Moses?”
20|18|He said, “It is my staff. On it I lean, and with it I beat down fodder for my flocks, and in it I find other uses.”
20|19|God said, “Throw it O Moses,”
20|20|He threw it, and behold, it was a snake active in motion
20|21|God said, “Seize it and fear not. We will return it at once to its previous state.”
20|22|“Now draw your hand close to your side. It will come out white, without harm, as another sign
20|23|“In order that We may reveal to you our greater signs
20|24|“Go to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds.”
20|25|Moses said, “O my Lord, expand my breast
20|26|“Ease my task for me
20|27|“And remove the impediment from my speech
20|28|“So that they may understand what I say
20|29|“And give me a minister from my family
20|30|“Aaron, my brother
20|31|“Add to my strength through him
20|32|“And have him share my task
20|33|“That we may praise You much
20|34|“And remember You much
20|35|“For You are He Who is regardful of us.”
20|36|God said, “Granted is your prayer, O Moses.”
20|37|“And indeed We conferred a favor on you another time
20|38|“Behold, We sent to your mother, by inspiration, this message
20|39|“ ‘Place him into the basket, then place him into the river. The river will cast him up on the bank, and he will be taken up by one who is an enemy to Me and an enemy to him’. But I cast love over you from Me, in order that you may be reared under Mine eye
20|40|“Behold, your sister going forth and saying, ‘Can I show you one who can nurse and rear the child?’ So We brought you back to your mother that her eyes might be cooled and she would not grieve. Then you killed a man, but We saved you from trouble, and We tried you in various ways. Then you stayed a number of years with the people of Midian. Then you came near as ordained, O Moses
20|41|“And I have prepared you for Myself.”
20|42|“Go you and your brother with My signs, and slacken not, either of you, in keeping Me in remembrance
20|43|“Go both of you to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
20|44|“But speak to him gently. Perhaps he may take warning because of his admiration.”
20|45|They said, “Our Lord, We fear that he will hasten with contempt against us, or that he will transgress all bounds.”
20|46|He said, “Fear not, for I am with you, and I hear and see everything
20|47|“So go both of you to him and say, ‘Indeed we are messengers sent by your Guardian Evolver. Therefore, allow the Children of Israel to exit with us, and do not stop them. Indeed with a sign we come from your Guardian Evolver, and peace to all who follow guidance
20|48|“Indeed it has been revealed to us that the penalty awaits those who reject and turn away.”
20|49|He said, “Who then, O Moses, is the Lord of you two?”
20|50|He said, “Our Lord is He Who gave to each thing its form and nature, and further, gave it purpose.”
20|51|He said, “What then happened to previous generations?”
20|52|He replied, “The knowledge of that is with my Lord, duly recorded. My Lord never errs, nor forgets
20|53|“He Who has made for you the earth, like a carpet spread out, has enabled you to go about therein by roads and channels, and has sent down water from the sky.” With it We have produced diverse pairs of plants, each distinct from the others
20|54|Eat for yourselves, and pasture your livestock. Indeed in this are signs for people endued with understanding
20|55|From the earth We created you, and into it We will return you, and from it We will bring you out once again
20|56|And We showed Pharaoh all of Our signs, but he rejected them
20|57|He said, “Have you come to drive us out of our land with your illusions, O Moses
20|58|“But we can surely produce illusions to match yours. So set a meeting between us and you which we will not fail to keep, neither we nor you, in a place where both will have equal chances.”
20|59|Moses said, “Your appointment is at the day of the festival, and let the people be assembled in the morning.”
20|60|So Pharaoh left. He hatched his scheme, and then came back
20|61|Moses said to him, woe to you. Do not tell a lie against God, lest He destroy you by chastisement. A forger must suffer penalty.”
20|62|So they disputed, one with another, over their affair, but they kept their talks secret
20|63|They said, “These two are certainly illusionists. Their object is to drive you out from your land with their illusions, and to do away with your most cherished institutions
20|64|“Therefore concoct your plan, and then assemble in ranks. He wins today who gains the upper hand.”
20|65|They said, “O Moses, would you rather that you throw first, or that we be the first to throw?”
20|66|He said, “No please, throw first.” Then behold, their ropes and their staffs. And it seemed to him on account of their illusions that they began to move
20|67|Then Moses sensed fear in himself
20|68|We said, “Fear not, for you have indeed the upper hand
20|69|“Present that which is in your right hand. Quickly it will swallow up that which they had faked. What they had faked is but an illusionist’s trick and the illusionist thrives not, no matter where he goes.”
20|70|So the illusionists were humbled. They said, “We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.”
20|71|He said, “Believe in Him before I give you permission? Surely this must be your leader, who has taught you illusions. Indeed I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will have you crucified on trunks of palm trees. So you will know for certain which of us can give more severe and more lasting punishment.”
20|72|They said, “Never will we consider you more than the clear signs that have come to us, or more than Him Who created us. So do whatever you want to do, for you can only influence in the life of the present
20|73|“For us, we have believed in our Lord. May He forgive us our faults, and the illusions to which you compelled us to do, for God is Best and Ever Lasting.”
20|74|Indeed he who returns to his Lord as a wrong-doer, for him is hell. Therein will he neither die nor live
20|75|But those who come to Him as believers who have worked righteous deeds, for them are ranks exalted
20|76|Gardens of eternity, beneath which rivers flow. They will dwell therein forever. Such is the reward of those who refine themselves
20|77|We sent this inspiration to Moses, “Travel by night with My servants, and split a dry path for them through the sea, without fear of being overtaken and without any other fear.”
20|78|Then Pharaoh pursued them with his forces, but the waters completely overwhelmed them and covered them up
20|79|Pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright
20|80|O you Children of Israel, We delivered you from your enemy, and We made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount, and We sent down to you manna and quail
20|81|Saying, “Eat of the good things We have provided for your sustenance, but commit no excess therein, lest My punishment should justly descend on you, and those on whom My punishment descends, will indeed perish
20|82|“But without doubt, I am He Who forgives again and again, those who repent, believe, and do right, they receive guidance.”
20|83|“What made you hasten in advance of your people, O Moses?”
20|84|He replied, “Behold, they are close on my footsteps. I hastened to you, O my Lord, to please you.”
20|85|God said, “We have tested your people in your absence. Samiri has led them astray.”
20|86|So Moses returned to his people frustrated and sorrowful. He said, “O my people, did your Lord not make an attractive promise to you? Did the promise seem to you too far off? Or did you desire that punishment should descend from your Lord on you, so you broke your promise to me?”
20|87|They said, “We did not break the promise to you of our own volition, but we were made to carry the weight of the ornaments of the people, and we threw them, because that was what Samiri suggested
20|88|“Then he brought out before them the image of a calf. It seemed mysterious, so they said, ‘this is your god, and the god of Moses, but he has forgotten.’ ”
20|89|Could they not see that it could not return a word to them, and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them good
20|90|Aaron had already before this said to them, “O my people, you are being tested by this, for indeed your Lord is God, the Merciful Benefactor, so follow me and follow my advice.”
20|91|They said, “We will not abandon this community, but we will devote ourselves to it until Moses returns to us.”
20|92|Moses said, “O Aaron, what kept you back, when you saw them going wrong
20|93|“From following me? Why did you not follow my advice?”
20|94|Aaron replied, “O son of my mother, grab me not by my beard or by my hair. Truly I feared that you would say, ‘You have caused a division among the Children of Israel, and you did not respect my word.’ ”
20|95|Moses said, “What then is your story, O Samiri?”
20|96|He replied, “I saw what they saw not. So I grabbed a handful from the footprint of the messenger and threw it. This is what my soul suggested to me.”
20|97|Moses said, “Go away, and your punishment in this life will be that you will say, ‘Untouchable’, and moreover you have a promise that will not fail. Now look at your god, of whom you have become a devoted worshipper. We will certainly melt it in a blazing fire and scatter it in the sea.”
20|98|But the God of you all is the One God. There is no god but Him. Of all things He has knowledge
20|99|Thus We relate to you stories of what happened before, for We have sent you a message from Us
20|100|If any turn away from it, indeed they will bear a burden on the Day of Accountability
20|101|They will remain in this state, and terrible will be the burden on them that day
20|102|The day the trumpet will be sounded. That day, We will gather the sinful, blurry-eyed
20|103|In whispers will they consult each other, “Yet they will stay no longer than ten
20|104|We know best what they will say, when their leader best in conduct says, “You stayed not longer than a day.”
20|105|They ask you concerning the mountains say, “My Lord will uproot them and scatter them as dust
20|106|“He will leave them flat
20|107|“Nothing crooked or curved will you see in their place.”
20|108|On that day they will follow the caller. No crookedness concerning him either. All sounds will humble themselves in the presence of God, the Merciful Benefactor. Nothing will you hear but the sound of their feet
20|109|On that day no intercession will help, except for those for whom permission has been granted by God, the Merciful Benefactor, and whose word is acceptable to Him
20|110|He knows what is before, after, and behind them, but they will not understand it with their knowledge
20|111|All faces will be humbled before Him, the Living, the Self-Sufficient, Eternal. Hopeless indeed will be the person that carries an injustice
20|112|But he who does deeds of righteousness and has faith, will have no fear of harm or of being deprived of what he is due
20|113|So We have sent this down, an Arabic Quran, and explained therein in detail some of the warnings, in order that they may be conscious of God, or that it may cause their remembrance
20|114|High above all is God, the King, the Truth. Do not be impatient with the Quran before its communication to you is completed, but say, “O my Lord, advance me in knowledge.”
20|115|We had already taken the covenant of Adam, but he forgot, and We found on his part no resolve
20|116|When We said to the angels, “Prostrate to Adam,” they prostrated themselves, but not Lucifer, he refused
20|117|Then We said, “O Adam, indeed this is an enemy to you and your mate. So do not let him get both of you out of the garden, so that you land in misery
20|118|“There is enough there for you not to go hungry nor to go naked
20|119|“Nor to suffer from thirst, nor from the Sun’s heat.”
20|120|But Satan whispered wrong to him. He said, “O Adam, will I lead you to the Tree of Eternity and to a kingdom that never decays?”
20|121|So they both ate of the tree, and so their nakedness appeared to them. They began to sew together, for their clothes, leaves from the garden. Thus did Adam ignore his Lord, and allow himself to be seduced
20|122|But his Lord, the Caller, chose him. He turned to him and gave him guidance
20|123|He said, “Go down all together from the garden, with enmity between yourselves, but if, as is sure, there comes to you guidance from Me, whoever follows My guidance, will not lose his way, nor fall into misery
20|124|“But whoever turns away from My message, indeed for him is a shallow life, and We will raise him up blind on the Day of Accountability.”
20|125|He will say, “O my Lord, why have You raised me up blind when I had sight?”
20|126|God will say, “Because when Our signs came to you, you disregarded them. So you will, this day, be disregarded.”
20|127|This is how We reward him who transgresses beyond bounds and believes not in the signs of his Lord, and the penalty of the hereafter is far more terrible and more enduring
20|128|Is it not a warning to these people, the many generations before them We caused to perish, in whose buildings they tour? Indeed, in this are signs for people endued with understanding
20|129|Had it not been for a word that went forth before from your Lord, their punishment would have come, but there is a term appointed
20|130|Therefore be patient with what they say, and praise your Lord, before the rising of the Sun, and before its setting. Yes, praise for part of the hours of the night, and at the sides of the day. That you may have joy
20|131|Nor strain your eyes in longing for the things We have given for enjoyment to some of them. The splendor of the life of the present is how We challenge them. But the provision of your Lord is better and more enduring
20|132|Encourage prayer for your people, and be consistent in it. We do not ask you to provide sustenance. We provide it for you, and the result is for the conscious
20|133|They say, “Why does he not bring us a sign from his Lord?” Has guidance not come to them from all that was in the previous books of scripture
20|134|And if We had inflicted on them a penalty before this they would have said, “Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we would certainly have followed Your signs before we were humbled and put to shame.”
20|135|Say, “Each one is waiting. So wait also, and soon will you know who is on the straight and even path, and who it is who has received guidance.” 135 (End of Part)
21|1|Closer and closer to the human being comes their judgment. Yet they are heedless and they turn away
21|2|There has never come to them a renewed message from their Lord that they did not listen to without regard
21|3|While their hearts were distracted. The wrongdoers conceal their private meetings saying, “Is he more than a human like yourselves? Will you follow illusions with your eyes open?”
21|4|Say, “My Lord knows each word in the heavens and on earth. He is the One Who hears and knows all things.”
21|5|“No,” they say, "A medley of dreams." "No, he fabricated it". "No, he is a poet". "Let him bring us a sign like the ones that were sent to those in the past.”
21|6|Before them, not one of the populations that We caused to perish believed. Will these believe
21|7|Before you, those We sent were also only men to whom We granted inspiration. Ask those who have the message if you do not know
21|8|Nor did We give them bodies that consumed no food, nor were they exempt from death
21|9|In the end, We fulfilled Our promise to them, and We saved them and those whom We pleased, but We caused to perish those who transgressed beyond bounds
21|10|We have revealed for you a book in which is a message for you. Will you not use your intelligence
21|11|How many populations did We cause to perish because of their immorality and lack of ethics, establishing in their places other people
21|12|Yet, when they sensed Our punishment behold, they tried to run from it
21|13|Run not, but return to the good things of this life that were given to you, and return home, in order that you may be called to account
21|14|They said, “Woe to us, we were indeed wrongdoers.”
21|15|And that cry of theirs ceased not, until We made them as a mown field, or as ashes silenced
21|16|We did not create the heavens and the earth for fun, nor all that is in between
21|17|If it had been Our will to take a pastime, We could indeed have taken it from the things nearest to Us, if We would do such a thing
21|18|No, We hurl the truth against falsehood, and it knocks out its brains, and behold, falsehood is bound to perish. Woe to you for the things you ascribe to Us
21|19|To Him belong all that is in the heavens and on earth. Even those who are in His presence are not too proud to serve Him, nor do they tire in doing so
21|20|They praise Him night and day, and they do not let up
21|21|Have they taken for worship gods from the earth who can resurrect
21|22|If there were in the heavens and the earth other gods besides God, there would have been confusion in both. But glory be to God, the Lord of the throne. High is He above what they attribute to Him
21|23|He cannot be questioned for His acts, but they will be questioned for theirs
21|24|Have they taken for worship gods besides Him? Say, “Bring your proof. This is the message of those with me and the message of those before me.” But most of them do not know the truth, and therefore turn away
21|25|No messenger did We send before you without this inspiration sent by Us to him, “There is no god but Me, therefore worship and serve Me.”
21|26|And they say, “God, the Merciful Benefactor has a son, glory be to him.” No, they are servants raised to honor
21|27|They do not speak before He speaks, and they act by His command
21|28|He knows what is before them, and what is behind them, and none can intercede except for those whom He approves, and they stand in awe and reverence before Him
21|29|If any of them should say, “I am a god besides Him,” We will reward them with hell. This is how We reward those who do wrong
21|30|Do the unbelievers fail to see that the heavens and the earth were joined together, before We split them apart? We made every living thing from water. Will they not then believe
21|31|And We have set on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with them, and We have made therein broad valleys between mountains for them to pass through, so that they may receive guidance
21|32|And We have made the heavens as a canopy well guarded. Yet they turn away from the signs
21|33|It is He Who created the night and the day, and the Sun and the Moon each float along in its orbit
21|34|We did not grant to any person before you eternal life. If you must die, should they then live forever
21|35|Every soul will have a taste of death, and We challenge you with bad and with good, and to Us you must return
21|36|When the unbelievers see you, they treat you with ridicule, “Is this,” they say, “The one who talks of your gods?” But they reject even the mention of God, the Merciful Benefactor
21|37|The human being is a creature of haste. Soon will I show you My signs, and then you will not ask Me to hasten them
21|38|They say, “When will this promise come to pass if you are telling the truth?”
21|39|If only the unbelievers knew of the time when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces, nor from their backs, nor will they be helped
21|40|No, it may come to them all of a sudden and as a shock to them. Then no power will they have to avert it, nor will they have respite
21|41|Mocked were messengers before you, but those who mocked were done in by the thing which they mocked
21|42|Say, “Who can keep you safe by night and by day from God, the Merciful Benefactor?” Yet they turn away from the mention of their Guardian Evolver
21|43|Or have they gods that can guard them from Us? They have no power to aid themselves, nor can they be defended from Us
21|44|No, We gave the good things of this life to these people and their fathers, until the period grew long for them. Do they not see that We gradually reduce the land in their control from its outlying borders? Is it then they who will win
21|45|Say, “I only warn you according to revelation.” But the deaf will not hear the call when they are warned
21|46|If even a gust of the punishment of your Lord reaches them, they will then say, “Woe to us, we did wrong indeed.”
21|47|We will set up scales of justice for the Day of Accountability, so no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least. And if there be the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it to account, and enough are We to take account
21|48|In the past, We granted to Moses and Aaron the Criterion, and a light, and a message for those who are conscious
21|49|Those who are conscious of their Guardian Evolver in their most private thoughts, and who hold the Hour in awe
21|50|And this is a blessed message that We have sent down. Will you then reject it
21|51|We gave Abraham moral authority and We knew him well
21|52|Behold, he said to his father and his people, “What are these statues to which you are devoted?”
21|53|They said, “We found our fathers worshipping them.”
21|54|He said, “Indeed you have been in manifest error, you and your fathers.”
21|55|They said, “Have you brought us the truth, or are you one of those who mock?”
21|56|He said, “No, and your Lord is the Guardian Evolver of the heavens and the earth, and He is the One Who created them, and I am a witness to this
21|57|“And by God, I have a plan for your idols after you go away and turn your backs.”
21|58|Then he broke them to pieces, all but the biggest of them, so that they might turn to it
21|59|They said, “Who has done this to our gods? He must indeed be of the wrong-doers.”
21|60|They said, “We heard a youth talk of them. His name is Abraham.”
21|61|They said, “Then bring him before the eyes of the people, that they may bear witness.”
21|62|They said, “Are you the one who did this to our gods, O Abraham?”
21|63|He said, “No, this was done by that, the biggest one. Ask them, if they can speak.”
21|64|So they turned to themselves and said, “Indeed you are the ones in the wrong.”
21|65|Then they were angered and embarrassed. They said, “You know full well that these do not speak.”
21|66|Abraham said, “Do you then worship, besides God, things that can neither be of any good to you nor do you harm
21|67|“Shame on you, and on the things that you worship besides God. Have you no sense?”
21|68|They said, “Burn him and protect your gods, if you want to do something.”
21|69|We said, “O fire, be cool and safe for Abraham.”
21|70|Then they sought a plot against him, but We made them the ones who lost most
21|71|And We delivered him and Lot to the land which We have blessed for the nations
21|72|And We bestowed on him Isaac, and as an additional gift, Jacob, and We made righteous the people of each one of them
21|73|And We made them leaders, guiding the people by Our command, and We sent them inspiration to do good deeds, to establish prayer, and to give zakat, and they constantly served Us
21|74|And to Lot, We gave judgment and knowledge, and We saved him from the town which practiced abominations. Truly they were a people given to wrong, a rebellious people
21|75|And We admitted him to Our mercy, for he was one of the righteous
21|76|And Noah, when he cried, We listened to him, and delivered him and his family from great distress
21|77|We helped him against the people who rejected Our signs. Truly they were a people given to wrong. So We drowned them all
21|78|And remember David and Solomon, when they gave judgment in the matter of the field, into which the sheep of certain people had strayed by night. We did witness their judgment
21|79|To Solomon We inspired the understanding of the matter. To each We gave judgment and knowledge, it was Our power that made the hills and the birds praise Us with David. It was We Who did it
21|80|It was We Who taught him the making of armor for your benefit, to guard you from violence. Will you then be grateful
21|81|The violent wind flowed for Solomon, by his order to the land which We had blessed, for We know all things
21|82|And of the devils were some who dived for him, and did other work besides that, and it was We Who guarded them
21|83|And Job, when He cried to his Lord, “Truly distress has seized me, but You are the Most Merciful of those who are merciful.”
21|84|So We listened to him. We removed the distress that was on him, and We restored his people to him, and doubled their number, as a grace from Ourselves, and a thing for commemoration for all who serve Us
21|85|And Ishmael, Idris, and Zul-kifl, all were of constancy and patience
21|86|We admitted them to Our mercy, for they were of the righteous
21|87|And remember Zun-nun, when he departed in punishment. He imagined that We had no power over him, but he cried through the depths of darkness, “There is no god but You, glory to You, I was indeed wrong.”
21|88|So We listened to him, and delivered him from distress, and thus do We deliver those who have faith
21|89|And Zechariah, when he cried to his Lord, “O my Lord, leave me not without offspring, though you are the best of inheritors.”
21|90|So We listened to him, and We granted him Yahya. We reversed his wife’s barrenness for him. These were ever quick in doing good works, they used to call on Us with love and reverence, and humble themselves before Us
21|91|And she who guarded her chastity, We breathed into her of Our spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for all people
21|92|Indeed the fellowship of yours is a single fellowship, and I am your Guardian Evolver, therefore serve Me
21|93|But others severed their unity, one from another, still they will all return to Us
21|94|Whoever does any act of righteousness and has faith, his endeavor will not be rejected. We will record it in his favor
21|95|But there is a ban on any population which We have caused to perish, that they will not return
21|96|Until the Gog and Magog are let through, and they swiftly swarm from every hill
21|97|Then will the true promise draw near. Then behold, the eyes of the unbelievers will stare in horror, “Woe to us, we were indeed heedless of this. No, we truly did wrong.”
21|98|Indeed you, and the gods that you worship besides God, are fuel for hell, and there you will go
21|99|If they had been gods, they would not have been sent there, but each one will live therein
21|100|For them will be sobbing, but they will not hear
21|101|Those for whom the good from Us has come before will be removed far from it
21|102|Not the slightest sound will they hear of hell. What their souls desired, in that will they dwell
21|103|The great fear will bring them no grief, but the angels will meet them. This is your day that you were promised
21|104|The day that We roll up the heavens like rolling a scroll, as We produced the first creation, We will produce a new one. This is a promise We have made and indeed We will fulfill it
21|105|Before this We wrote in the Psalms, after the Reminder, “My servants the righteous will inherit the earth.”
21|106|Indeed in this is a message for people who want to worship God
21|107|And We have not sent you except as a mercy for all the worlds
21|108|Say, “What has come to me by inspiration, is that your God is One God. Will you therefore submit to His will?”
21|109|But if they turn back say, “I have proclaimed the message to you all alike and in truth, but I know not whether that which you are promised is near or far
21|110|“It is He Who knows what is open in speech and what you hide
21|111|“I know only that it will be a trial for you and enjoyment for a time.”
21|112|Say, “O my Lord, judge with truth. Our Lord the Merciful Benefactor is the One Whose assistance should be sought against your blasphemies.”
22|1|O humanity, be regardful of your Guardian Evolver, for the commotion of the Hour will be a terrible thing
22|2|The day you will see it, every nursing mother will forget she was nursing, and every pregnant female will deliver. You will see humanity as in a drunken riot, yet not drunk, and dreadful will be the punishment of God
22|3|And yet among humanity, there are some who dispute about God, without knowledge, and follow every wrong-doer, obstinate in rebellion
22|4|Concerning Satan, it is decreed that whoever turns to him for friendship, he will lead them astray, and he will guide them to the penalty of the fire
22|5|O humanity, if you have doubt about the resurrection, consider that We created you out of dust, then out of a zygote, then out of an embryo, then out of tissue, partly formed and partly unformed, in order that We may make it manifest to you, and We cause whom We will to rest in the wombs for an appointed term, then We bring you out as babies, then raise you so you may reach your age of full strength, and some of you are called to die, and some are sent back to the feeblest old age, so that they know not, after having known. And you see the earth barren and lifeless, but when We pour down rain on it, it is stirred to life, it swells, and it puts forth every kind of beautiful growth
22|6|This is because God is the Reality. It is He Who gives life to the dead, and it is He Who has power over all things
22|7|And indeed the Hour will come. There can be no doubt about it, or about the fact that God will raise up all who are in the graves
22|8|Yet there are among humanity, those who dispute about God, without knowledge, without guidance, and without a book of enlightenment
22|9|Bending his side, in order to lead the people astray from the path of God, for him there is disgrace in this life, and on the Day of Accountability, We will make him taste the penalty of burning
22|10|“This is because of the deeds which your hands sent forth. For indeed God is not unjust to His servants
22|11|There are among the people some who serve God on the verge. If good befalls them, they are content, but if a trial comes to them, they turn on their faces. They lose both the present and the hereafter. That is a loss for all to see
22|12|They call on such deities besides God, who can neither hurt nor profit them. That is straying far indeed
22|13|They call on one whose harm is nearer than his profit. Harmful indeed is the protector, and harmful the companion
22|14|Indeed God will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow, for God carries out all that He plans
22|15|If any think that God will not help His messenger in the present and the hereafter, let him stretch out a rope to the ceiling and cut himself off, then let him see whether his plan will remove that which enrages him
22|16|Thus We have sent down clear signs, and indeed God guides whom He wills
22|17|Those who believe, those who are Jewish, the Sabaeans, Christians, Magians, and Polytheists, God will judge between them on the Day of Accountability, for God is witness to all things
22|18|Do you not see that to God submits all things that are in the heavens and on earth? The Sun, the Moon, the stars, the hills, the trees, the animals, and a good number among humanity. But a good number are also fit for punishment, and those who God will disgrace, none can raise to honor, for God carries out all that He wills
22|19|These two opponents dispute with each other about their Guardian Evolver, but those who deny their Lord, for them will be cut out a garment of fire. Over their heads will be poured out boiling water
22|20|With it will scald what is within their bodies, as well as their skin
22|21|Also, there will be hooked rods of iron to punish them
22|22|Every time they wish to get away from it, and from anguish, they will be forced back into it. Taste the penalty of burning.”
22|23|God will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds, to gardens with rivers flowing through them. They will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be of silk
22|24|For they have been guided to the most refined of speeches, they have been guided to the path of Him Who is worthy of praise
22|25|As for those who have rejected God, and would keep back the people from the way of God, and from the Sacred Masjid which We have made for all people, must know that equal there is the resident and the visitor, and any whose purpose for being there is deviation or wrongdoing, We will cause them to taste a most terrible penalty
22|26|Behold, We assigned to Abraham the site of the house saying, “Do not associate anything with Me, and keep My house clean for those who circle it, or stand up, bow, or prostrate themselves
22|27|“And inform humanity concerning Hajj. They will come like you on foot, and on every mode of transportation, coming from every distant land
22|28|“That they may experience that which will be of benefits to them, and remember the Name of God on the days appointed, while over the livestock which He has provided for them. Then eat of it, and feed the destitute in want
22|29|“So let them complete the rites prescribed for them, make their promises, and circle the Ancient House.”
22|30|Whoever honors the sacred rites of God, for him is good in the sight of his Lord. Permissible to you are livestock, except those mentioned to you, but avoid the abomination of idols, and avoid a word that is false
22|31|Be true in faith to God, and never assign partners to Him. If anyone assigns partners to God, it is as if he had fallen from heaven, and had been snatched up by birds, or the wind had blown and thrown him into a distant place
22|32|Whoever holds in honor the symbols of God, it should truly come from piety of heart
22|33|In them you have benefits for a term appointed. In the end their place of sacrifice is near the Ancient House
22|34|To every people We appointed rites that they might mention the name of God over the sustenance He gave them from animals. And your God is One God, so submit your will to Him, and give the good news to those who humble themselves
22|35|They are those whose hearts, when God is mentioned, are filled with awe. Who show patient perseverance over their afflictions, establish prayer, and give out of what We have bestowed upon them
22|36|And the sacrificial animal, We have made it for you among the symbols from God. In them is good for you. So remember the name of God over it as they line up, and when they are down on their sides. Then eat of it, and feed the needy who do not ask, and those who do. Thus We have made animals subject to you, that you may be grateful
22|37|It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches God, it is your piety that reaches Him. He has made them subject to you, that you may praise God for His guidance to you, and proclaim the good news to all who do right
22|38|Indeed God will defend those who believe, indeed God does not love any who is a traitor of faith or who shows ingratitude
22|39|To those against whom war is made, permission is given to fight, because they were wronged, and indeed God is most powerful for their aid
22|40|Those who have been expelled from their homes in defiance of right, for no reason except that they say, “Our Guardian Evolver is God.” If God did not check one group of people by means of another, there would surely have been pulled down monasteries, churches, synagogues, and masjids, in which the name of God is commemorated in abundant measure. God will certainly aid those who aid Him, for indeed God is Full of Strength, Exalted in Might
22|41|Those who, if We establish them in the land, establish prayer and give zakat, encourage right and forbid wrong, then with God rests the end of all their affairs
22|42|If they reject you, so did peoples before them, the people of Noah, of ‘Ad , and of the Thamud
22|43|Those of Abraham and Lot
22|44|The companions of the Madyan people, and Moses, they all were rejected, but I granted respite to the unbelievers, and after that I punished them. How terrible was my rejection of them
22|45|How many populations have We caused to perish which were given to wrongdoing which tumbled down on their roofs? And how many wells are lying idle and neglected, as well as castles lofty and well-built
22|46|Do they not travel through the land, so that their hearts may learn wisdom, and their ears may learn to hear? Truly it is not their eyes that are blind, but the hearts in their breasts
22|47|And they ask you to hasten on the punishment, but God will not fail in His promise. Indeed a day in the sight of your Lord is like a thousand years of your count
22|48|And to how many populations did I give respite, though they were given to wrongdoing. In the end I punished them. To me is the destination
22|49|Say, “O humanity, I am sent to you only to give a clear warning
22|50|“Those who believe and work righteousness, for them is forgiveness and sustenance most generous
22|51|“But those who strive against Our signs, seeking to stop them, they will be companions of the fire.”
22|52|Never did We send a messenger or a prophet before you, that when he had a purpose, Satan threw something harmful in his purpose, but God will throw out anything that Satan throws in, and God will confirm His signs, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom
22|53|He does this, so that He may make the suggestions thrown in by Satan, a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease, and who has hardened their heart. Indeed the wrongdoers are in a disagreement far astray
22|54|So that those on whom knowledge has been bestowed, may learn that it is the truth from your Lord, and that they may believe therein, and their hearts may be made humble and open to it. For God indeed guides those who believe to the straight way
22|55|Those who do not believe will not cease to be in doubt concerning revelation, until the Hour comes suddenly upon them, or there comes to them the penalty of a day of disaster
22|56|On that day, the control will be that of God. He will judge between them. And those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in gardens of pleasure
22|57|And for those who do not believe and deny our signs, there will be a crushing punishment
22|58|Those who leave their homes in the cause of God, and are slain or die, indeed will God bestow on them an excellent provision. Truly God is He Who bestows the best provision
22|59|Indeed He will admit them to a place with which they will be well pleased, for God is All Knowing, Most Understanding
22|60|Thus if one has retaliated to no greater extent than the injury he received, and is again attacked, God will help him, for God is One who blots out sins and forgives again and again
22|61|Because God merges night into day, and He merges day into night, and indeed it is God Who hears and sees all
22|62|Because God, He is the Reality, and those besides Him whom they invoke, are as falsehood, but indeed God is He, Most High, Most Great
22|63|Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky, and thereafter the earth becomes dressed with green? For God is He Who understands the finest mysteries, and is well acquainted with them
22|64|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, for indeed God is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
22|65|Do you not see that God has made subject to you all that is on the earth, and the ships that sail through the waters by His command? He withholds the sky’s rain from failing on the earth except by His permission, for God is Most Kind and the Merciful Redeemer to humanity
22|66|It is He Who gave you life, will cause you to die, and will again give you life. Truly humanity is a most ungrateful creature
22|67|To every people We have appointed rites and ceremonies which they perform. Then let them not dispute with you over the matter, but invite them to your Lord, for you are surely on the right way
22|68|If they argue with you say, “God knows best what it is you do.”
22|69|“God will judge between you on the Day of Accountability, concerning the matters in which you differ.”
22|70|Do you not know that God knows all that is in heaven and on earth? Indeed it is all in a record, and that is easy for God
22|71|Yet they worship besides God, things for which no authority has been sent down to them, and of which they have no knowledge, for those who do wrong there is no helper
22|72|When Our clear signs are rehearsed to them, you will notice denial on the faces of the unbelievers. They nearly attack those who rehearse Our signs to them. Say, “Shall I tell you of something far worse than these signs? It is the fire of hell. God has promised it to the unbelievers, and evil is that destination.”
22|73|O humanity, here is a parable put forward, listen to it. Those on whom you call other than God, cannot even create a fly, even if they all met together for the purpose, and if the fly snatches away anything from them, they would have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble are those who petition, as are those whom they petition
22|74|No just estimate have they made of God, for God is He Who is strong and able to carry out His will
22|75|God chooses messengers from angels and from human beings, for God is He Who hears and sees all things
22|76|He knows what is before them and what is behind them and to God go back all questions
22|77|O you who believe, bow down, prostrate yourselves, adore your Lord, and do good, so that you may flourish
22|78|And strive in His cause, as you ought to strive. He has chosen you, and has imposed no difficulties on you in this way, it is the way of your father Abraham. It is He Who has named you Muslims, both before and in this revelation, that the messenger may be a witness for you, and you are witnesses for humanity. So establish prayer, give zakat, and hold fast to God. He is your Protector, the best to protect and the best to help. (End of Part)
23|1|Believers will certainly flourish
23|2|Those who humble themselves in their prayers
23|3|Who avoid harmful talk
23|4|Who are active in deeds of charity
23|5|Who abstain from sex
23|6|Except with their mates, or those whom their right hands possess, for in their case they are free from blame
23|7|But those whose desires exceed these limits are transgressors
23|8|But those who faithfully observe their trusts and their promises
23|9|And who strictly remember their prayers
23|10|These will be the heirs
23|11|Who will inherit paradise. They will dwell therein forever
23|12|And indeed We created humanity from a quintessence of clay
23|13|Then We placed them as a zygote in a place of rest, firmly fixed
23|14|Then We made the zygote into an embryo, then of that embryo We made a fetus, then we made the fetus into bones and clothed the bones with flesh, then we developed out of it another creature. So blessed is God, the best of creators
23|15|After that, you will eventually die
23|16|Then on the Day of Accountability, you will be raised up
23|17|And We have made above you seven paths, and We are never unmindful of Our creation
23|18|And We send down water from the sky by a certain measure, and We cause it to soak in the earth, and We certainly are able to make it disappear
23|19|With it We grow for you gardens of date palms and vines. In them you have abundant fruit, and from them you eat and enjoy
23|20|Also is a tree springing out of Mount Sinai which produces oil and relish for those who use it for food
23|21|And in cattle too, you have an instructive similitude. From within their bodies We produce milk for you to drink. There are also in them numerous other benefits for you, and of their meat you eat
23|22|And on them as well as on ships you are carried
23|23|Further, We sent a long line of prophets to instruct you. We sent Noah to his people. He said, “O my people, worship God, you have no other god but Him. Will you not fear Him?”
23|24|The leaders of the unbelievers among his people said, “He is no more than a human like you. His wish is to assert his will over you. If God had wished to send messengers, He could have sent down angels, never did we hear of such a thing as he says, from even among our earliest ancestors
23|25|“He is but a man possessed. Wait and have patience with him for a time.”
23|26|Noah said, “O my Lord, help me, for they accuse me of lies.”
23|27|So We inspired him with this message, “Construct the Ark within Our sight and under Our guidance. Then when Our command comes, and the fountains of the earth gush forth, take on-board pairs of every type, male and female, and your family, except those of them against whom the word has already gone forward, and do not address Me in favor of the wrongdoers, for they will be drowned
23|28|And when you have embarked on the Ark, you and those with you say, “Praise God, He Who has saved us from the people who do wrong.”
23|29|And say, “O my Lord, enable me to disembark with your blessing, for You are the best to enable us to disembark.”
23|30|Indeed in this are signs, and with this do We test people
23|31|Then We produced after them another generation
23|32|And We sent to them a messenger from among themselves saying, “Worship God, you have no other god but Him. Will you not fear Him?”
23|33|And the leaders of his people who disbelieved and denied the meeting in the hereafter, and he on whom We had bestowed the good things in the life of the present said, “He is no more than human like you. He eats of what you eat, and drinks of what you drink
23|34|“If you follow a human being like yourselves behold, it is certain you will be lost
23|35|“Does he promise that when you die and become dust and bones, you will be brought out
23|36|“Far, very far is that which you are promised
23|37|“There is nothing but our life in the present. We die and we live, but we will never be raised up again
23|38|“He is but one who invents a lie against God, but we are not ones to believe in him.”
23|39|He said, “Lord help me, for they accuse me of lying.”
23|40|God said, “In but a little while, they are sure to be sorry.”
23|41|Then the blast overtook them with justice, and We made them as remains of dead leaves. So away with the people who do wrong
23|42|Then We produced after them other generations
23|43|No people can hasten their term, nor can they delay it
23|44|Then We sent our messengers in succession. Every time there came to a people their messenger they accused him of falsehood. So We made them follow each other in punishment. We made them as a tale that is told. So away with a people who will not believe
23|45|Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and with clear authority
23|46|And to Pharaoh and his nomarchs. But they behaved arrogantly. They were a people conceited
23|47|They said, “Shall we believe in two people like ourselves while their people are subject to us?”
23|48|So they accused them of falsehood, and they became of those that were caused to perish
23|49|And We gave Moses the Book, in order that they might receive guidance
23|50|And We made the son of Mary and his mother as a sign. We gave them both shelter on a high ground of tranquility, and springs
23|51|O you messengers, enjoy things good and refined, and work righteousness, for I am well acquainted with all that you do
23|52|And indeed this community of yours is a single community, and I am your Lord. Therefore fear Me and no other
23|53|But the people cut off the events of unity between them into sects. Each group rejoices in that which is with it
23|54|But leave them in their confused ignorance for now
23|55|Do they think that because We have granted them abundance of wealth and sons
23|56|That We would funnel them all the good. No, they do not understand
23|57|Indeed those who live in awe for fear of their Lord
23|58|Those who believe in the signs of their Lord
23|59|Those who do not join in worship, partners with their Lord
23|60|And those who give their charity with their hearts full of awe, because they will return to their Lord
23|61|It is these who hasten in every good work, and these are foremost in them
23|62|On no soul do We place a burden greater than she can bear. Before Us is a record that clearly shows the truth. They will never be wronged
23|63|But their hearts are in confused ignorance of this, and there are besides that, deeds of theirs that they will continue to do
23|64|Until We seize them in punishment. Those of them that received the good things of the present behold, they will cry in supplication
23|65|It will be said, “Cry not in supplication this day, for you will certainly not be helped by Us
23|66|“My signs used to be rehearsed to you, but you used to turn back on your heels
23|67|“In arrogance. Speaking wrongfully about it by night.”
23|68|Do they not ponder over the Word, or has anything new come to them that did not come to their ancestors
23|69|Or do they not recognize their messenger, so they reject him
23|70|Or do they say, “He is possessed?” No, he has brought them the truth, but most of them hate the truth
23|71|If the truth had been in accord with their desires, truly the heavens and the earth, and all beings therein would have been in chaos. No, We have sent them advice, but they turn away from the advice
23|72|Or is it that you ask them for some reward? But the reward of your Lord is best. He is the best of those who give sustenance
23|73|But indeed you call them to the straight way
23|74|And indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviating from that way
23|75|If We had mercy on them and removed the distress which is on them, they would obstinately persist in their transgression, wandering in distraction back and forth
23|76|We inflicted punishment on them, but they did not humble themselves to their Lord, nor do they submissively supplicate to Him
23|77|Until We open on them a gate leading to a severe punishment. Then they will be plunged in despair
23|78|It is He Who has created for you the faculties of hearing, sight, feeling, and understanding. Little thanks is it you give
23|79|And He has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him will you be gathered back
23|80|It is He Who gives life and death, and to Him is due the alternation of night and day. Will you not then understand
23|81|Instead, they say things similar to what the people in the past said
23|82|They say, “What, when we die and become dust and bones, could we really be raised up again
23|83|“Such things have been promised to us and to our ancestors before. They are nothing but tales of the ancient.”
23|84|Say, “To whom belongs the earth and all beings therein? Speak, if you know.”
23|85|They will say, “To God.” Say, “Then will you not remember?”
23|86|Say, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the Lord of the throne of glory supreme?”
23|87|They will say, “They belong to God.” Say, “Will you not then be filled with awe?”
23|88|Say, “Who is it in whose hands is the governance of all things, who protects all, but is not protected by any? Speak, if you know.”
23|89|They will say, “It belongs to God.” Say, “Then how are you deluded?”
23|90|We have sent them the truth, but they insist on practicing falsehood
23|91|No son did God have, nor is there any god joined with Him. If there were many gods, behold, each god would have taken away what he had created, and some would have lorded over others. Glory be to God. He is free from the sort of things they attribute to Him
23|92|He knows what is hidden and what is open. Exalted is He above the partners they attribute to Him
23|93|Say, “O my Lord, show me in my lifetime, that which they are warned against
23|94|“But, O my Lord do not put me among the people who do wrong.”
23|95|And We are certainly able to show you that which they are warned against
23|96|Repel evil with that which is best. We are well acquainted with the things they say
23|97|And say, “O my Lord, I seek refuge with You from the suggestions of the devils
23|98|“And I seek refuge with You, O my Lord, lest they should come near me.”
23|99|They will be in falsehood, but when death comes to one of them he says, “O my Lord, send me back to life
23|100|“In order that I may do right by the things I neglected.” By no means, it is only words he says. Before them is a partition until the day they are raised up
23|101|Then when the trumpet is blown, there will be no more relationships between them that day, nor will they ask about each other
23|102|Then those whose balance of good deeds is heavy, they will attain salvation
23|103|But those whose balance is light, they will have lost their souls, in hell will they live
23|104|The fire will burn their faces, and they will grin therein, with their lips displaced
23|105|“Were not My signs rehearsed to you, and did you not treat them as false?”
23|106|They will say, “Our Lord, our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we became a people astray
23|107|“Our Lord, bring us out of this. If ever we return to evil, then will we be wrongdoers indeed.”
23|108|He will say, “Remain in it disgraced, and speak not to Me
23|109|“Some of My servants used to pray ‘Our Lord, we believe, forgive us and have mercy upon us, for You are the best of those who show mercy.”
23|110|“But you treated them with ridicule, so much so, that your ridicule of them made you forget to remember Me, all because you were laughing at them
23|111|“I have rewarded them this day for their patience and constancy. They are indeed the ones who have achieved bliss.”
23|112|He will say, “How long did you stay on earth? Has it been years?”
23|113|They will say, “We stayed a day or part of a day, ask those who keep account.”
23|114|He will say, “You stayed not even close to that, if you only knew
23|115|“Did you then think that We had created you without purpose, and that you would not be brought back to Us for account?”
23|116|Therefore exalted is God, the King, and the Reality. There is no god but Him, the Lord of the throne of honor
23|117|Anyone who invokes besides God, any other god, he has no authority for that, and his reckoning will be exclusively with his Lord, and indeed the unbelievers will fail to succeed
23|118|So say, “O my Lord, grant forgiveness and mercy, for You are the best of those who show mercy.”
24|1|A Surah which We have sent down, and which We have ordained. In it We have sent down clear signs, in order that you may receive advice
24|2|The woman and the man guilty of impermissible sex, flog each of them with a hundred lashes. Let not compassion move you in their case, a matter prescribed by God, if you believe in God and the Last Day, and let a group of the believers witness their punishment
24|3|Let no man guilty of impermissible sex marry a woman, except one similarly guilty, or an unbeliever. Nor let any but this kind of man or an unbeliever, marry such a woman, to the believers this is forbidden
24|4|And those who accuse chaste women, and do not produce four witnesses to support their accusations, flog them with eighty lashes, and reject their evidence ever after, for such people are wicked transgressors
24|5|Unless they repent thereafter and correct their conduct, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
24|6|And for those who accuse their spouses, and have in support, no evidence but their own, their solitary evidence can be taken if they bear witness four times with a promise by God that they are solemnly telling the truth
24|7|And the fifth promise should be that they solemnly invoke the curse of God on themselves if they are lying
24|8|But it would avert the punishment from the wife, if she bears witness four times with a promise by God, that her husband is telling a lie
24|9|And the fifth promise should be that she solemnly invokes the punishment of God on herself if her accuser is telling the truth
24|10|If it were not for God's grace and mercy on you, and if God were not Oft-Returning, Full of Wisdom, you would be ruined indeed
24|11|Those who brought forward the lie are a group among you. Do not think it is bad for you, in the contrary, it is good for you. To every person among them will come the punishment of the harmful deeds that he earned, and to him who took on himself the lead among them, will be a terrible penalty
24|12|Why did the believers, men and women, when you heard of the affair, not put the best light on it in their own minds and say, “This charge is an obvious lie”
24|13|Why did they not bring four witnesses to prove it? When they do not bring witnesses, such men in the sight of God, are guilty
24|14|Were it not for the grace and mercy of God on you, in the present and the hereafter, a terrible penalty would have seized you, because you rushed hastily into this affair
24|15|When you put it on your tongues, and said out of your mouths, things of which you had no knowledge, and you thought it to be a light matter, when it was most serious in the sight of God
24|16|And why did you not say when you heard it?– “It is not right of us to speak of this. Glory be to God, this is a most serious slander.”
24|17|God advises you that you may never repeat such conduct, if you are true believers
24|18|And God makes the signs plain to you, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom
24|19|Those who love to see scandal spread among the believers will have a terrible penalty in this life and in the hereafter. God knows, and you know not
24|20|Were it not for the grace and mercy of God on you and that God is full of kindness and mercy
24|21|O you who believe, follow not Satan’s footsteps. If any follow the footsteps of Satan, he will command what is shameful and wrong, and were it not for the grace and mercy of God on you, not one of you would have ever been purified, but God purifies whom He pleases, and God is the One who hears and knows all things
24|22|Let not those among you who are endued with grace and means, resolve by promise against helping their relatives, those in want, and those who have left their homes in God's cause. Let them forgive and overlook. Do you not wish that God would forgive you? For God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
24|23|Those who slander chaste women, indiscreet but believing, are cursed in this life and in the hereafter, for them is a terrible penalty
24|24|On the day when their tongues, their hands, and their feet will bear witness against them as to their actions
24|25|On that day, God will pay them back all that is due, and they will realize that God is the Truth, He Who makes all things manifest
24|26|Unethical women are for unethical men, and immoral men are for immoral women. And refined women are for refined men, and refined men are for refined women. These are not affected by what people say, for them there is forgiveness and an honorable reward
24|27|O you who believe, enter not houses other than your own, until you have asked permission and greeted those in them. That is best for you, and perhaps you will apply it
24|28|If you find no one in the house, still do not enter until permission is given to you. If you are asked to come back later, then come back later. That makes for greater refinement for yourselves, and God knows well all that you do
24|29|It is no blame on your part to enter abandoned houses which are useful for you, and God has knowledge of what you reveal and what you conceal
24|30|Say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty. That will make for greater refinement for them, and God is well acquainted with all that they do
24|31|And say to the believing women, that they should lower their gaze and guard their modesty, that they should not display their ornaments, except what seems appropriate to her, that they should draw their garments over their bosoms and not display their adornment, except to their husbands, their parents, their husband’s parents, their sons, their husbands’ sons, their brothers or their brothers’ sons, or their sisters’ sons, or their maids, or those whom their right hands possess, or male servants who do not desire them, or small children who are not aware of women’s need for privacy, and that they should not let their feet draw attention to what they conceal of their zeenah. O you believers, turn all together towards God, that you may attain bliss
24|32|Marry those among you who are single, the virtuous ones among you, male and female. If they are poor, God will give them means out of His bounty, for God encompasses all, and He knows all things
24|33|Let those who do not find the means for marriage keep themselves chaste until God gives them means out of His grace, and if those whom your right hand possess ask for a deed in writing to enable them to earn their freedom for a certain sum, give them such a deed if you know any good in them. Yes, and give them something out of the means which God has given to you. And do not force your female captives into prostitution when they desire chastity, in order that you may make a profit in the goods of this life, but if anyone compels them, then indeed because they were compelled, God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
24|34|We have already sent down to you verses making things clear, an illustration from the story of people who passed away before you, and advice for those who are conscious of God
24|35|God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His light is as if there were a niche and within it a lamp. The lamp enclosed in glass. The glass as it were a brilliant star lit from a blessed olive tree, neither from the East nor from the West, whose oil is luminous, though fire does not touch it, light upon light, and God guides whom He wills to His light. God puts forward parables for humanity, and God knows all things
24|36|Lit is such a light in houses which God has permitted to be raised to honor, for the celebration of His name in them. In them He is glorified in the mornings and in the evenings, again and again
24|37|By the people for whom neither a deal nor a sale can divert from the remembrance of God, nor from prayer, nor from paying zakat. Their anxiety is about the day when hearts and eyes will be transformed in a world completely new
24|38|That God may reward them according to the best of their deeds, and add even more for them out of His grace. For God provides for those whom He wills, without measure
24|39|But the unbelievers, their deeds are like a mirage in sandy deserts which the person parched with thirst mistakes for water, until when he comes up to it, he finds it to be nothing, but he finds God with him, and God will pay him his account, and God is swift in taking account
24|40|Or the unbelievers’ state is like the depths of darkness in a vast deep ocean, overwhelmed with billow covered by billow, covered by dark clouds. Depths of darkness, one above another. If a man stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it. For any to whom God does not give light, there is no light
24|41|Do you not see that it is God Whose praises all beings in the heavens and on earth, and the birds of the air with wings outspread? Each one knows its own mode of prayer and praise, and God knows well all that they do
24|42|Yes, to God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth, and to God is the final goal
24|43|Do you not see that God makes the clouds move gently, then joins them together, then make them into a heap? Then you will see rain come out from their center, and He sends down from the sky, mountain masses of clouds which holds hail. He strikes with it whom He pleases and He turns it away from whom He pleases. And the vivid flash of His lightning nearly blinds the sight
24|44|It is God Who alternates the night and the day, indeed in these things are an instructive similitude for those who have vision
24|45|And God has created every animate creature from water. Of them there are some that crawl on their bellies, some that walk on two legs, and some that walk on four. God creates what He wills, for indeed God has power over all things
24|46|We have indeed sent down signs that make things manifest, and God guides whom He wills to a way that is straight
24|47|They say, “We believe in God and in the messenger, and we follow them.” But even after that, some of them turn away. They are not really believers
24|48|When they are summoned to God and His messenger, in order that He may judge between them, behold, some of them refuse to come
24|49|But if the truth is on their side, they come to him promptly
24|50|Is it that there is a disease in their hearts, or do they doubt it, or do they fear that God and His messenger will deal unjustly with them? No, they behave wrongfully
24|51|The answer of the believers, when summoned to God and His messenger, in order that He may judge between them, is no thing other than this, they say, “We hear, and we follow.” It is these who will attain felicity
24|52|It is those who follow God and His messenger, and are conscious of God and do right, who will win in the end
24|53|They swear their strongest promises by God, that if only you would command them, they would leave their homes. Say, “Do not make promises, action would be better, and indeed God is well acquainted with all that you do.”
24|54|Say, “Follow God, and follow the messenger, but if you turn away, he is only responsible for the duty placed on him and you for that placed on you. If you follow him, you will be on right guidance. The messenger’s duty is only to preach the clear message
24|55|God has promised to those among you who believe and work righteous deeds, that He will indeed grant them in the land inheritance of power, as He granted it to those before them, that He will establish in authority, their religion, the one which He has chosen for them, and that He will change their state, after the fear in which they lived, to one of security and peace. ‘They will worship Me and not associate anything with Me.’ If any do not believe after this, they are rebellious and wicked
24|56|So establish prayer and give zakat, and follow the messenger, that you may receive mercy
24|57|Never think that the unbelievers are going to stop God's plan on earth. Their abode is the fire, and it is indeed an evil refuge
24|58|O you who believe, let those whom your right hands possess, and the children among you who have not come of age, ask your permission before they come to your presence on three occasions. Before morning prayer, when you put aside your clothes in the afternoon, and after the night prayer. These are your three times of privacy. Outside of those times, it is not wrong for you or for them, to move about among each other. Thus God makes clear the signs to you, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom
24|59|But when the children among you come of age, let them also ask for permission, as do those senior to them in age. Thus God makes clear His signs to you, for God is full of knowledge and wisdom
24|60|Post menopausal women, who do not desire marriage, there is no blame on them if they put away their garments, provided they do not flaunt their beauty, but it is best for them to be modest, and God is the One Who sees and knows all things
24|61|It is no blame on the blind, nor on those born disabled, nor on one afflicted with illness, nor on yourselves, if you all eat from your own houses, or those of your fathers, or your mothers, or your brothers, or your sisters, or your father’s brothers or your father’s sisters, or your mother’s brothers, or your mother’s sisters, or in houses of which the keys are in your possession, or in the house of a sincere friend of yours. There is no blame on you, whether you eat together or separately, but if you enter houses, greet each other with a greeting blessed and good, as from God. Thus God makes clear the signs to you that you may understand
24|62|Believers are those who believe in God and His messenger. When they are with him on a matter requiring collective action, they do not depart until they have asked to be excused, those who ask to be excused are those who believe in God and His messenger. So when they ask to be excused, to attend to a matter, excuse those whom you will, and ask God for their forgiveness, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
24|63|Do not call the messenger to you, like you call others to you. God knows those of you who slip away under the shelter of some excuse. So let those beware who oppose the messenger’s orders, lest some trial befalls them, or a terrible penalty is inflicted on them
24|64|Undoubtedly, to God belongs what is in the heavens and on earth. Indeed He knows what you intend on doing, and one day they will be brought back to Him, and He will tell them the truth of what they did, for God knows all things
25|1|Blessed is He who sent down the Criterion to His servant, that it might be of use to all the systems of knowledge
25|2|He to Whom belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. He has no son, nor does He have a partner in His control. It is He who created all things, and ordered them in due proportions
25|3|Yet they have taken besides him, gods that can create nothing but are themselves created, that have no control of hurt or good to them, and cannot control death or life, or resurrection
25|4|And the disbelievers say, “This is nothing but a lie which he has fabricated, and others have helped him at it.” In truth, they have put forward an injustice and a lie
25|5|And they say, “Tales of the ancients, has he written, and they are dictated before him morning and evening.”
25|6|Say, “The Quran was sent down by Him who knows the mystery that is in the heavens and the earth, indeed He is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
25|7|And they say, “What sort of a messenger is this, who eats food, and walks through the streets? Why has not an angel been sent down with him to warn us
25|8|“Or why has not a treasure been bestowed on him, or why does he not have a garden for enjoyment?” The wrongdoers say, “You follow none other than a mad man.”
25|9|See what kinds of comparisons they make for you, but they have gone astray, and never will they be able to find a way
25|10|Blessed is He Who, if that were His will, could give you better things than those. He could give you gardens with rivers flowing through them, and palaces
25|11|No, they deny the hour of the judgment to come, but We have prepared a blazing fire for those who deny the Hour
25|12|When it sees them from a place far off, they will hear its fury and its ranging sigh
25|13|And when they are cast and bound together into a constricted place, they will plead to perish then and there
25|14|“This day plead not for a single destruction. Plead to perish oft-repeatedly.”
25|15|Say, “Is that best, or the eternal garden promised to the righteous? For them, that is a reward as well as a goal of attainment
25|16|“For them there will be therein, all that they wish for. They will dwell there forever. A promise from your Lord which you requested.”
25|17|The day He will gather them together, as well as those they worship besides God, He will ask, “Was it you who lead My servants astray, or did they stray from the path themselves?”
25|18|They will say, “Glory to You, it is not proper for us to take for protectors others besides You, but You bestowed on them and their parents, good things in life, until they forgot the message, and became a lost people.”
25|19|Now they have proved you liars concerning what you say, so you cannot avert your penalty nor get help.” And whoever among you does wrong, We will cause him to taste a terrible penalty
25|20|And the messengers whom We sent before you, were all people who ate food and walked through the streets. We have made some of you as a trial for the others. Will you have patience? For God is One who sees all things. 20 (End of Part)
25|21|Those who do not expect the meeting for judgment with Us say, “Why are the angels not sent down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?” Indeed they have an arrogant conceit of themselves, and terrible is the insolence of their impiety
25|22|The day they see the angels, no joy will there be for those who are unethical. And the angels will say, “There is a barrier forbidden to you altogether.”
25|23|And We will turn to whatever deeds they did in this life, and We will make those deeds as blowing dust
25|24|The companions of the garden will be well that day in their abode, and have the best resting place
25|25|The day the heaven will be rent asunder with clouds, and angels will be sent down, descending in ranks
25|26|That day, the control of right and truth will be entirely with God, the Merciful Redeemer. It will be a day of dire difficulty for the disbelievers
25|27|The day that the wrongdoer will bite at his hands and he will say, “Oh, I wish I had gone the way of the messenger
25|28|“Oh, I wish I had never taken that one for a friend
25|29|“He led me astray from the message after it had come to me. Satan is to the human being a traitor.” Then the messenger will say
25|30|“O my Lord, truly my people took this Quran as virtually useless.”
25|31|We made for every messenger an enemy among those who are corrupt, but enough is your Lord to guide and to help
25|32|Those who do not believe say, "Why is not the Quran revealed to him all at once?" It is revealed this way so that We may strengthen your heart with it, and We have vocalized it to you in gradual, moderate, well-arranged stages
25|33|And no question do they bring to you about which We do not reveal to you the truth and the best explanation
25|34|Those who will be gathered to hell while on their faces, they will be in a terrible situation, and as to the path, most astray
25|35|Before this, We sent Moses the Book, and appointed his brother Aaron with him as minister
25|36|And We directed them, “Go both of you to the people who have rejected our signs.” And those people We caused to perish by utter destruction
25|37|And the people of Noah, when they rejected the messengers, We drowned them, and We made them a sign for humanity, and We have prepared for all wrongdoers a terrible penalty
25|38|And also ‘Ad and Thamud, and the companions of the Rass, and many generations between them
25|39|To each We offer parables and similitudes, and to each We brought utter annihilation for their sins
25|40|And the unbelievers indeed must have passed by the town which rained a shower of harm. Did they not then see it with their own eyes? But they do not fear the resurrection
25|41|When they see you, they do not deal with you, except with mockery, “Is this the one whom God has sent as a messenger?”
25|42|“Indeed he would have nearly misled us from our gods, had we not been so devoted to them.” Soon they will know when they see the penalty who it is that is most misled
25|43|See the one who takes for his god his own desires? Could you be a manager of affairs for him
25|44|Or do you think that most of them listen or understand? They are only like livestock. No, they wander even more
25|45|Have you not turned your vision to your Guardian Evolver? See how He prolongs the shadow? If He willed, He could make it stationary. But instead We make the Sun its guide
25|46|Then We draw it in towards Ourselves, and wind it down in gradual stages
25|47|And He is the One who makes the night as a blanket for you, makes sleep as peace and tranquility, and makes the day as it were a revival
25|48|And it is He Who sends the winds as heralds of good news, going before His mercy, and We send down pure water from the sky
25|49|So that with it, We may give life to a dead land, and quench the thirst of things We have created, livestock and human beings, in great numbers
25|50|And We have distributed the water among them, in order that they may praise Us, but most people are averse to everything but ingratitude
25|51|Had it been Our will, We could have sent a warner to the center of every population
25|52|Therefore, do not listen to the unbelievers, but strive against them with the utmost effort
25|53|It is He Who has let free the two bodies of flowing water, one palatable and sweet, the other salty and bitter. Yet He has made a barrier between them, a partition that is forbidden to be passed
25|54|It is He Who has created human beings from water. Then He established relationships of lineage and marriage, for your Lord has power over all things
25|55|Yet they worship besides God things that can neither profit them nor harm them, and the disbeliever is a helper against his own Guardian Evolver
25|56|But We only sent you to give good news and advice
25|57|Say, “No reward do I ask of you for it but this, that each one who wills, take a straight path to his Lord.”
25|58|And put your trust in Him Who lives and dies not, so praise Him, and enough is He to be acquainted with the faults of His servants
25|59|He Who created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between, in six days, and is firmly established on the throne of authority, God the Merciful Benefactor. Then ask about Him, any who are acquainted with those things
25|60|When it is said to them, “Prostrate to the Merciful Benefactor”, they say, “And what is the Merciful Benefactor? And why should we prostrate to that which you advise us?” It increases their flight from the truth
25|61|Blessed is He Who made the constellations in the skies, and placed therein a lamp and a moon casting light
25|62|And it is He Who made the night and the day to follow each other, for those who have the will to praise Him and to show their gratitude
25|63|And the servants of God, the Merciful Benefactor, are those who walk on the earth with humility, and when the ignorant address them they say, “Peace.”
25|64|Those who spend the night in adoration of their Lord, prostrating and standing
25|65|Those who say, “Our Lord, avert from us the punishment of hell, for its punishment is indeed a terrible affliction
25|66|“Terrible indeed is it as a home and as a place to stay.”
25|67|Those who when they give, are neither irresponsible nor miserly, but are balanced between those extremes
25|68|Those who do not invoke with God any other god, nor slay the soul that God has made sacred, except for just cause, and who do not engage in impermissible sex. But any who does this, not only meets punishment
25|69|But the penalty on the Day of Accountability will be doubled for him, and he will dwell therein in disgrace
25|70|Unless he repents, believes, and does good, for God will change the wrong of such people into good, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
25|71|And whoever repents and does right, has truly turned to God with an acceptable conversion
25|72|And those who do not support falsehood. And if they pass by futility, they pass by it with honorable avoidance
25|73|Those who, when they are advised with the signs of their Lord, do not fail to register them, as if they were deaf or blind
25|74|And those who pray, “Our Lord, grant to us spouses and offspring, who will be the comfort of our eyes, and make us leaders of the righteous.”
25|75|Those are the ones who will be rewarded with the highest place in heaven, because of their determination. There they will be met with greetings and peace
25|76|Dwelling therein, and how beautiful a home and place of rest
25|77|Say to the rejecters, “My Lord is not upset by you, if you do not call on Him, but you have indeed rejected Him, so soon will come the inevitable punishment.”
26|1|Taa, Siin, Miim
26|2|These are verses of the Book that makes things clear
26|3|It may be that you stress your soul with grief that they do not become believers
26|4|If it were Our will, We could send down to them from the sky, a sign to which they would bend their necks in humility
26|5|And there has not come to them a reminder from God the Merciful Benefactor, from which they do not turn away
26|6|They have indeed rejected the message. So they will know, soon enough, the truth of what they mocked
26|7|Do they not look at the earth, and how many noble things of all kinds We have produced therein
26|8|Indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|9|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|10|Behold, your Lord called to Moses, “Go to the people of iniquity
26|11|“The People of Pharaoh. Will they not be conscious?”
26|12|He said, “O my Lord, I fear that they will charge me with falsehood
26|13|“My heart will be right, but my speech may not go smoothly, so send Aaron also
26|14|“And further, they have a warrant out on me, and I fear they may kill me.”
26|15|God said, “Never, go both of you with Our signs, We are with you, and will listen to your call
26|16|“So go forward, both of you, to Pharaoh and say, ‘We have been sent by the Lord of all the worlds
26|17|“ ‘Send with us the Children of Israel.’ ”
26|18|Pharaoh said, “Did we not cherish you while you were a child among us, and did you not stay with us for many years of your life
26|19|“And you did the deed which you did, and you were of the rejecters.”
26|20|Moses said, “I did it when I was of those who go astray
26|21|“So I fled from you all when I feared you, but my Lord has since invested me with judgment and wisdom, and appointed me as one of the messengers
26|22|“And this is the favor with which you blame me, that you have enslaved the Children of Israel.”
26|23|Pharaoh said, “And what is the ‘Lord of all the worlds”
26|24|Moses said, “The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all between, if you are to be convinced.”
26|25|Pharaoh said to those around, “Did you not hear what he says?”
26|26|Moses said, “Your Lord, and the Lord of your ancestors from the beginning.”
26|27|Pharaoh said, “Truly your messenger, who has been sent to you, is certainly crazy.”
26|28|Moses said, “Lord of the East and the West, and all between, if you only had sense.”
26|29|Pharaoh said, “If you put forward any god other than me, I will certainly throw you in prison.”
26|30|Moses said, “Even if I showed you something convincing?”
26|31|Pharaoh said, “Show it then, if you tell the truth.”
26|32|So Moses threw his staff, and behold, it was a serpent, plain for all to see
26|33|And he drew out his hand, and behold, it was white to all beholders
26|34|Pharaoh said to the advisors around him, “This is indeed an illusionist well-versed
26|35|“His plan is to get you out of your land by his illusions, so what is it you advise?”
26|36|They said, “Keep him and his brother in suspense for a while, and dispatch to the cities, gatherers to collect–
26|37|“And bring up to you, all of our illusionists well-versed.”
26|38|So the illusionists were gathered together for the appointment of a day well-known
26|39|And the people were asked, “Are you assembled
26|40|“So that we may follow the illusionists’ way if they win?”
26|41|So when the illusionists arrived they said to Pharaoh, “Will there be for us a suitable reward if we win
26|42|He said, “Yes, that and more, for you will in that case be raised to posts nearest to me.”
26|43|Moses said to them, “Throw what you came to throw.”
26|44|So they threw their ropes and their staffs and said, “By the power of Pharaoh, it is we who will certainly win.”
26|45|Then Moses threw his staff, and behold, it instantly swallowed up all the falsehood they faked
26|46|Then the illusionists fell down, prostrate in adoration
26|47|Saying, “We believe in the Lord of all the worlds
26|48|“The Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
26|49|Pharaoh said, “Believe in Him before I give you permission? Surely he is your leader, who has taught you illusions, but soon will you know. “Be sure I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I will cause you all to die on the cross.”
26|50|They said, “No matter, for us, we will but return to our Lord
26|51|“Our only desire is that our Lord will forgive us our faults, so that we may become foremost among the believers.”
26|52|By inspiration we told Moses, “Travel by night with my servants, for surely you will be pursued.”
26|53|Then Pharaoh sent heralds to all the cities
26|54|Saying, “These Israelites are only a small group
26|55|“Though they are raging furiously against us
26|56|“We are still a multitude, amply fore-warned.”
26|57|So We expelled them from gardens, springs
26|58|Treasures, and an honorable position
26|59|And We made the Children of Israel inheritors of such things
26|60|So they pursued them at sunrise
26|61|And when the two groups saw each other, the people of Moses said, “We will surely be overtaken.”
26|62|Moses said, “By no means, for my Lord is with me, and soon He will guide me.”
26|63|Then We told Moses by inspiration, “Strike the sea with your staff.” So it divided, and each separate part became like a huge, solid mass of a mountain
26|64|And We made the other group approach in the same direction
26|65|We delivered Moses and all who were with him
26|66|But We drowned the others
26|67|Indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|68|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|69|And rehearse to them something of Abraham’s story
26|70|Behold, he said to his father and his people, “What do you worship?”
26|71|They said, “We worship idols, and we remain constantly in attendance to them.”
26|72|He said, “Do they listen to you when you call on them
26|73|Or do you good or harm?”
26|74|They said, “No, but we found our fathers doing what we do.”
26|75|He said, “Do you then see what you have been worshipping
26|76|“You and your forefathers before you
26|77|“Indeed they are enemies to me, but not the Lord of the all the systems knowledge
26|78|“He created me, and it is He Who guides me
26|79|“Who gives me food and drink
26|80|“And when I am sick, it is He Who makes me healthy
26|81|“He will cause me to die, and then bring me to life again
26|82|“And who I hope will forgive me my faults on the Day of Accountability
26|83|“O my Lord, bestow wisdom on me, and join me with the righteous
26|84|“Grant me a mention of honor on the tongue of truth among the next generations
26|85|“Make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss
26|86|“Forgive my father, for he is among those astray
26|87|“And let me not be in disgrace on the day they will be resurrected
26|88|“The day when neither wealth nor sons will be of benefit
26|89|“But only he will flourish who brings to God a heart at peace
26|90|“To the righteous, the garden will be brought near
26|91|“And to those straying in evil, the fire will be placed in full view
26|92|“And it will be said to them, ‘where are the gods you worshipped
26|93|“ ‘Besides God? Can they help you or help themselves?’
26|94|“Then they will be thrown headlong into the fire, they and those straying in evil
26|95|“Including the party of Lucifer all together
26|96|“They will say in their conversation
26|97|“ ‘By God, we were truly in manifest error
26|98|“ ‘When we held you as equals with the Lord of the worlds
26|99|“ ‘And no one misguided us except the wrong-doers
26|100|“ ‘Now, we have none to intercede for us
26|101|“ ‘Nor a single friend to feel for us
26|102|“But now, if we only had the chance to return, we will truly be of those who believe.”
26|103|Indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|104|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|105|The People of Noah rejected the messengers
26|106|Behold, their brother Noah said to them, “Will you not be conscious
26|107|“I am to you a trustworthy messenger
26|108|“So be conscious of God, and follow me
26|109|“No reward do I ask of you for it, my reward is only from the Lord of the worlds
26|110|“So be conscious of God, and follow me.”
26|111|They said, “Shall we believe in you when it is the worst who follow you?”
26|112|He said, “What do I know as to what they do
26|113|“Their judgment is only with my Lord, if you can understand
26|114|“I am not one to drive away those who believe
26|115|“I am sent only to advise clearly.”
26|116|They said, “If you do not desist, O Noah, You will be stoned to death.”
26|117|He said, “O my Lord, truly my people have rejected me
26|118|“Judge then, between them and me openly, and save me and the believers who are with me.”
26|119|So We delivered him and those with him, in the Ark filled with all creatures
26|120|Thereafter We drowned those who stayed behind
26|121|Indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|122|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|123|The ‘Ad rejected the messengers
26|124|Behold, their brother Hud said to them, “Will you not be conscious of God
26|125|“I am to you a trustworthy messenger
26|126|“So be conscious of God and follow me
26|127|“No reward do I ask of you for it. My reward is only from the Lord of the worlds
26|128|“Do you build a landmark on every high place to amuse yourselves
26|129|“And do you build for yourselves great edifices, in the hope of living therein forever
26|130|“And when you rule, you rule as dictators
26|131|“Now be conscious of God, and follow me
26|132|“Yes, fear Him Who has bestowed on you freely all that you know
26|133|“He has bestowed on you livestock and children
26|134|“And gardens and springs
26|135|“Truly I fear for you the penalty of a great day.”
26|136|They said, “It is the same to us whether you advise us or are not among our advisors
26|137|“This is no other than a custom of those who came before
26|138|“And we are not the ones to receive pains and penalties.”
26|139|So they rejected him, and We caused them to perish, indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|140|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|141|The Thamud people rejected the messengers
26|142|Behold, their brother Salih said to them, “Will you not be conscious
26|143|“I am to you a trustworthy messenger
26|144|“So be conscious of God, and follow me
26|145|“No reward do I ask of you for it. My reward is only from the Lord of the worlds
26|146|“Will you be left secure, in the enjoyment of all that you have here
26|147|“Gardens and springs
26|148|“And corn-fields and date palms, with spathes near breaking from the weight of the fruit
26|149|“And you carve houses out of mountains, with great skill
26|150|“But be conscious of God and follow me
26|151|“And follow not the influence of those who are extravagant
26|152|“Who do wrong in the land, and do not correct their ways.”
26|153|They said, “You are only one of those possessed
26|154|“You are no more than a human being like us. Or bring us a sign, if you tell the truth.”
26|155|He said, “Here is a she-camel, who has a right to water, as you have a right to water on a day appointed
26|156|“Touch it not with harm, lest the penalty of a great day seize you.”
26|157|Still they hamstrung it, but then they became full of regrets
26|158|And the penalty seized them, indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|159|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|160|The people of Lot rejected the messengers
26|161|Behold, their brother Lot said to them, “Will you not be conscious
26|162|“I am to you a trustworthy messenger
26|163|“So be conscious of God and follow me
26|164|“No reward do I ask of you for it. My reward is only from the Lord of all the worlds
26|165|“Of all the creatures in the world, will you approach males
26|166|“And abandon those whom God has created for you to be your mates? No, you are a people transgressing all limits.”
26|167|They said, “If you do not pull back, O Lot, you will surely be driven out.”
26|168|He said, “I detest your doings.”
26|169|“O my Lord, save me and my family from the things they do.”
26|170|So We delivered him and his family, all–
26|171|Except an old woman who lingered behind
26|172|But the rest We caused to perish
26|173|We rained down on them a shower of brimstone, and terrible was the shower on those who were advised but did not listen
26|174|Indeed in this is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|175|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|176|The Companions of the Wood rejected the messengers
26|177|Behold, Shu’aib said to them, “Will you not be conscious
26|178|“I am to you a trustworthy messenger
26|179|“So be conscious of God and follow me
26|180|“No reward do I ask of you for it. My reward is only from the Lord of all worlds
26|181|“Give just measure, and cause no loss to others by fraud
26|182|“And weigh with scales true and upright
26|183|“And do not withhold things justly due to people, nor do wrong in the land, spreading corruption
26|184|“And be conscious of Him Who created you and Who created the generations before you.”
26|185|They said, “You are merely one of those possessed
26|186|“You are no more than a human being like us, and indeed we think you are a liar
26|187|“Now cause a piece of the universe to fall on us if you are right.”
26|188|He said, “My Lord knows best what you do.”
26|189|But they rejected him. Then came the punishment of a day of the shadow, and that was the penalty of a great day
26|190|Indeed in that is a sign, but most of them do not believe
26|191|And indeed your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|192|Indeed this is a revelation from the Lord of all worlds
26|193|With it came down the spirit of faith and truth
26|194|To your heart and mind, that you may advise
26|195|In the clear Arabic tongue
26|196|Without doubt it is announced in the scripture of former peoples
26|197|Is it not a sign to them, that the learned of the Children of Israel knew it as true
26|198|Had We revealed it to any of the non-Arabs
26|199|And had he recited it to them, they would not have believed in it
26|200|We caused it to enter the hearts of those who are corrupt
26|201|But they will not believe in it, until they see the terrible penalty
26|202|But the penalty will come to them all of a sudden, when they least expect it
26|203|Then they will say, “Shall we have respite?”
26|204|Do they also ask for Our penalty to be hastened on
26|205|Do you see that We let them enjoy this life for a few years
26|206|Yet eventually, there must come to them the punishment which they were promised
26|207|It will not profit them, that they enjoyed this life
26|208|Never did We destroy a population, except those who had been warned
26|209|By way of reminder, and We are never unjust
26|210|No devils have brought down this revelation
26|211|It would neither suit them nor would they be able to produce it
26|212|Indeed they have been removed far from even the chance of hearing it
26|213|So do not call on any other god with God, or you will be among those under the penalty
26|214|And advise your nearest relatives
26|215|And lower your wing to the believers who follow you
26|216|Then if they ignore you say, “I am free from responsibility for what you do.”
26|217|And put your trust in the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
26|218|The One who sees you standing in prayer
26|219|And your movements among those who prostrate themselves
26|220|For it is He Who hears and knows all things
26|221|Shall I inform you, O people, on whom it is that the devils descend
26|222|They descend on every unethical, immoral deceiver
26|223|They repeat what they hear, though most of the deny it
26|224|And of the poets, it is the misguided who follow them
26|225|Do you not see that they roam in every lowland
26|226|And that they say what they do not do
26|227|Except those who believe, work righteousness, engage much in the remembrance of God, and defend themselves after they are unjustly attacked, and soon the assailants will know at what misfortune they will arrive
27|1|Taa, Siin. These are verses of the Quran, a book which makes things clear
27|2|A guide and good news for the believers
27|3|Those who establish prayer, pay their zakat, and have confidence in the hereafter
27|4|As for those who do not believe in the hereafter, We have made their deeds acceptable in their eyes, and so they wander about, lost
27|5|For them a terrible penalty is waiting, and in the hereafter, theirs will be the greatest loss
27|6|As for you, the Quran is bestowed upon you from the presence of One Who is Wise and All Knowing
27|7|Behold, Moses said to his family, “I perceive a fire, soon I will bring you from there some knowledge, or I will bring you a burning brand to light our fuel, so that you may warn yourselves
27|8|But when he came to the fire, a voice was heard, “Blessed are those in the fire and those around it, and glory be to God, Evolver of all the worlds
27|9|“O Moses, indeed I am God, the Exalted in Might, the Wise
27|10|“Now throw your staff.” But when he saw it moving of its own accord, as if it had been a snake, he turned his back in retreat, and did not look back. “O Moses, do not fear, truly in My presence those called as messengers have no fear
27|11|“But if any have done wrong, but have thereafter replaced good in place of wrong, truly I am Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
27|12|“Now put your hand into your chest and it will come out white, free of harm. These are among the nine signs you will take to Pharaoh and his people, for they are a people defiant.”
27|13|But when Our signs came to them which should have opened their eyes they said, “These are illusions manifest.”
27|14|And they rejected those signs unjustly and with arrogance, though their souls were convinced of it. So see what the end of those who acted wrongfully was
27|15|In the past, We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said, “Praise God, Who has favored us above many of His servants who believe.”
27|16|And Solomon was David’s heir. He said, “O you people, we have been taught the speech of birds, and on us has been bestowed a little of all things. This is indeed grace manifest from God.”
27|17|And before Solomon, marched a legion of the jinn, the humans, and the birds, and they were arranged in ranks
27|18|Then, when they came to a valley of the ants, one of the ants said, “O you ants, get into your habitations, lest Solomon and his legion crush you without knowing it.”
27|19|So he smiled, amused at its speech, and he said, “O my Lord, order me that I may be grateful for Your favors which you have bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do righteous deeds that will please You, and admit me, by Your grace, to the ranks of Your righteous servants.”
27|20|And he looked over the birds and he said, “Why do I not see the hoopoe, or is it among the absentees
27|21|“I will certainly punish it with a severe penalty, or cause it to be absent permanently, unless it brings me a clear reason for its absence.”
27|22|But the hoopoe had not gone far. It approached him and said, “I have compassed territory which you have not compassed, and I have come to you from Sheba with certain findings
27|23|“I found there a woman ruling over them and governing them, and she has been provided everything, and she has a magnificent throne
27|24|“I found her and her people worshipping the Sun instead of God. Satan has made their deeds seem pleasing in their eyes which has averted them from the way, so that they can receive no guidance
27|25|“And so that they do not worship God, He Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and Who knows what you conceal and what you reveal
27|26|“God, there is no god but He, Lord of the Throne Supreme.”
27|27|Solomon said, “Soon will we see whether you have told the truth or lied
27|28|“Go with this letter of mine, and deliver it to them. Then draw back from them, and wait to see what answer they return.”
27|29|The queen said, “O you advisors, here addressed to me is a letter worthy of respect
27|30|“It is from Solomon, and it reads as follows
27|31|“Be not arrogant towards me, but come to me as a Muslim.”
27|32|She said, “O you advisors, advise me in this situation of mine, for no decision have I made, except in your presence.”
27|33|They said, “We are endued with strength, and possessors of great might, but the command is with you, so consider what you will command.”
27|34|She said, “Kings indeed, when they enter a country, ravish it, and make the most honorable of its people, its most humiliated, they do indeed
27|35|“But I am going to send him a gift, and wait to see with what answer my messenger returns.”
27|36|So when the messenger came Solomon said, “You give me riches? But that which God has given me is better than that which He has given you. No, it is you who rejoice in your gift
27|37|“Go back to them, and be sure we will come to them with such legions as they will never be able to resist. We will expel them from there in disgrace, and they will feel humbled.”
27|38|He said to his own people, “O advisors which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me as Muslim?”
27|39|Said a strong one of the jinn, “I will bring it to you before you stand from your place. Indeed I have full strength for the purpose, and can be trusted.”
27|40|Said one who had knowledge of the Book, “I will bring it to you before your sight can return to you.” Then when Solomon saw it placed before him he said, “This is allowed by my Lord, to make evident whether or not I will reject it, but if any is grateful, indeed his gratitude is for his own self. But if any rejects it, still my Lord is rich and noble, and truly my Lord is free of all needs, supreme in honor.”
27|41|He said, “Make her throne uncomfortable, we will see whether she is guided to the truth or is one of those who receive no guidance.”
27|42|So when she arrived, she was asked, “Is this your throne?” She said, “It was just like this, but knowledge was bestowed on us in advance of this, and we are Muslims.”
27|43|And he diverted her from the worship of others besides God, for she was from a people who had rejected it
27|44|She was asked to enter the lofty palace, but when she saw it, she thought it was a pool of water, and exposed her legs. He said, “This is only a palace paved smooth with glass.” She said, “My Lord, I have indeed wronged my soul, and I submit with Solomon, to the Guardian Evolver of all systems of knowledge.”
27|45|We sent to the Thamud their brother Salih saying, “Serve God.” But behold, they became two factions arguing with each other
27|46|He said, “O my people, why do you hasten on harm before good? Why do you not ask God for forgiveness, that you may receive mercy
27|47|They said, “A bad omen do we predict from you and those who are with you.” He said, “Your bad omen is with God. Yes, you are a people being tested.”
27|48|There were in the city nine people of a family, who do wrong in the land, and would not reform
27|49|They said, “Swear a mutual promise by God that we will make a secret night attack on him and his people, and that we will then say to his heir when he seeks vengeance, ‘We were not present at the slaughter of his people, and we are indeed telling the truth.’ ”
27|50|They plotted and planned, but We too planned, even while they perceived it not
27|51|So see what the end of their plot was, We caused them and their people to perish, all of them
27|52|Now their houses were in utter ruin, because they did wrong, indeed in this is a sign for people of knowledge
27|53|And We saved those who believed and practiced righteousness
27|54|We also sent Lot as a prophet. Behold, he said to his people, “Do you do what is shameful with you eyes wide open
27|55|Are you really attracted to men more than, in addition to, or instead of women?" No, but you are unaware
27|56|But his people gave no other answer but this, they said, “Drive out the followers of Lot from your city, these are indeed men who want to be uncorrupted and refined.”
27|57|But We saved him and his family, except his wife, We knew that she would be of those who lagged behind
27|58|And We rained down on them a shower of brimstone, and harmful was the shower on those who were advised but did not listen
27|59|Say, praise be to God, and peace on His servants whom He has chosen for His message. Who is better, God or the false gods they associate with Him? 59 (End of Part)
27|60|Or Who has created the heavens and the earth? And Who sends you down rain from the sky? Yes, with it We cause to grow well-planted orchards full of beauty and pleasure. It is not in your power to cause the growth of the trees in them. Can there be another god besides God? No, still there are people who stray from justice
27|61|And Who has made the earth comfortable to live on, made rivers in it, set mountains immovable, and made a separating partition between the two bodies of ?owing water? Can there be another god besides God? No, but most of them know not
27|62|And Who listens to the soul distressed when it calls on Him? And Who relieves its suffering, and makes you inheritors of the earth? Can there be another god besides God? But little it is that you remember
27|63|And Who guides you through the depths of darkness on land and sea? And Who sends the winds as heralds of good news, going before His mercy? Can there be another god besides God? High is God above what they associate with Him
27|64|And Who originates creation, then repeats it, and Who gives you sustenance from heaven and earth? Can there be another god besides God? Say, “Bring forward your argument if you are telling the truth.”
27|65|Say, none in outer-space nor on earth, except God, knows what is hidden, nor can they know when they will be raised up
27|66|Nor can their knowledge comprehend the hereafter. No, they are in doubt. No, they are blind to it
27|67|The unbelievers say, “What, when we become dust, we and our ancestors, will we really be raised from the dead
27|68|“Indeed we were promised this, as well as our ancestors before us. But these are nothing but tales of the ancient.”
27|69|Say, “Go through the earth and see what the end of those guilty of wrongdoing was.”
27|70|But do not grieve over them, nor distress yourself because of their plans
27|71|They also say, “When will this promise come if you are truthful?”
27|72|Say, “It may be that some of the events which you wish to hasten are close.”
27|73|But indeed your Lord is full of grace to humanity, yet most of them are ungrateful
27|74|And indeed your Lord knows all that their hearts hide as well as all that they reveal
27|75|Nor is anything hidden in heaven or on earth, except what is in a clear record
27|76|Indeed this Quran explains to the Children of Israel much of the matters which they disagree
27|77|And indeed it is a guide and a mercy to those who believe
27|78|Indeed your Lord will decide between them by His decree, and He is Exalted in Might, All Knowing
27|79|So put your trust in God, for you are on the path of manifest truth
27|80|Truly you cannot cause the dead to listen, nor can you cause the deaf to hear the call, as they turn back in retreat
27|81|Nor can you be a guide to the blind, to prevent them from straying. Only those will listen who believe in Our signs, and they should all be considered muslim
27|82|And when the word is proven against them, we will produce from the earth a creature to face them. He will speak to them because humanity did not believe with assurance in Our signs
27|83|One day We will gather together from every people, a group of those who reject our signs, and they will be kept in ranks
27|84|Until they come, and it will be said to them, “Did you reject My signs, though you comprehended them not, or what was it you did?”
27|85|And the word will be fulfilled against them, because of their wrongdoing, and they will be unable to speak
27|86|Do they not see that We have made the night for them to rest in, and the day to give them energy? Indeed in this are signs for any people who believe
27|87|And the day that the trumpet will be sounded, terrified will be those who are in the sky, and those who are on earth, except who God wills to save, and all will come to His presence as beings conscious of their vulnerabilities
27|88|You see the mountains and you think of them as immovable, but they will pass away as the clouds pass away. Such is the work of God, He Who manages all things, for He is well acquainted with all that you do
27|89|Whoever comes with good, good will be waiting for him, and he will be secure from terror that day
27|90|And if any does harm, their faces will be pushed down into the fire. Do you receive a reward other than that which you have earned by your deeds?”
27|91|For me, I have been asked to serve the Guardian Evolver of this city, He Who has purified it, and to Whom belong all things, and I am asked to be of those who bow as Muslims
27|92|And I recite the Quran. And if any accept guidance, they do it for the good of their own souls, and if any stray say, “I am only a warner.”
27|93|And say, “Praise God, He Who will soon show you His signs, so that you will know them,” and your Lord is not unmindful of what you do
28|1|Taa, Siin, Miim
28|2|These are verses of the Book that makes things clear
28|3|We rehearse to you some of the story of Moses and Pharaoh in truth for people who believe
28|4|Truly Pharaoh exalted himself in the land and broke its people into sects, oppressing a small group among them. Their sons he killed, but he kept alive their females, and he has indeed committed crimes against humanity
28|5|And We wished to be gracious to those who were being oppressed in the land, to make them leaders, and to make them heirs
28|6|To establish them in the land, and to show Pharaoh, Haman, and the followers at their hands, the very things against which they were taking precautions
28|7|So We sent this inspiration to the mother of Moses, “Suckle your child, but when you fear for him, cast him into the river, but fear not nor grieve, for We will return him to you, and We will make him one of Our messengers.”
28|8|Then the people of Pharaoh took him out of the river. It was intended that Moses should be to them an adversary, and a cause of sorrow for Pharaoh, Haman, and all their followers were people who did harmful deeds
28|9|The wife of Pharaoh said, “A comfort to the eye, for me and for you. Do not slay him, it may be that he will be useful to us, or we may take him as a son.” But they were unaware of what they were doing
28|10|But then came a void in the heart of the mother of Moses. She would have disclosed his identity had We not strengthened her heart with faith, so that she would remain a believer
28|11|And she said to the sister of Moses, “Follow him.” So the sister watched him in the guise of a stranger, so they would not know
28|12|And We ordained that he would refuse to suckle at first, until his sister approached them and said, “Shall I point out to you a people of a house that will nourish and raise him for you, and who will be caring to him?”
28|13|So We returned him to his mother, that her eye might be comforted, that she would not grieve, and that she would know that the promise of God is true, but most of them do not understand
28|14|When he reached full age, and was firmly established, We bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge, this is how We reward those who do right
28|15|And he entered the city at a time when its people were not watching, and he found there two people fighting, one from his sect, and the other from the sect of his enemy. Now the person of his sect appealed to him against his enemy, and Moses struck him with his fist and made an end to him. He said, “This is a work of the evil Satan, for he is an enemy that clearly misleads.”
28|16|He prayed, “O my Lord, I have indeed wronged my soul. So forgive me, for my own sake.” So God forgave him, for He is the Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
28|17|He said, “Lord, because You have bestowed Your grace on me, never will I be a help to those who do wrong.”
28|18|In the morning he was in the city looking around in a state of fear when behold, the person who had the day before sought his help called aloud for his help again. Moses said to him, “Indeed you are clearly a combative person.”
28|19|Then when he decided to strike the person who was an enemy to both of them, that person said, “O Moses, is it your intention to slay me as you slew a person yesterday? Your intention is nothing other than to become a powerful, violent person in the land, and not to be one who sets things right.”
28|20|Then there came a person running from the farthest end of the city. He said, “O Moses, the leaders are meeting concerning whether or not to slay you, so leave, I give you sincere advice.”
28|21|He then left from there, looking around in a state of fear. He prayed, “O my Lord, save me from the people given to wrongdoing.”
28|22|Then when he turned his face towards the land of Madyan he said, “I hope that my Lord will show me the smooth path.”
28|23|And when he arrived at the watering-place in Madyan, he found there a group of men watering their flocks, and besides them he found two ladies who were keeping back their flocks. He said, “What is the problem?” They said, “We cannot water our flocks until the shepherds move their flocks, for our father is a very old man.”
28|24|So he watered their flocks for them, then he went back to the shade and said, "O my Lord, indeed I am in desperate need of any good that You can send me.”
28|25|Afterward, one of the damsels came back to him walking shyly. She said, “My father invites you that he may reward you for having watered our flocks for us.” So when he came to him and told the story he said, “Fear not, you escaped from people of wrongdoing.”
28|26|Said one of them, “O my father, hire him, truly the best of people for you to employ is one of integrity.”
28|27|He said, “I intend to wed one of my daughters to you on condition that you work for me for eight years, but if you complete ten years, it will be a favor from you, but I intend not to place you under any difficulty. Indeed you will find me, God willing, one of the righteous.”
28|28|He said, “Let there be an agreement between you and me, that whichever of the two terms I fulfill let there be no resentment toward me, and God is a witness to what we say.”
28|29|So when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was traveling with his family, he perceived a fire in the direction of Mount Tur. He said to his family, “Wait, I perceive a fire. I hope to bring you some knowledge from there, or a torch, that you may warm yourselves.”
28|30|But when he came to the fire, a voice was heard from the right bank of the valley, from a tree in hallowed ground, “O Moses, indeed I am God, Lord of all the worlds
28|31|“Now throw your staff.” But when he saw it moving of its own accord, as if it had been a snake, he turned back in retreat, and would not immediately return. “O Moses,” it was said, “Come close, and fear not, for you are of those who are secure
28|32|“Put your hand in your chest and it will come out white without harm, and draw your hand close to your side to guard against fear. Those are two pieces of evidence from your Lord to Pharaoh and his advisors, for truly they are people rebellious and wicked.”
28|33|He said, “O my Lord, I have slain a person among them, so I fear they will try to slay me
28|34|“And my brother Aaron, he is more eloquent in speech than I, so send him with me as a helper, to edify and strengthen me, for I fear that they may accuse me of falsehood.”
28|35|He said, “We will certainly strengthen your arm through your brother, and invest you both with authority, so they will not be able to touch you. With Our sign you will triumph, you two as well as those who follow you.”
28|36|When Moses came to them with Our clear signs they said, “This is nothing but creative illusions. But never did we hear of this among our ancestors.”
28|37|Moses said, “My Lord knows best who it is that comes with guidance from Him, and whose end will be best in the hereafter. Certainly the wrongdoers will not prosper.”
28|38|Pharaoh said, “O advisers, no god do I know for you but myself. Therefore, O Haman, light me a kiln to bake bricks out of clay, and build me a lofty palace, that I may mount up to the God of Moses, but as far as I am concerned, I think Moses is a liar.”
28|39|And he was arrogant and insolent in the land beyond reason, He and his army. They thought that they would not have to return to Us
28|40|So We seized him and his army, and We flung them into the sea. Now you see what the end of those who did wrong was
28|41|And we made them leaders inviting to the fire, and on the Day of Accountability no help will they find
28|42|In the present We made a curse to follow them, and on the Day of Accountability they will be among the despised
28|43|We revealed the Book to Moses, after We had caused the earlier generations to perish, in order to give to humanity insight, and also guidance and mercy, that they might receive advice
28|44|You were not on the western side when We decreed the Commandments to Moses, nor were you a witness to those events
28|45|But We raised up new generations, and extended life for them, and you were not a dweller among the people of Madyan, rehearsing Our signs to them, but it is We Who send messengers with inspiration
28|46|Nor were you at the side of the Mountain of Tur when we called to Moses. But you are sent as a mercy from your Lord, to give warning to a people to whom no warner had come before you, in order that they may receive advice
28|47|If We had not sent you to them, and a calamity had struck them for what their hands have sent forth they might say, “Our Lord, why did You not send us a messenger? We would have then followed Your signs and been among those who believe.”
28|48|But when the truth has come to them from Us they say, “Why are signs not sent to him, like those which were sent to Moses?” Did they not reject the signs which were given to Moses? They say, “Two kinds of illusions, each assisting the other.” And they say, “As for us, we reject all such things.”
28|49|Say, “Then bring a book from God which is a better guide than either of them, that I may follow it. Do it, if you are right.”
28|50|But if they do not come to you, know that they only follow their desires, and who is more astray than one who follows his desires, devoid of guidance from God, for God does not guide people given to wrongdoing
28|51|Now We have caused the word to reach them, in order that they may receive advice
28|52|Those to whom We sent the Bible before this, they believe in it
28|53|And when it is recited to them they say, “We believe in it, for it is the truth from our Lord. Indeed we were Muslims even before this
28|54|Twice they will be given their reward, because they have persevered, because they deflect harm with good, and because they give out of what We have given them
28|55|And when they hear vain talk, they turn away from it and say, “To us our deeds, and to you yours, peace be unto you. We do not seek ignorance.”
28|56|It is true that you will not be able to guide every one you love, but God guides whom He wills and He knows best those who receive guidance
28|57|They say, “If we were to follow the guidance with you, we would be snatched away from our land.” Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary to which are brought as tribute, fruits of all kinds, a provision from Ourselves? But most of them do not understand
28|58|And how many populations have We caused to perish that exulted in their life of ease and plenty, now their dwellings after them are deserted, all but a few, and We are their heirs
28|59|Nor was your Lord the One to destroy a population until He had sent to its center a messenger rehearsing to them Our signs, nor will We destroy a population, until its communities practice injustice
28|60|The things that you are given are but the conveniences of this life and the glitter of it, but that which is with God is better and more enduring, will you not then be wise
28|61|Are these two alike? One to whom We have made an excellent promise, and who will reach his fulfillment, and one to whom We have given the good things of this life, but who on the Day of Accountability is to be among those brought up for punishment
28|62|That day God will call to them and say, “Where are My partners that you imagined as such?”
28|63|Those against whom the charge will be proven will say, “Our Lord, these are the ones whom we led astray. We led them astray as we were astray ourselves. We free ourselves from them in Your presence. It was not us they worshipped.”
28|64|It will be said to them, “Call upon your partners for help,” they will call upon them, but they will not listen to them, and they will see the penalty before them, they will wish, "If only they had been open to guidance.”
28|65|That day God will call to them and say, “What was the answer you gave to the messengers?”
28|66|Then the whole story that day will seem obscure to them, like light to the blind, and they will not even be able to question each other
28|67|But any who in this life had repented, believed, and worked righteousness, will have hopes to be among those who achieve salvation
28|68|Your Lord creates and chooses as He pleases. No choice do they have. Glory be to God, and far is He above the partners they ascribe to Him
28|69|And your Lord knows all that their hearts conceal and all that they reveal
28|70|And He is God. There is no god but He. To Him is the praise, at the first and at the last, for Him is the command, and to Him will you all be brought back
28|71|Say, do you see that if God were to make the night perpetual over you until the Day of Accountability, what god is there, other than God, that can give you light? Will you not then listen
28|72|Say, do you see that if God were to make the day perpetual over you until the Day of Accountability, what god is there, other than God, that can give you a night in which you can rest? Will you not then see
28|73|It is out of His mercy that He has made for you night and day, that you may rest therein, and that you may seek his grace, in order that you may be grateful
28|74|The day that He will call on them, He will say, “Where are my partners whom you imagined to be such?”
28|75|And from each people will We draw a witness, and We will say, “Produce your proof.” Then they will know that the truth is for God, and the lies which they invented, will leave them in the lurch
28|76|Qarun was indeed of the people of Moses, but he acted insolently towards them. Such were the treasure We bestowed on him, and its keys would have been a burden even to a body of strong men. Behold, his people said to him, “Exult not, for God does not love those who exult in riches
28|77|“But seek with the wealth which God has bestowed on you, the home of the hereafter, but do not forget your share in the present, but do good, as God has been good to you, and do not seek opportunities to do wrong in the land, for God does not love those who do wrong.”
28|78|He said, “This has been given to me because of what I know.” Did he not know that God had caused to perish before him, entire generations which were superior to him in strength and greater in the riches they had accumulated? But the wrong-doers are not called immediately to account for their sins
28|79|So he went to his people with the pride of his worldly glitter. Said those whose goal is the life of the present, “Oh I wish we had the like of what Qarun has, he is truly a master of good fortune.”
28|80|But those who had been granted true knowledge said, “Unfortunately for you, the reward of God in the hereafter is best for those who believe and work righteousness, but none will attain this, except those who persevere in good.”
28|81|Then We caused the earth to swallow him up, and his house, and he had not the least little group to help him against God, nor could he defend himself
28|82|And those who had envied his position the day before began to say, “It is indeed God Who enlarges the provisions or restricts them for any of His servants He pleases. Had it not been that God was gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us up. Indeed those who reject God will never prosper.”
28|83|The home of the hereafter, We will give it to those who do not intend haughtiness or wrong on earth, and the end is best for the righteous
28|84|If any does right, the reward for him is better than his deed, but if any does wrong, the doers of wrong are only punished to the extent of what they do
28|85|Indeed He Who ordained the Quran for you, will bring you back to the place of return. Say, “My Lord knows best who it is who brings true guidance, and who is in manifest error.”
28|86|And you were not expecting that the Book would be sent to you, except as a mercy from your Lord. Thus do not be a support to the rejecters
28|87|And let nothing keep you back from the signs of God after they have been revealed to you, and invite the people to your Lord, and be not of the company of those who join gods with God
28|88|And call not on another god, besides God. There is no god but He. Everything that exists will perish, except His Face. To Him belongs the command, and to Him will you all be brought back
29|1|Alif, Laam, Miim
29|2|Do the people think that they will be left alone by saying, “We believe,” and not be tested
29|3|We tested those before them, and God will certainly make known those who are truthful from those who are liars
29|4|Do those who do wrong think that they will get the better of Us? Poor is their judgment
29|5|For those whose hopes are in the meeting with God in the hereafter, let them strive, for the term appointed by God is surely coming and He hears and knows all things
29|6|And if any strive, they do so for their own souls, for God is free of all needs from all creation
29|7|Those who believe and do righteous deeds, from them We will remove all sin that may be in them, and We will reward them according to the best of their deeds
29|8|We have enjoined on humanity kindness to parents, but if either of them tries to force you to join in worship anything with Me of which you do not know, do not follow them. You all have to return to me, and I will tell you the truth of all that you did
29|9|And those who believe and work righteous deeds, We will admit them to the company of the righteous
29|10|Then there are some people who say, “We believe in God.” But when they suffer affliction in the cause of God, they perceive the human inflicted problem as if it were the punishment of God, and if help comes to you from your Lord, they are sure to say, “We were with you.” Does God not know best all that is in the heart of all creation
29|11|And God most certainly knows those who believe, and just as certainly, those who are hypocrites
29|12|And the unbelievers say to those who believe, “Follow our way, and we will bear the consequences of your faults.” Never in the least will they bear their consequences, in fact they are liars
29|13|They will however, bear their own burdens, and share the burdens of others, and on the Day of Accountability they will be called to account for their lies
29|14|Indeed We sent Noah to his people, and he stayed among them a thousand years less fifty, but the flood overwhelmed them while they persisted in harmful deeds
29|15|But We saved him and the companions of the Ark, and We made the Ark a sign for all people
29|16|And We also saved Abraham. Behold, he said to his people, “Serve God, and be conscious of Him. That will be best for you, if you understand
29|17|“For you worship idols besides God, and you create falsehood. The things that you worship besides God has no power to give you sustenance. So seek sustenance from God, serve Him, and be grateful to Him. To Him will be your return
29|18|“And if you reject the message, so did generations before you, and the duty of the messenger is only to preach publicly and clearly.”
29|19|Do they not see how God originates creation then repeats it? Truly that is easy for God
29|20|Say, “Travel through the earth and see how God originated creation, as will God produce a later creation, for God has power over all things
29|21|“He punishes whom He pleases, and He grants mercy to whom He pleases, and toward Him are you turned
29|22|“Neither on earth nor in heaven will you be able to flee from, or sabotage his plan, nor have you besides God, any protector or helper.”
29|23|Those who reject the signs of God and the meeting with Him in the hereafter, and those who despair of My mercy, they will suffer a most terrible penalty
29|24|So nothing was the answer of Abraham’s people except that they said, “Slay him, or burn him.” But God saved him from the fire. Indeed in this are signs for people who believe
29|25|And he said, “You have taken for worship idols besides God, out of mutual love and regard between yourselves in this life, but on the Day of Accountability you will disown and curse each other, and your abode will be the ?re, and you will have none to help you.”
29|26|But Lot had faith in Him. He said, “I will leave home for the sake of my Lord, for He is Exalted in Might, and Wise.”
29|27|And We gave him Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and ordained among his progeny the prophetic office and revelation, and We granted him his reward in this life, and he was in the hereafter of the company of the righteous
29|28|And Lot, when he said to his people, “You commit lewdness, such as no people in creation committed before you
29|29|“Do you indeed approach men, and cut off the lineage? And practice sin, even in your councils?” But his people gave no answer except this, “Bring us the punishment of God if you tell the truth.”
29|30|He said, “O my Lord, help me against the people who do wrong.”
29|31|When Our messengers came to Abraham with the good news they said, “We are indeed going to destroy the people of this township, for truly they are addicted to sin.”
29|32|He said, “But Lot is there.” They said, “We know full well who is there. We will certainly save him and his following, except his wife, she is of those who lag behind.”
29|33|And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was grieved on their account, and felt powerless to protect them, but they said, “Fear not, nor grieve, we are here to save you and your following, except your wife, she is of those who lag behind
29|34|“For we are going to bring down on the people of this township a punishment from heaven, because they have been totally rebellious.”
29|35|And We have left of it an evident sign for any people who care to understand
29|36|To the Madyan people We sent their brother Shu’aib, then he said, “O my people, serve God, and anticipate the Last Day, nor do wrong on the earth, as those do who are corrupt.”
29|37|But they rejected him, then the mighty blast seized them, and they lay prostrate in their homes
29|38|Remember also the ‘Ad and the Thamud people. Clearly there, their fate will appear to you from the traces of their buildings. Satan made their deeds alluring to them, and kept them back from the path, though they were gifted with intelligence and skill
29|39|Remember also Qarun, Pharaoh, and Haman. There came to them Moses with clear signs, but they behaved with insolence on the earth, yet they could not overreach Us
29|40|Each one of them We seized for their sin. Against some of them, We sent a violent tornado with showers of stones, some were caught by a mighty blast, some We caused the earth to swallow up, and some We drowned in the waters. It was not God Who wronged them, they wronged their own souls
29|41|The parable of those who take protectors other than God, is that of the spider who builds for itself a house, but truly the flimsiest of houses is the spider’s house, if they only knew
29|42|Indeed God knows of anything whatsoever they call upon besides Him, and He is Exalted in Power, the Wise
29|43|And these are the parables We set forth for humanity, but only those with knowledge understand them
29|44|God created the heavens and the earth in true proportions, indeed in that is a sign for those who believe. 44 (End of Part)
29|45|Recite what is sent of the Book by inspiration to you, and establish prayer, for prayer restrains from shameful and harmful deeds, and remembering God is the greatest thing, and God knows the deeds that you do
29|46|And do not dispute with the people of the Book, except with what is best, unless it is with those of them who inflict wrong. Instead say, “We believe in the revelation which has come down to us, and in that which came down to you. Our God and your God is one, and it is to Him we bow.”
29|47|And We have sent down the Book to you. And those we gave the Book believe in it, as do some of these, and none but unbelievers reject our signs
29|48|And you were not able to recite a book before this, nor are you able to transcribe it with your right hand. In that case indeed, they would have doubted
29|49|No, here are signs self-evident in the hearts of those endowed with knowledge, and none but the unjust reject Our signs
29|50|And they say, “Why are not signs sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, “The signs are indeed with God, and I am indeed a clear warner.”
29|51|And is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the Book that is rehearsed to them? Indeed, in it is a mercy and a reminder to those who believe
29|52|Say, “Enough is God for a witness between you and me. He knows what is in the heavens and on earth, and it is those who believe in vanities and reject God who will perish
29|53|They ask you to hasten the punishment for them. Had it not been for a term of respite appointed, the punishment would certainly have come to them, and it will certainly reach them all of a sudden, when they least expect it
29|54|They ask you to hasten on the punishment, but indeed hell will encompass the rejecters of faith
29|55|On the day that the punishment will cover them from above them and from below them, and a voice will say, “Taste the fruits of your deeds.”
29|56|O My servants who believe, truly spacious is My earth, therefore serve Me
29|57|Every soul will have a taste of death. In the end, to Us will you all be brought back
29|58|But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, to them We will give a home in heaven, lofty mansions beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. An excellent reward for the workers
29|59|Those who persevere in patience, and put their trust in their Lord
29|60|How many are the creatures that do not carry their own sustenance? It is God who feeds them and you, for He hears and He knows
29|61|If indeed you ask them who has created the heavens and the earth, and ordered the Sun and the Moon, they will certainly reply, “God.” How are they then deluded
29|62|God increases the sustenance of whichever of His servants He pleases, and He saves for him, for God has full knowledge of all things
29|63|And if indeed you ask them who it is that sends down rain from the sky, and gives life with it to the earth after its death, they will certainly reply, “God.” Say, “Praise belongs to God.” But most of them do not understand
29|64|What is the life of the present but entertainment and play? But indeed the home in the hereafter, that is life indeed, if they only knew
29|65|Now, if they embark on a vessel, they call on God, making their devotion sincerely and exclusively to Him, but once He has delivered them safely to land behold, they give a share of their worship to others
29|66|Denying what We have given them, but let them enjoy it, because soon they will know
29|67|Do they not then see that We have made a secure sanctuary, and that people are being snatched away from all around them? Then, do they believe in falsehood, and reject God
29|68|And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against God or rejects the truth when it reaches him? Is there not a home in hell for those who do not believe
29|69|And those who strive in Our cause, We will certainly guide them to our paths, for indeed God is with those who do right
30|1|Alif, Laam, Miim
30|2|The Roman Empire has been defeated
30|3|In a land close by. But they, even after this defeat of theirs, will soon be victorious
30|4|Within a few years. With God is the decision, in the past and in the future. On that day will the believers rejoice
30|5|With the help of God. He helps whom He wills, and He is Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
30|6|It is the promise of God. Never does God depart from His promise, but most people do not understand
30|7|They know only the outer things in the life of the present, but of the end of things they are ignorant
30|8|Do they not reflect in their own minds? God has not created the heavens and the earth, and all between them, except for just ends, and for a term appointed. Yet there are truly many among people who deny the meeting with their Lord
30|9|Do they not travel through the earth, and see what the end of those before them was? They were superior to them in strength. They tilled the soil and populated it in greater numbers than these have. There came to them their messengers with guidance which they rejected to their own peril. It was not God Who wronged them, but they wronged their own souls
30|10|In the end, for those who did harm, is harm, because they rejected the signs of God, and made mockery of them
30|11|It is God Who begins the process of creation then repeats it, then you will be brought back to Him
30|12|On the day that the Hour will be established, the guilty will be in despair
30|13|No intercessor will they have among their partners, and they will themselves reject their partners
30|14|On the day the hour will be established, that day all people will be sorted out
30|15|Then those who have believed and did righteous deeds will be happy in a meadow of pleasure
30|16|And those who have rejected faith and falsely denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter, they will be brought forth to punishment
30|17|So glory be to God, when you reach evening, and when you rise in the morning
30|18|Yes, to Him belongs the praise, in the heavens and on earth, and in the afternoon, and at night
30|19|It is He Who brings out the living from the dead, and brings out the dead from the living, and Who gives life to the earth after it is dead, and you will be brought out from the dead
30|20|Among His signs is this, that He created you from dust, and then behold, you are human beings scattered far and wide
30|21|And among His signs is this, that He created for you mates from among yourselves, that you may live in tranquility with them, and He has put affection and mercy between your hearts, indeed in that are signs for those who reflect
30|22|And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the variations in your languages and your colors, indeed in that are signs for those who know
30|23|And among His signs is the sleep that you take by night and by day, and the quest that you make for livelihood out of His bounty, indeed in those are signs for those who listen
30|24|And among His signs is that He shows you the lightning, both by way of fear and of hope, and He sends down rain from the sky, and with it gives life to the earth after it is dead, indeed in that are signs for those who are wise
30|25|And among His signs is this, that heaven and earth stand by His command. Then when He calls you by a single call from the earth, behold, you come forth immediately
30|26|To Him belongs every being that is in the heavens and on earth. All are devoutly obedient to Him
30|27|It is He Who begins the process of creation, and then repeats it, and for Him it is most easy. To Him belong the loftiest descriptions in the heavens and the earth, for He is Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom
30|28|He gives to you a similitude from your own experience. Do you have partners among those whom your right hands possess, to share as equals in the wealth We have bestowed on you? Do you fear them as you fear each other? This is how we explain the signs in detail to a people who understand
30|29|No, the wrongdoers merely follow their own lusts, being devoid of knowledge, but who will guide those whom God leaves astray? To them there will be no helpers
30|30|So set your face steadily and truly to the upright, natural way. Establish what God has made according to the pattern on which He has made humanity. Let there be no change in that work done by God. That is the standard religion, but most among humanity do not understand
30|31|Turn back in repentance to Him, and be conscious of Him. Establish prayer, and be not among those who join gods with God
30|32|Or those who split up their religion, and become sects, each group rejoicing in that which they have
30|33|When trouble touches people, they cry to their Lord, turning back to Him in repentance, but when He gives them a taste of mercy from Himself behold, some of them pay part-worship to other god’s besides their Lord
30|34|As if to show their ingratitude for the favors We have bestowed on them. Then enjoy your brief day, but soon will you know your foolishness
30|35|Or have We sent down authority to them that points out to them the things to which they pay part-worship
30|36|When We give people a taste of mercy, they exult at it, and when some harm afflicts them because of what their own hands have sent forth behold, they are in despair
30|37|Do they not see that God enlarges provision and restricts it for whomever He pleases? Indeed in that are signs for those who believe
30|38|So give what is due to family, the needy, and to displaced persons. That is best for those who seek the Countenance of God, and it is these who will flourish
30|39|That which you lay out for increase through the property of other people, will have no increase with God, but that which you lay out for charity, seeking the Countenance of God will increase. It is these who will get a reward multiplied
30|40|It is God Who has created you. Further, He has provided for your sustenance, then He will cause you to die, and again He will give you life. Are there any of your partners that can do any one of these things? Glory be to Him and high is He above the partners they attribute to Him
30|41|Corruption has appeared on land and sea because of that which the hands of humanity have earned, that God may give them a taste of some of their deeds, in order that they may turn back from evil
30|42|Say, “Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those before you. Most of them worshipped others besides God.”
30|43|But set your face to the upright way of life, before there comes from God the day that there is no chance of averting. On that day humanity will be divided in two
30|44|Those who do not believe will suffer from that rejection, and those who work righteousness, they are preparing
30|45|So that He may reward those who believe and work righteous deeds out of His bounty, but He does not love those who do not believe
30|46|Among His signs is this, that He sends the winds as heralds of hope, giving you a taste of His grace and mercy, that the ships may sail majestically by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty, in order that you may be grateful
30|47|We did indeed send before you, messengers to their respective peoples, and they came to them with clear signs. Then, to those who transgressed, We paid out retribution, and it was due from Us to aid those who believed
30|48|It is God Who sends the winds, and they raise the clouds. Then He spreads them in the sky as He wills, and breaks them into fragments, until you see raindrops issue from the middle of it. Then when He has made them reach those of His servants that He wills behold, they rejoice
30|49|Even though before they received the rain, just before this, they were in despair
30|50|Then contemplate the memorials of God's mercy, how He gives life to the earth after its death, indeed the same One will give life to the human beings that are dead, for He has power over all things
30|51|And if We send a wind from which they see their land turn yellow behold, they become thereafter, ungrateful
30|52|So indeed you cannot make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf to hear the call, when they show their backs and turn away
30|53|Nor can you lead back the blind from their straying. Only those will you make to hear are those who believe in Our signs and submit
30|54|It is God Who created you in a state of fragility, then gave you strength after vulnerability, then after strength gave you frailty and a grey head. He creates as He wills, and it is He Who has all knowledge and power
30|55|On the day that the Hour of reckoning will be established, the transgressors will swear that they stayed only an hour. So were they used to being deluded
30|56|But those endued with knowledge and faith will say, “Indeed you did stay, within God's decree, until the Day of Resurrection, and this is the Day of Resurrection, but you, you were not aware.”
30|57|So on that day no excuse of theirs will avail the transgressors, nor will they be invited then to seek grace by repentance
30|58|Indeed We have given to humanity in this Quran, every kind of parable, but if you bring to them any sign, the unbelievers are sure to say, “You do nothing but speak lies.”
30|59|Thus God places a seal upon the hearts of those who do not know
30|60|So patiently persevere, for indeed the promise of God is true, nor let those shake your firmness, who have themselves no certainty of faith
31|1|Alif, Laam, Miim
31|2|These are verses of the Wise Book
31|3|A guide and a mercy to the doers of good
31|4|Those who establish prayer, give zakat, and have confidence in the hereafter
31|5|These are on guidance from their Lord, and it is these who will flourish
31|6|But there are among the people, those who purchase idle tales without knowledge or meaning, to mislead people from the path of God, and to throw ridicule on that path, for these there will be a crushing penalty
31|7|When Our signs are rehearsed to this type of person, he turns away in arrogance, as if he did not hear them, as if there were deafness in both his ears. Announce to him a terrible penalty
31|8|For those who believe and work righteous deeds, there will be gardens of bliss
31|9|To dwell therein forever. The promise of God is true, and He is Exalted in Power, the Wise
31|10|He created the heavens without any pillars that you can see, He set on the earth, mountains standing firm, lest it should shake with you, and He scattered throughout it creatures of all kinds. We send down rain from the sky, and produce on the earth every kind of noble creature, in pairs
31|11|Such is the creation of God. Now show Me what is there that others besides Him have created. No, but the transgressors are in manifest error
31|12|We bestowed in the past, this wisdom on Luqman, “Show your gratitude to God.” Any who is grateful, does so to the profit of his own soul, but if any is ungrateful, indeed God is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
31|13|Behold, Luqman said to his son by way of instruction, “O my son, do not join in worship others with God, for false worship is indeed the highest wrongdoing.”
31|14|And We have instructed man to be good to his parents. With hardship upon hardship did his mother bear him, and two years was his weaning. Hear the command, “Show gratitude to Me and to your parents, and to Me is your final goal
31|15|“But if they strive to make you join in worship with Me, things of which you do not know, follow them not, yet accompany them in this life with justice and consideration, and follow the way of those who turn to me in love. In the end, the return of you all is to Me, and I will tell you the truth and meaning of all that you did.”
31|16|“O my son,” said Luqman, “If there were the weight of a mustard-seed, and it were hidden in a rock, or anywhere in the heavens or on earth, God will bring it out, for God understands the greatest mysteries, and is well acquainted with them
31|17|“O my son, establish prayer, encourage what is just, and discourage what is wrong, and bear with patient constancy whatever may happen to you, for this is firmness of purpose in the conduct of affairs
31|18|“And do not turn your cheek to people, nor walk in insolence through the earth, for God loves not any arrogant boaster
31|19|“And be moderate in your pace, and lower your voice, for the harshest of sounds without doubt is the braying of the donkey.”
31|20|Do you not see that God has subjected to your use, all things in the heavens and on earth, and has made his bounties flow to you in exceeding measure, both seen and unseen? Yet there are among humanity those who dispute about God, without knowledge and without guidance, and without a book to enlighten them
31|21|When they are told to follow the revelation that God has sent down they say, “No, we will follow the ways that we found our fathers following, “What, even if it is Satan beckoning them to the penalty of the blazing fire
31|22|Whoever submits his whole self to God, and is a doer of good, has indeed grasped the most trustworthy handhold, and with God rests the end and the decision of all affairs
31|23|But if any do not believe, do not let his rejection grieve you. To Us is their return, and We will tell them the truth of their deeds, for God knows well all that is in the heart
31|24|We grant them their pleasure for a little while. In the end, We will drive them to a chastisement unrelenting
31|25|If you ask them who it is that created the heavens and the earth they will certainly say, “God.” Say, “Praise God.” But most of them do not understand
31|26|To God belong all things in heaven and earth, indeed God is He Who is free of all wants, worthy of all praise
31|27|And if all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean were ink, with seven oceans behind it to add to its supply, still the words of God would not be exhausted, for God is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
31|28|And you are not created nor resurrected except as one soul, for God is He Who hears and sees all things
31|29|Do you not see that God merges night into day, and He merges day into night. He has subjected the Sun and the Moon to His Law, each running its course for a term appointed. And that God is well acquainted with all that you do
31|30|God is the Reality, and whatever else they invoke besides Him is falsehood, and God, He is the Highest, the Greatest
31|31|Do you not see that the ships sail through the world ocean by the grace of God that He may show you His signs? Indeed in this are signs for all who persevere and give thanks
31|32|When a wave covers them like canopies, they call to God, offering Him sincere devotion, but when He has delivered them safely to land, there are among them those that halt between right and wrong. But none reject Our signs except every ungrateful traitor
31|33|O humanity, do your duty to your Lord, and be aware of a day when neither a parent can do anything for their child, nor a child for their parent. Indeed the promise of God is true. So do not let this present life deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver delude you about God
31|34|Indeed the knowledge of the Hour is with God. It is He Who sends down rain, and He Who knows what is in the wombs, and no one knows what it is that they will earn on the morrow, nor does anyone know in what land they are to die, indeed with God is full knowledge and He is acquainted with all things
32|1|Alif, Laam, Miim
32|2|This is the revelation of the Book in which there is no doubt, from the Guardian Evolver of all the systems of knowledge
32|3|Or do they say, “He has fabricated it?” No, it is the truth from your Lord, so you can advise a people to whom no warner has come before you, in order that they may receive guidance
32|4|It is God who has created the heavens and the earth, and all between them, in six days, and is firmly established on the throne of authority. You have none besides Him to protect or intercede for you. Will you not then receive advice
32|5|He manages all affairs from the heavens to the earth. In the end will all affairs go up to Him, on a day the space whereof will be as a thousand years of your counting
32|6|Such is He, the Knower of all things hidden and open, the Exalted in Power, the Merciful Benefactor
32|7|He Who has improved everything that He has created. And He began the creation of humanity with nothing more than mud
32|8|And made his progeny from the quintessence of a fluid otherwise seemingly worthless
32|9|Then He formed him and breathed in him from His Spirit, and He gave you the faculties of hearing and sight, feeling and understanding. Little thanks do you give
32|10|And they say, “What, when we lay buried in the earth, will we indeed be in a creation renewed? No, they deny the meeting with their Lord
32|11|Say, “The Angel of Death that is put in charge of you will take your souls as promised. Then you will be brought back to your Lord.”
32|12|If only you could see when the guilty ones will bend their heads low before their Lord saying, “Our Lord, We have seen and we have heard. So send us back to the world. We will work righteousness, because we do indeed believe.”
32|13|If We had so willed, We could certainly have brought every soul its true guidance, but this word from Me will come true, “I will fill hell with jinn and humans all together.”
32|14|“So taste this, because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours, indeed We will forget you. Taste the eternal penalty for your harmful deeds.”
32|15|Only those believe in Our signs who when they are recited to them, fall down in adoration, and glorify their Lord by praising Him, and are not puffed up with pride
32|16|Their limbs forsake their beds of sleep, while they call on their Lord in fear and hope, and they give out of the sustenance which We have given them
32|17|And no soul knows what pleasure of the eye is kept hidden in reserve for them as a reward for their deeds
32|18|Is then the person who believes no better than the person who is rebellious? No, they are not equal
32|19|For those who believe and do righteous deeds, they have gardens as hospitable homes, for those deeds
32|20|As for those who are rebellious, their abode will be the fire. Every time they wish to get away from it, they will be forced deeper into it, and it will be said to them, “Taste the penalty of the fire that you used to deny.”
32|21|And indeed We will make them taste of the penalty of this life, before the supreme penalty, in order that they may return
32|22|And who does more wrong than one to whom is recited the signs of his Lord, and who then turns away from it? Indeed from those who transgress, We will exact due retribution
32|23|We did indeed give the Book to Moses, so do not be in doubt of its reaching you, and We made it a guide to the Children of Israel
32|24|And We appointed, from among them, leaders giving guidance under Our command, so long as they persevered with patience, and continued to have faith in Our signs
32|25|Indeed your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Accountability, in the matters wherein they differ among themselves
32|26|Does it not teach them a lesson, how many generations We caused to perish before them, in whose dwellings they walk in? Indeed in that are signs. Will they not then listen
32|27|And do they not see that We send rain to parched soil bare of herbage, and produce with it crops, providing food for their livestock and themselves? Have they no vision
32|28|They say, “When will this decision be, if you are telling the truth?”
32|29|Say, “On the day of decision, no profit will it be to unbelievers if they then believe, nor will they be granted respite.”
32|30|So turn away from them, and wait. They too are waiting
33|1|O Prophet, be conscious of God and do not listen to the unbelievers nor the hypocrites, indeed God is full of Knowledge and Wisdom
33|2|But follow that which comes to you by inspiration from your Lord, for God is well acquainted with all that you do
33|3|And put your trust in God, and enough is God as a manager of affairs
33|4|God has not made for any person two hearts in his one body, nor has He made your wives whom you divorce by Zihar your mothers, nor has He made those who you call sons, your sons. These are your sayings, but God tells you the truth, and He shows the right way
33|5|Call them by the names of their fathers. That is more just in the sight of God, but if you do not know their father’s names, call them your brothers in faith, or your friends, but there is no blame on you if you make a mistake concerning this. What counts is the intention of your hearts, and God is Oft-Returning, Mercifully Redeeming
33|6|The prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves, and his wives are their mothers. But blood relatives among you have closer personal ties in the decree of God, than the community of believers and Muhajirs. But still do what is just to your closest friends. Such is the writing in the decree of God
33|7|And remember We took from the Prophets their covenant. As We did from you, from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus the son of Mary. We took from them a solemn covenant
33|8|That God may question the caretakers of truth, concerning the truth they were charged with, and He has prepared for the unbelievers a terrible penalty
33|9|O you who believe, remember the grace of God bestowed on you, when there came down on you an army to overwhelm you, but We sent against them a storm and forces that they could not see, but God sees clearly all that you do
33|10|Behold, they came upon you from above you and from below you, and behold, the eyes became dim, and the hearts gaped up to the throats, and you had contradicting thoughts about God
33|11|In that situation were the believers tried. They were shaken as by a tremendous shaking
33|12|And behold, the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease say, “God and His messenger promised us nothing but delusion.”
33|13|Behold, a group among them said, “You people of Yathrib, you cannot stand the attack, therefore go back.” And a group of them asks for leave of the Prophet saying, “Truly our houses are bare, and exposed,” though they were not exposed. They intended nothing but to run away
33|14|And if an entry had been made for them from the sides of the city, and they had been incited to sedition, they would certainly have brought it to pass, with only a brief delay
33|15|Even though they had already took a covenant with God not to turn their backs and a covenant with God must be answered for
33|16|Say, “Running away will not profit you if you are running away from death or slaughter, and even if you do escape, no more than brief respite will you be allowed to enjoy.”
33|17|Say, “Who is it that can screen you from God if it is His will to give you punishment or to give you mercy?” Nor will they find for themselves, besides God, any protector nor helper
33|18|Indeed God knows those among you who keep the people back, and those who say to their brothers, “Come along with us,” but they do not come to the fight, except for a few
33|19|Who rely on you. And when danger arises, you will see them looking to you, their eyes revolving, like one of those who death hovers over, but when the danger has passed, they will strike you with sharp tongues, covetous of the good. Such people have no faith, so God has made their deeds of no effect, and that is easy for God
33|20|They think that the confederates have not withdrawn, and if the confederates should come again, they would wish they were in the deserts wandering among the Bedouins, and seeking news about you from a safe distance, and if they were in your presence, they would fight only a little while
33|21|You indeed have in the messenger of God, an excellent example of conduct, for anyone whose hope is in God and the Last Day, and who engages much in the praise of God
33|22|When the believers saw the confederate army they said, “This is what God and his messenger promised us, and God and His messenger told us the truth.” And it only added to their faith and their zeal for obedience
33|23|Among the believers are people who have been true to their covenant with God. Of them some have completed their vow to the utmost, and some still wait, but they have never changed their determination in the least
33|24|God rewards people of truth for their truth, and punishes the hypocrites if that is His will, or He turns to them in mercy, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
33|25|And God turned back the unbelievers with all their fury. No advantage did they gain, and enough is God for the believers in their fight, and God is full of strength, able to enforce His will
33|26|And the people of the Book who aided them, God took them down from their strongholds and cast fear into their hearts. So that some you slew, and some you made prisoners
33|27|And He made you heirs of their lands, their houses, their goods, and of a land which you had not visited before, and God has power over all things
33|28|O prophet, say to your wives, “If you want the life of the present and its glitter, then come, I will provide for your enjoyment and will let you go in a handsome manner
33|29|But if you want God and His messenger, and the home of the hereafter, indeed God has prepared for the good doers among you, a great reward
33|30|O wives of the Prophet, if any of you were proven guilty of unseemly conduct, the punishment would be doubled for her, and that is easy for God. 30 (End of Part)
33|31|But any of you who are devout in the service of God and His messenger, and works righteousness, twice will We grant a reward to her, and We have prepared for her generous sustenance
33|32|O wives of the Prophet, you are not like any of the other women. If you realize it, do not speak intuitively, lest one in whose heart is sickness should be moved with expectations, but speak as you should
33|33|And dwell in your homes without flaunting yourselves like those of the days of ignorance, and establish prayer, and give zakat, and follow God and His messenger. God wishes only to remove all character flaws from you, and the members of your family, in order to refine you
33|34|And recite what is rehearsed to you in your homes from the signs of God and His wisdom, for God is Subtle and Aware
33|35|For Muslim men and women, for believing men and women, for devout men and women, for true men and women, for men and women who are patient, for men and women who humble themselves, for men and women who give in charity, for men and women who fast, for men and women who guard their chastity, and for men and women who engage much in God's praise, for them God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward
33|36|It is not fitting for a believer, man or woman, when a matter has been decided by God and His messenger to differ concerning that decision. If anyone ignores God and His messenger, he is certainly and clearly on a wrong path
33|37|Behold, you said to one who had received the grace of God and your favor, "Hold on to your wife, and be conscious of God.” But you hid in your heart that which God was about to make manifest. You feared the people, but it is more fitting that you fear God. Then when Zaid divorced her following the necessary procedures, We joined her in marriage to you, in order that there may be no difficulty on the believers concerning marriage with the wives of those who you call your sons, after they had divorced them following the necessary procedures, and God's command must be fulfilled
33|38|There can be no blame on the Prophet for what God has indicated to him as a duty. It was the Sunnah of God among those in the past who have passed away, and the command of God is a decree determined
33|39|Those who preach the Messages of God, and fear Him, and fear none but God, enough is God to call them to account
33|40|Muhammad is not the father of any of your people, but he is the messenger of God, and the seal of the Prophets, and God has full knowledge of all things
33|41|O you who believe, glorify God by praising Him, and do this often
33|42|And praise Him morning and evening
33|43|He is the One Who sends blessings on you, as do His angels, that He may bring you out from the depths of darkness into light, and He is full of mercy to the believers
33|44|Their salutation on the day they meet Him will be “Peace.” And He has prepared for them a generous reward
33|45|O Prophet, truly We have sent you as a witness, a bearer of hope, and a warner
33|46|And as one who invites to God's grace by His permission, and as a lamp spreading light
33|47|So give hope to the believers that they will have great bounty from God
33|48|And do not follow the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and ignore their annoyances, and put your trust in God, for enough is God as a manager of affairs
33|49|O you who believe, when you marry believing women, and then divorce them before you have touched them, no period of ‘iddat have you to count concerning them. But give them a gift, and then let them go
33|50|O Prophet, We have made permissible to you, your wives to whom you have given their dowry, and those whom your right hand possess, out of those who God has assigned to you, and daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, and daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts who migrated with you, and any believing woman who dedicates herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet wishes to wed her. This is only for you, and not for the believers at large. We know what We have appointed for them concerning their wives and those whom their right hands possess, in order that there will be no difficulty for you, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
33|51|You may defer the turn of any of them you please, and you may receive any you please, and there is no blame on you if you invite one whose turn you had set aside. This is better for cooling their eyes, preventing their grief, and providing satisfaction from what you have given them, and God knows all that is in your hearts, and God is All Knowing, Most Understanding
33|52|It is not permissible for you to marry women after this, nor to leave them for other wives, even though their beauty attracts you, except any your right hand possess, and God watches over all things
33|53|O you who believe, do not enter the Prophet’s houses until you are given permission to come eat, and then not so early as to wait for its preparation. But when you are invited, feel free to enter, but once you have finished your meal, leave without making conversation. Such behavior annoys the Prophet. He is shy about asking you to leave, but God is not shy about telling you the truth, and when you ask them for something, ask them from behind a screen. That makes for greater purity for your hearts and for theirs, nor is it right for you to annoy God's messenger, nor should you marry his widows after him at any time. Truly such a thing is in God's sight an enormity
33|54|Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, indeed God has full knowledge of all things
33|55|There is no blame on these women if they appear before their parents or their sons, their brothers or their brother’s sons, or their sisters’ sons, or their maids, or those whom their right hands possess, but be conscious of God, for God is witness to all things
33|56|God and His angels send blessings on the Prophet. O you who believe, send blessings on him, and salute him with greetings
33|57|Indeed those who defy God and defy His messenger, God has cursed them in the present and in the future, and has prepared for them a crushing punishment
33|58|And those who distress believing men and women undeservedly bear on themselves a glaring sin
33|59|O prophet, tell your wives and daughters, and the believing women, that they should draw their outer wear over themselves. That is more modest, that they may be acknowledged but not harassed, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
33|60|Truly if the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and those who stir up sedition in the city do not desist, We will certainly stir you up against them. Then they will not be able to stay there as your neighbors for any length of time
33|61|They will have a curse on them, and whenever they are found, they will be seized and slain without mercy
33|62|Such was the Sunnah of God among those who lived. No change will you find in the Sunnah of God
33|63|People ask you concerning the Hour. Say, “The knowledge of it is with God.” But what will make you understand that perhaps the Hour is near
33|64|Indeed God has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blazing fire
33|65|To dwell therein forever. No protector will they find, nor helper
33|66|The day that their faces will be turned upside down in the fire they will say, “Woe to us, we wish that we had obeyed God and obeyed the messenger.”
33|67|And they would say, “Our Lord, We followed our leaders and our great ones, but they misled us as to the right path
33|68|“Our Lord, double their punishment, and curse them with a great curse.”
33|69|O you who believe, be not like those who upset and insulted Moses, but God cleared him of what they uttered, and he was honorable in God's sight
33|70|O you who believe, be conscious of God, and say a word directed to the right
33|71|That He may make your conduct whole and sound, and forgive you your sins. He who follows God and His messenger have already attained the highest achievement
33|72|We indeed offered the trust to the heavens and the earth, and the mountains, but they refused to undertake it, being afraid of it, but the human being undertook it. Indeed he was uninformed and thus misjudged
33|73|With the result that God has to punish the hypocritical men and women, and the unbelieving men and women, but God turns in mercy to the believers, men and women, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
34|1|Praise God, to Whom belongs all things in the heavens and on earth. To Him belongs the praise in the hereafter, and He is full of wisdom, acquainted with all things
34|2|He knows all that goes into the earth, and all that comes out of it, all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends to it, and He is the Merciful Redeemer, the Oft-Forgiving
34|3|The unbelievers say, “The hour will never come for us.” Say, “No, but most surely, by my Lord, it will come for you. By Him Who knows the unknown, from Whom is not hidden the least little atom in the heavens or on earth, nor is there anything less than that, nor greater, that is not in the clear record
34|4|That He may reward those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, for them is forgiveness and sustenance, most generous.”
34|5|But those who strive against Our signs to stop them, for them will be a penalty, and a punishment most crushing
34|6|And those to whom knowledge has come, see that the revelation sent down to you from your Lord is the truth, and that it guides to the path of the One exalted in might, worthy of all praise
34|7|The unbelievers say in ridicule, “Shall we point out to you a person who will tell you when you are disintegrated to total disintegration, that you will then be raised in a new creation
34|8|“Has he invented a falsehood against God, or has a jinn seized him?” No, it is those who do not believe in the hereafter who will be punished, and who are in furthest error
34|9|Do they not see what is before them and behind them, of the sky and the earth? If We wished, We could cause the earth to swallow them up, or cause a piece of the universe to fall on them. Indeed in this is a sign for every devotee that turns to God
34|10|We bestowed this grace on David from Ourselves, “O mountains, sing back the praises of God with him. And birds, you do the same. And We made the iron soft for him
34|11|Commanding, “Make coats of mail, balancing well the rings of chained armor, and work righteousness, and know that I see clearly all that you do.”
34|12|And to Solomon We made the wind obedient. Its early morning stride was a month’s journey, and its evening stride was a month’s journey, and We made a font of molten brass to flow for him, and there were jinn that worked in front of him, by the permission of his Lord, and if any of them deviated from our command, We made him taste the penalty of the blazing fire
34|13|They worked for him, as he desired, making arches, images, basins as large as reservoirs, and cooking cauldrons fixed in their places, “Work, sons of David, with thanks,” but few of My servants are appreciative
34|14|Then when We decreed Solomon’s death, nothing showed them his death except a little worm of the earth that kept slowly gnawing away at his staff. So when he fell over, the jinn saw plainly that if they had known the unknown, they would not have stayed in the crushing penalty of their task
34|15|There was for Sheba, a sign in their homeland, two gardens to the right and to the left, “Eat of the sustenance provided by your Lord, and be grateful to Him. A territory good and a Lord Oft-Forgiving
34|16|But they turned away from God, and We sent against them the flood released from the dams, and We converted their two garden rows into gardens producing bitter fruit, and tamarisks, and some few stunted lotus-trees
34|17|That was the requital that We gave them because they ungratefully rejected faith, and never do We punish any except those who are ungrateful rejecters
34|18|Between them and the cities on which We had poured our blessings, We placed cities in prominent positions, and between them We appointed stages of the journey in due proportion, “Travel therein, secure by night and by day.”
34|19|But they said, “Our Lord, place longer distances between our journey stages.” But they wronged themselves with this. Then We made them as a tale that is told, and We dispersed them all in scattered fragments, indeed in this are signs for every soul who is patient and grateful
34|20|And on them Satan proved his assumption true, and they followed him, all but a group who believed
34|21|But he had no authority over them, except that We might make evident the person who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it, and your Lord watches over all things
34|22|Say, “Call upon other gods whom you desire besides God. They have no power, not even the weight of an atom, in the heavens or on earth, they have no share in it, nor are any of them a helper to God
34|23|“No intercession can avail in His presence, except for those whom He has granted permission, until fear is removed from their hearts at the Day of Accountability, then they will say, ‘What is it that your Lord asked?’ They will say, ‘That which is true and just, and He is Most High, Most Great.’ ”
34|24|Say, “Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and the earth?” Say, “It is God, and certainly we and you are either on right guidance or in manifest error.”
34|25|Say, “You will not be questioned as to our sins, nor will we be questioned as to what you do.”
34|26|Say, “Our Lord will gather us together and will, in the end, decide the matter between us and you in truth and justice, and He is the one to decide, the All Knowing.”
34|27|Say, “Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners, but by no means can you do it. No, He is God, the Exalted in Power, the Wise.”
34|28|We have not sent you except as a universal messenger to humanity, giving them good news, and warning them against harmful deeds, but most people do not understand
34|29|They say, “When will this promise come to pass if you are telling the truth?”
34|30|Say, “For you is the appointment of a day for which you can neither push back for an hour nor push forward.”
34|31|The unbelievers say, “We will neither believe in this scripture nor in any that came before it.” If only you could see when the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, throwing back the word of blame on each other. Those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones, “Had it not been for you, we would certainly have been believers.”
34|32|The arrogant ones will say to those who had been oppressed, “Was it we who kept you back from guidance after it reached you? No, rather it was you who transgressed.”
34|33|Those who had been oppressed will say to the arrogant ones, “No, it was a plot of yours by day and by night. Behold, you constantly ordered us to be ungrateful to God, and to attribute equals to Him.” They will declare repentance when they see the penalty. We will put chains on the necks of the unbelievers. It would only be punishment for their deeds
34|34|Never did We send a warner to a population but the elites among them said, “We do not believe in the message with which you have been sent.”
34|35|They said, “We have more in wealth and in sons, and we cannot be punished.”
34|36|Say, “Indeed my Lord enlarges and restricts the provision to whom He pleases, but most people do not understand.”
34|37|It is neither your wealth nor your sons that will bring you nearer to Us in degree, but only those who believe and work righteousness. These are the ones for whom there is a reward multiplied for their deeds, while they reside secure in the dwellings on high
34|38|Those who work against Our signs to cause failure, they will be brought to punishment
34|39|Say, “Indeed my Lord enlarges and restricts the sustenance to any of His servants He pleases, and nothing in the least do you give in His cause but He reimburses it, for He is the best of those who grant sustenance
34|40|One day He will gather them all together and say to the angels, “Was it you that these people used to worship?”
34|41|They will say, “Glory to You, Our tie is with You as a Protector, not with them. No, but they worshipped the jinn. Most of them believed in them.”
34|42|So on that day, no power will they have over each other, for profit or harm, and We will say to the wrongdoers, “Taste the penalty of the fire which you used to deny.”
34|43|When Our clear signs are rehearsed to them they say, “This is only a person who wishes to hinder you from the worship which your parents practiced.” And they say, “This is only a lie invented.” And the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them, “This is nothing but obvious deception.”
34|44|But We had not given them books which they could study, nor sent messengers to them before you as warners
34|45|And their predecessors rejected the truth, these have not received a tenth of what We had granted to those. Yet when they rejected My messengers, how terrible My rejection of them was
34|46|Say, “I advise you on one point. That you should stand up before God, whether it is in pairs, or it is individually, and reflect within yourselves. Your companion is not possessed. He is no less than a warner to you, in face of a terrible penalty.”
34|47|Say, “No reward do I ask of you. It is all in your interest. My reward is only due from God, and He is witness to all things.”
34|48|Say, “Indeed my Lord gives the truth, He Who has full knowledge of all that is hidden.”
34|49|Say, “The truth has arrived, and falsehood neither creates anything new nor restores anything.”
34|50|Say, “If I am astray I only stray to the loss of my own soul, but if I receive guidance, it is because of the inspiration of my Lord to me. It is He Who hears all things, and is near.”
34|51|If only you could see when they will shake with fear, but then there will be no escape for them, and they will be seized from a position near
34|52|And they will say, “We believe in the truth, “But how could they receive faith from a position so far off
34|53|Seeing that before they did not entirely believe, and that they continually cast slanders on the unknown from a position far off
34|54|And between them and their desires, is placed a barrier, as was done in the past with those like them, for they too were indeed in suspicious doubt
35|1|Praise God, from Whom came the origins of the heavens and the earth. Who made the angels messengers with wings, two, three, or four pairs. He adds to creation as He pleases, for God has power over all things
35|2|What God, out of his mercy, bestows on humanity none can withhold. What He does withhold none can grant besides Him, and He is the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
35|3|O humanity, call to mind the grace of God to you, is there a creator other than God, to give you sustenance from heaven or earth? There is no god but He. How then are you deluded from the truth
35|4|And if they reject you, so were messengers rejected before you. All affairs go back to God for decision
35|5|O humanity, certainly the promise of God is true. So do not let this present life deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver delude you about God
35|6|Indeed Satan is an enemy to you. So treat him as an enemy. He only invites his adherents so that they may become companions of the blazing fire
35|7|For those who reject God is a terrible penalty, but for those who believe and work righteous deeds is forgiveness, and a magnificent reward
35|8|Then is he, to whom the evil of his conduct is made alluring, so that he looks upon it as good, is he equal to one who is rightly guided? For God leaves to stray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. So do not let your heart go out to them with regret, for God knows well all that they do
35|9|It is God Who sends the winds, so that they raise up the clouds, and We drive them to a land that is dead, and revive the earth with it after its death. Even then the resurrection will come
35|10|If any seek praise and power, to God belong all praise and power. To Him mounts up all words of purity. It is He Who exalts each deed of righteousness. Those who hatch harmful plots, for them is a penalty terrible, and the plotting of such will be void of success
35|11|And God created you from dust, then from a zygote, then He made you in pairs, and no female conceives nor delivers, except with His knowledge, nor is a person long-lived, granted length of days, nor is a part cut off from his life, except if it is in a decree ordained. All this is easy for God
35|12|Nor are the two bodies of flowing water alike, the one palatable, sweet, and pleasant to drink, and the other, salty and bitter. Yet from each kind of water do you eat meat fresh and tender, and you extract ornaments to wear, and you see the ships in it that plow the waves, so that you may seek the bounty of God, and that you may be grateful
35|13|He merges night into day, and He merges day into night, and He has subjected the Sun and the Moon to His law. Each one runs its course for a term appointed. Such is God your Lord. To Him belongs all control, and those whom you invoke besides Him have no power in the least
35|14|If you invoke them, they will not listen to your call, and if they were to listen, they could not answer you. On the Day of Accountability, they will reject your partnership, and none can inform you like the One who is acquainted with all things
35|15|O you people, it is you who have need of God, but God is the One free of all wants, worthy of all praise
35|16|If He so pleased, He could remove you and bring about a new creation
35|17|Nor is that difficult for God
35|18|Nor can a bearer of burdens bear another’s burdens. If one heavily laden should call another to his load, not the least portion of it can be carried by the other, even if they are nearly related. You can only advise those who fear their Lord unseen, and establish prayer. And whoever purifies himself does so for the benefit of his own soul, and the destination is to God
35|19|The blind and the seeing are not alike
35|20|Nor are the depths of darkness and the light
35|21|Nor are the shade and the heat of the sun
35|22|Nor are those alike that are living and those who are dead. God can make any hear whom He wills to hear, but you cannot make those to hear who are in graves
35|23|You are no other than a warner
35|24|Indeed We have sent you in truth as a bearer of good news, and as a warner, and there never were a people without a warner having lived among them
35|25|And if they reject you, so did their predecessors, to whom came messengers with clear signs, books of prophecies, and the book of enlightenment
35|26|In the end, I punished those who rejected faith, and how terrible was My rejection of them
35|27|Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky? With it We bring out produce of various colors. And in the mountains are tracts white and red, of various shades of color, and intensely black
35|28|And among human beings, and crawling creatures, and livestock, are those of various colors. Those who are indeed conscious of God among His servants have knowledge, for God is Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving
35|29|Those who recite the Book of God, establish prayer, and give out of what We have provided for them, secretly and openly, hope for a deal that will never fail
35|30|For He will pay them their due, no, He will give them more out of His bounty, for He is Oft-Forgiving, most ready to appreciate
35|31|That which We have revealed to you of the Book is the truth reflecting the truth of what was revealed before it, for God is surely, to His servants, well acquainted and fully observant
35|32|And We have given the Book for inheritance, to those of Our servants as We chose, but there are among them, some who wrong their own souls, some who follow a middle course, and some who are, by God's permission, foremost in good deeds, and that is the highest blessing
35|33|They will enter Gardens of eternity, therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be of silk
35|34|And they will say, “Praise God, Who has removed from us all sorrow, for our Lord is indeed oft-forgiving, ready to appreciate
35|35|“He Who has, out of His bounty, settled us in a home that will last. Neither fatigue nor sense of weariness will touch us therein.”
35|36|But those who reject God, for them will be the fire of hell. No term will be determined for them, thus not allowing them to die, nor will its penalty be lightened for them. This is how We reward every ungrateful one
35|37|Therein will they cry aloud, “Our Lord, let us out. We will work righteously, not the deeds we used to do.” “Did We not give you a long enough life so that all could take the advice? And the warner came to you. So taste this, for the wrongdoers there is no helper.”
35|38|Indeed God knows all the hidden things of the heavens and the earth, and indeed He has full knowledge of all that is in the heart
35|39|It is He Who has made you inheritors in the earth. If any then reject God, their rejection will work against them. Their rejection only adds to disbelief for the unbelievers in the sight of their Lord. Their rejection only adds to their undoing
35|40|Say, “Have you seen these partners of yours whom you call upon besides God? Show Me what it is they have created in the earth. Or have they a share in the heavens? Or have We given them a book from which they can derive guidance? No, the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusions
35|41|It is God Who sustains the heavens and the earth, lest they cease to function, and if they should fail, there is none, not one, who can sustain them thereafter. Indeed He is Most Understanding, Oft-Forgiving
35|42|They swore their strongest oath by God that if a warner came to them, they would follow his guidance better than any other people, but when a warner came to them, it only increased their flight
35|43|On account of their arrogance in the land, and their plotting of evil. But the plotting of evil will only hem in the authors of it. Now they are looking for the way the ancients were dealt with? But no change will you find in God's Sunnah, and no finale will you find in God's Sunnah
35|44|Do they not travel through the earth, and see what the end of those before them was, though they were superior to them in strength? Nor is God to be escaped by anything in the heavens or on earth, for He is All Knowing, All Powerful
35|45|If God were to punish people according to what they deserve, He would not leave on its back a single one of these creatures, but He gives them respite for a stated term. When their term expires, then indeed God has in His sight all His servants
36|1|Yaa, Siin
36|2|By the Quran, full of wisdom
36|3|You are indeed one of the messengers
36|4|On a straight way
36|5|It is a revelation sent down by Him, the Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
36|6|That you may advise a people whose parents had received no advice, and who therefore remain heedless
36|7|The word is proved true against the greater part of them, for they do not believe
36|8|We have put chains around their necks, up to their chins, so that their heads are forced up
36|9|And We have put bars in front of them and bars behind them, and further, We have covered them up, so that they cannot see
36|10|It is the same to them whether you warn them or you do not warn them, they will not believe
36|11|You can only warn one who follows the message and fears the Merciful Benefactor, unseen. Give them good news of forgiveness, and of a reward most generous
36|12|Indeed We will give life to the dead, and We record what they send forward and what they leave behind, and of all things We have taken account in a clear book
36|13|Give them by way of a parable the story of the companions of the city. Behold, there came messengers to it
36|14|When We sent to them two messengers they rejected them, so We reinforced them with a third. They said, “Truly we have been sent on a mission to you.”
36|15|They said, “You are only human like us, and God, the Merciful Benefactor, sends no sort of revelation. You do nothing but lie.”
36|16|They said, “Our Lord knows that we have been sent on a mission to you
36|17|“And our duty is only to proclaim the message clearly.”
36|18|They said, “For us, we predict an evil omen from you. If you desist not, we will certainly stone you, indeed a terrible punishment will be inflicted on you by us.”
36|19|They said, “Your evil omens are with you. Are you not then advised? No, but you are a people transgressing all bounds.”
36|20|Then there came running from the farthest part of the city, a person announcing, “O my people, follow the messengers
36|21|“Follow those who ask no reward of you, and who have themselves received guidance. 21 (End of Part)
36|22|“And what would happen to me if I did not serve Him Who created me, and He to Whom you will all be brought back
36|23|“Shall I take gods besides Him? If God, the Merciful Benefactor, should intend some adversity for me, of no use would be their intercession for me, nor can they save me
36|24|“I would indeed, if I were to do so, be in manifest error
36|25|“For me, I have faith in the Guardian Evolver of you all, so listen to me.”
36|26|It was said, “Enter the garden.” He said, “I wish that my people knew
36|27|“That my Lord has granted me forgiveness, and has enrolled me among those held in honor.”
36|28|And We did not send down against his people after him any guest from heaven, nor was it necessary for Us to do so
36|29|It was no more than a single mighty blast, and behold, they were gone
36|30|Unfortunately for these slaves, there does not come a messenger to them that they did not mock
36|31|Do they not see how many generations before them We caused to perish? And they will not return to them
36|32|But each one of them will be brought before Us
36|33|A sign for them is the earth that is dead. We give it life, and produce grain from it, of which you eat
36|34|And We produce in it orchards with date palms and vines, and We cause springs to gush forth therein
36|35|That they may enjoy the fruits of it. It was not their hands that made this. Will they not then give thanks
36|36|Glory be to God, Who created in pairs all things that the earth produces, all of it, and things that they do not know of
36|37|And a sign for them is the night. We withdraw from it the day, and behold, they are plunged into darkness
36|38|And the Sun runs its course for a period determined for it. That is His decree, the Exalted in Might, the All Knowing
36|39|And the Moon, We have ordained for it phases, until it returns like the withered lower part of a date-stalk
36|40|It is not permitted for the Sun to catch the Moon, nor can the night outstrip the day. Each swims along in its own orbit
36|41|And a sign for them is that We carried their people through the flood in the loaded Ark
36|42|And We have created for them similar vessels on which they ride
36|43|If it were Our will, We could drown them. Then there would be no helper, nor could they be delivered
36|44|Except by way of mercy from Us, and by way of convenience for a time
36|45|They are told, “Be conscious of that which is before you and that which is after you, in order that you may receive mercy.”
36|46|Not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their Lord, except those from which they turn away
36|47|And when they are told, “Give of that which God has provided you,” the unbelievers say to those who believe, “Shall we feed those whom if God had so willed, He would have fed Himself? You are in nothing but manifest error.”
36|48|Further they say, “When will this promise come to pass, if what you say is true?”
36|49|They will not have to wait for anything but a single blast. It will seize them while they are still disputing among themselves
36|50|Then no chance will they have with their will to manage their affairs, nor to return to their people
36|51|The trumpet will be sounded, when behold, from their place of rest, people will rush forth to their Lord
36|52|They will say, “Woe to us, who has raised us up from our resting place?” This is what God, the Merciful Benefactor, promised. And true was the word of the messengers.”
36|53|It will be no more than a single blast, and then they will all be brought up before Us
36|54|Then on that day, not a soul will be wronged in the least, and you will be repaid for your past deeds
36|55|Indeed on that day the companions of the garden will have joy in all that they do
36|56|They and their mates will be in groves of shade, reclining on thrones
36|57|Fruit will be there for them, they will have whatever they call for
36|58|“Peace,” a word from the Lord, Mercifully Redeeming
36|59|“And O you in sin, get away this day
36|60|“Did I not enjoin on you, O you children of Adam, that you should not worship Satan, and that he was to you a sworn enemy
36|61|“And that you should worship Me, and that this is the straight way
36|62|“But he led astray a great multitude of you. Did you not then use reason
36|63|“This is the hell about which you were warned
36|64|“Embrace the fire this day, because you rejected it.”
36|65|That day will We put a seal on their mouths, but their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness to all that they did
36|66|If it had been Our will, We could surely have removed their eyes, then they would have run about grabbing for the path, but how could they have seen
36|67|And if it had been Our will, We could have transformed them in their places, then they would have been unable to proceed, and they could not have returned
36|68|If We grant long life to any, We cause them to be reversed in creation. Will they not then understand
36|69|We have not instructed the messenger in poetry, nor is that like him. This is no less than a message and a Quran making things clear
36|70|That it may give advice to any that are alive, and that the charge may be proven against those who reject it
36|71|Do they not see that it is We who have created for them livestock, among the things that Our hands have fashioned that are under their control
36|72|And that We have subjected them to their use? Of them, some carry them and some they eat
36|73|And they obtain other benefits from them, including drink. Will they not then be grateful
36|74|Yet they take for worship gods other than God, thinking that they might be helped
36|75|They do not have the power to help them, but they will be brought up all together
36|76|But do not let their speech grieve you. Indeed We know what they hide as well as what they disclose
36|77|Do human beings not see that it is We Who created them from a zygote? Yet behold, he stands up as an open adversary
36|78|And he makes comparisons to Us, and forgets his own origin and creation. He says, “Who can give life to bones, and decomposed ones at that?”
36|79|Say, “He will give them life Who created them the first time. For He is well-versed in every kind of creation
36|80|“The same One who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when behold, you kindle with it
36|81|“Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the likes of him?” Yes indeed, for He is the Ultimate Creator, the All Knowing
36|82|Indeed, when He intends a thing, His command is “Be”, and it is
36|83|So glory be to Him in Whose hands are the control of all things, and to Him will you all be brought back
37|1|By those who line themselves in ranks
37|2|And so are strong in repelling harm
37|3|And so proclaim the message
37|4|Indeed your God is one
37|5|Lord of the heavens and of the earth, and all between them, and Lord of every point at the rising of the Sun
37|6|We have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty in the stars
37|7|For beauty and to guard against all rebellious devils
37|8|They should not strain their ears in the direction of the exalted assembly, but shall be cast away from every side
37|9|Repulsed, for they are under a perpetual penalty
37|10|Except those that snatch away something by stealth, and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness
37|11|Just ask their opinion. Are they more difficult to create, or the other beings We have created? We have created them out of wet clay
37|12|Indeed you marvel while they ridicule
37|13|And though they are advised, they pay no heed
37|14|And when they see a sign, they turn it into mockery
37|15|And say, “This is nothing but evident deception
37|16|“What, when we die and become dust and bones, will we be raised up
37|17|“And also our ancestors?”
37|18|Say, “Yes, and you will then be humiliated.”
37|19|Then there will be a single cry, and behold, they will begin to see
37|20|They will say, “Woe to us, this is the Day of Accountability!”
37|21|This is the day of sorting out, the truth you once denied
37|22|“Bring up,” it will be said, “The wrongdoers and their partners, and the things they worshipped
37|23|“Besides God, and lead them to the way of the fire
37|24|“But stop them, for they must be asked
37|25|“What is the matter with you that you did not help each other?”
37|26|No, but that day they will submit
37|27|And they will turn to one another, and question each other
37|28|They will say, “It was you who used to come to us from the right.”
37|29|They will reply, “No, you yourselves had no faith
37|30|“Nor had we any authority over you. No, it was you who were a people in obstinate rebellion
37|31|“So now has been proved true against us, the word of our Lord, so we will indeed taste it
37|32|“We led you astray, for indeed we were ourselves astray.”
37|33|Indeed that day, they will all share in the penalty
37|34|Indeed that is how We will deal with the wrong-doers
37|35|For they, when they were told that there is no god except God, would puff themselves up with pride–
37|36|And say, “What, will we give up our gods for the sake of a poet possessed?”
37|37|No, he has come with the truth, and he confirms the messengers
37|38|You will indeed taste the terrible penalty
37|39|But it will be no more than retribution for what you did
37|40|But the sincere servants of God
37|41|For them is sustenance determined
37|42|They will enjoy fruits, and honor and dignity
37|43|In gardens of felicity
37|44|Facing each other on thrones
37|45|Round will be passed to them a cup from a clear-flowing fountain
37|46|White, of a taste delicious to those who drink of it
37|47|Free from harm, nor will they suffer intoxication from it
37|48|And with them will be companions of modest gaze and beautiful eyes
37|49|Like delicate eggs closely guarded
37|50|Then they will turn to one another and question each other
37|51|One of them will start the conversation by saying, “I had a friend
37|52|“Who used to say, ‘What, are you among those who bear witness to the truth
37|53|“When we die and become dust and bones, will we indeed receive rewards and punishments?”
37|54|A voice said, “Would you like to look down?”
37|55|He looked down and saw him in the middle of the fire
37|56|He said, “By God, you were just short of bringing me to perdition
37|57|“Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those sent there
37|58|“Is it the case that we will not die
37|59|“Except our first death, and that we will not be punished?”
37|60|Indeed this is the greatest achievement
37|61|For the like of this let all strive who wish to strive
37|62|Is that the better entertainment or the Tree of Zaqqum
37|63|For We have truly made it a trial for the wrongdoers
37|64|For it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of hellfire
37|65|The shoots of its fruit-stalks are like the heads of devils
37|66|Truly they will eat of it and fill their stomachs
37|67|Then indeed on top of that they will be given a mixture made of boiling water
37|68|Then their return will be to the fire
37|69|Truly they found their parents on the wrong path
37|70|So they were rushed down on their footsteps
37|71|And truly before them, many of the ancients went astray
37|72|But We sent among them, people to advise them
37|73|Then see what was the end of those who were advised
37|74|Except the sincere servants of God
37|75|Noah called to Us, and We are the best to hear prayers
37|76|And We delivered him and his people from the Great Calamity
37|77|And made his progeny to endure
37|78|And We left for him generations to come in later times
37|79|Peace and salutation to Noah among the nations
37|80|Indeed we reward those who do right
37|81|For he was one of our believing servants
37|82|Then the rest we overwhelmed in the flood
37|83|Indeed among those who followed his way was Abraham
37|84|Behold, he approached his Lord with a pure heart
37|85|Behold, he said to his father and to his people, “What is it you worship
37|86|“Is it false gods instead of God that you desire
37|87|“Then what is your idea about the Lord of the worlds?”
37|88|Then he cast a glance at the stars
37|89|And he said, “I am indeed sick.”
37|90|So they turned away from him, and departed
37|91|Then he turned to their gods and said, “Will you not eat
37|92|“What is the matter with you that you do not speak?”
37|93|Then did he turn to them, striking them with the right hand
37|94|Then they came with hurried steps, and faced him
37|95|He said, “You worship that which you have carved
37|96|“But God has created you and that which you make.”
37|97|They said, “Build him a furnace, and throw him into the blazing fire.”
37|98|They then sought another strategy against him, but We made them the ones most humiliated
37|99|He said, “I will go to my Lord, He will surely guide me
37|100|“O my Lord, grant me one from the righteous.”
37|101|So We gave him the good news of a child ready to sacrifice and forbear
37|102|Then when he reached the age of work he said, “O my son, I see in a vision that I offer you in sacrifice. Now tell me what you see?” The son said, “O my father, do as you are asked. You will find me, God willing, one practicing patience and constancy.”
37|103|So when they both submitted their wills, and he laid him prostrate on his forehead
37|104|We called out to him “O Abraham,”
37|105|“You have already fulfilled the vision.” Indeed We reward those who do right
37|106|For this was a challenge
37|107|And We ransomed him with a momentous sacrifice
37|108|And We left this blessing for him among generations to come
37|109|“Peace and salutation to Abraham.”
37|110|Indeed We reward those who do right
37|111|For he was one of our believing servants
37|112|And We gave him the good news of Isaac, a prophet, one of the righteous
37|113|We blessed him and Isaac, but of their progeny are some who do right and some who do wrong, to their own souls
37|114|Again We bestowed Our favor on Moses and Aaron
37|115|And We delivered them and their people from great calamity
37|116|And We helped them, so they overcame
37|117|And We gave them the Clear Books
37|118|And We guided them to the straight way
37|119|And We left this blessing for them among generations to come
37|120|“Peace and salutation to Moses and Aaron.”
37|121|So indeed We reward those who do right
37|122|For they were two of our believing servants
37|123|Elias was also among those sent by Us
37|124|Behold, he said to his people, “Will you not be conscious
37|125|“Will you call upon Baal and abandon the Best of Creators
37|126|“Your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors?”
37|127|But they rejected him, and they will certainly be called up
37|128|Except the sincere and devoted servants of God
37|129|And We left this blessing for him among generations to come
37|130|“Peace be upon Elias.”
37|131|Then indeed do We reward those who do right
37|132|For he was one of our believing servants
37|133|Lot was also among those sent by Us
37|134|Behold, We delivered him and all his adherents
37|135|Except an old woman who was among those who lagged behind
37|136|Then We caused the rest to perish
37|137|Indeed you pass by their sites, by day–
37|138|And by night. Then will you not use reason
37|139|Jonah was also among those sent by Us
37|140|When he ran away to the ship fully stocked
37|141|He cast lots, and he was condemned
37|142|Then the fish swallowed him. He had done things worthy of blame
37|143|Had it not been that he glorified God
37|144|He would certainly have remained inside the fish until the Day of Resurrection
37|145|But We cast him up on the naked shore in a state of sickness
37|146|And We caused to grow over him a spreading plant of the gourd kind
37|147|And We sent him to a hundred thousand people or more
37|148|And they believed. So We permitted them to enjoy their time
37|149|Then ask them, do the females belong to God and the males to you
37|150|Or did you see Us create the angels female
37|151|Is it not that they say falsely
37|152|“God has children”? But they are liars
37|153|Did He choose daughters over sons
37|154|What is the matter with you? How judge you
37|155|Will you not then receive advice
37|156|Or have you an authority manifest
37|157|Then bring your book if you are truthful
37|158|And they have created a blood relationship between Him and the jinn. But the jinn know that they have indeed to appear
37|159|Glory be to God, He is free from the things they ascribe to Him
37|160|Not so the servants of God, sincere and devoted
37|161|Indeed neither you nor those you worship
37|162|Can lead any into temptation concerning God
37|163|Except those whom are themselves heading to the blazing fire
37|164|“Not us, only for him is a place known
37|165|“And indeed we are arranged in ranks
37|166|“And we are indeed those who declare God's glory.”
37|167|And there were those who said
37|168|“If only we had before us a message from those in the past
37|169|“We would certainly have been servants of God, sincere.”
37|170|So they reject it, but soon will they know
37|171|Our word has already been passed on before to Our servants sent by Us
37|172|So that they would certainly be assisted
37|173|And that Our forces surely must conquer
37|174|So turn away from them for a little while
37|175|And watch them, and they soon will see
37|176|Do they wish to rush our punishment
37|177|But when it descends into the open space before them, terrible will be the morning for those who were warned
37|178|So turn away from them for a little while
37|179|And watch and they soon will see
37|180|Glory to your Lord, the Lord of Honor and Power, free from what they ascribe to Him
37|181|And peace on the messengers
37|182|And praise God, the Guardian Evolver of all the worlds
38|1|Saad. By the Quran, full of advice
38|2|But the unbelievers are steeped in self-glory and separatism
38|3|How many generations before them did We destroy? In the end they cried, when there was no longer time for being saved
38|4|So they wonder how a warner has come to them from among themselves, and the unbelievers say, “This is a deceiver telling lies
38|5|“Has he made the gods all into one God? Truly this is a curious thing.”
38|6|And the leader among them walks away saying, “Walk away, and remain constant to your gods, for this is truly a thing created
38|7|“We never heard the likes of this among the people of these latter days. This is nothing but a fabrication.”
38|8|“What, has the message been sent to him, of all people?” But they are in doubt concerning My message. No, they have not yet tasted My punishment
38|9|Or have they the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Exalted in Power, and the Grantor of bounties without measure
38|10|Or have they control of the heavens and the earth and all between? If so, let them ascend by means to reach that end
38|11|Soldiers there will be defeated among the companies
38|12|Before them the people rejected Noah and ‘Ad. And Pharaoh the lord of stakes
38|13|And Thamud, the people of Lot, and the Companions of the Wood, these were the confederates
38|14|Not one of them failed to reject the messengers, so My punishment came justly and inevitably
38|15|They must only wait for a single mighty blast, and there will be no delay
38|16|They say, “Our Lord, hasten to us our sentence before the Day of Account.”
38|17|Have patience with what they say, and remember our servant David, the possessor of strength, for he constantly turned to God
38|18|It was We Who made the hills declare in unison with him, Our praises in the evening and in the morning
38|19|Then the birds gathered, and all turned with him to God
38|20|We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and sound judgment in speech and decision
38|21|Has the story of the litigants reached you? Behold, they climbed over the wall of the private chamber
38|22|Then they entered the presence of David, and he was terrified of them. They said, “Fear not, we are two litigants, one of whom has wronged the other. Now decide between us with truth, and treat us not with injustice, but guide us to the balanced way
38|23|“This person is my brother. He has nine and ninety ewes, and I have one. Yet he says, ‘commit her to my care’, and is harsh to me in speech.”
38|24|David said, “He has undoubtedly wronged you in demanding your ewe to be added to his ewes. Truly many are the partners who wrong each other. Not so do those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, they are but a few.” Then David realized that We had tried him. He asked forgiveness of his Lord, fell down bowing, and turned to God in repentance
38|25|So We forgave him. He indeed approached Us, and this is a beautiful place of return
38|26|O David, We indeed made you a creation of free will on the earth. So judge between people in truth, and do not follow your desires, for they will mislead you from the path of God. Those who wander astray from the path of God is a terrible penalty, because they forget the Day of Account
38|27|Not without purpose did We create heaven and earth, and all between. That was the thought of the unbelievers, but woe to the unbelievers, because of the fire of hell
38|28|Shall We treat those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, the same as those who do wrong on the earth? Shall We treat those who guard against wrong, the same as those who turn away from right
38|29|Here is a book which We have sent down to you, full of blessings, that they may think on its signs, and that people of understanding may receive the advice
38|30|To David We gave Solomon, excellent in Our service, and he constantly turned to Us
38|31|Behold, there were brought before him, in the evening, excellently bred horses
38|32|And he said, “I truly love the love of excellence, with the remembrance of my Guardian Evolver.” Until they were hidden in the veil
38|33|“Bring them back to me.” Then he began to pass his hand over their legs and their necks
38|34|And We tried Solomon. We placed on his throne a body, but he turned to Us
38|35|He said, “O my Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingdom that will not suit another after me, for You are the Grantor of Bounties
38|36|Then We subjected the wind to his power, to flow gently to his order, wherever he willed
38|37|And the devils, every kind of builder and diver
38|38|And others bound in chains
38|39|“Such are Our bounties, whether you bestow them or withhold them, no account will be asked.”
38|40|And he indeed enjoyed a near approach to Us, and a beautiful place of return
38|41|Remember Our servant Job. Behold, he cried to his Lord, “Satan has afflicted me with distress and suffering.”
38|42|“Strike here with your foot, here is water with which to wash, cool and refreshing, and to drink.”
38|43|And We gave him back to his people, and doubled their number, as a grace from Us, and a thing for commemoration, for all who have understanding
38|44|“And take in your hand a little grass, and bend it, but do not break it.” Truly We found him full of patience and constancy, and how excellent he was in Our service, and he constantly turned to Us
38|45|And commemorate Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all were possessors of power and vision
38|46|Indeed We choose them for a special purpose, proclaiming the message of the hereafter
38|47|They were, in Our sight, truly of the company of the elect, the best
38|48|And remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Zul-Kifl. Each of them was of the company of the best
38|49|This is indeed a reminder that indeed for the righteous, there is a beautiful place of return
38|50|Gardens of eternity, whose doors will be open to them
38|51|They will recline therein. Therein they can call for fruit in abundance, and drink
38|52|And beside them will be chaste women restraining their glances, companions of equal age
38|53|Such is the promise made to you for the Day of Account
38|54|Truly such will be Our bounty and it will never fail
38|55|Yes, but for the wrongdoers will be a terrible place of return
38|56|They will burn in hell, a miserable resting place indeed
38|57|Yes, then will they taste a boiling fluid, and a fluid dark, murky, intensely cold
38|58|And other penalties of a similar kind to match them
38|59|This is a company bursting in with you. No welcome is there for them. Certainly they will burn in the fire
38|60|They say, “No welcome for you. It is you who have brought this upon us. Miserable is this place to stay in.”
38|61|They will say, “Our Lord, whoever brought this upon us, add to him a double penalty in the fire.”
38|62|And they will say, “What has happened to us that we do not see the people who we used to number among the harmful
38|63|“Did we treat them with ridicule, or have we failed to perceive them?”
38|64|Truly that is just and fitting, the talk of people of the fire
38|65|Say, “Truly I am a warner. No god is there but the one God, Supreme, and Irresistible
38|66|“The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all between, Exalted in Might, able to enforce His will, forgiving again and again.”
38|67|Say, “That is a message supreme
38|68|“From which you turn away
38|69|“I have no knowledge of the leaders on high, when they discuss matters among themselves
38|70|“Only this has been revealed to me, that I give warning plainly and publicly.”
38|71|Behold, your Lord said to the angels, “I am about to create the human being from mud
38|72|“When I have fashioned him and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down to him in prostration.”
38|73|So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together
38|74|Except Lucifer. He was arrogant, and became one of those who reject
38|75|God said, “O Lucifer, what prevents you from prostrating yourself to one who I have created with my two hands? Are you arrogant? Or are you one of the high and mighty ones?”
38|76|Lucifer said, “I am better than he. You created me from fire, and him you created from mud.”
38|77|God said, “Get out of here then, for you are rejected, accursed
38|78|“And My curse will be on you until the Day of Accountability.”
38|79|Lucifer said, “O my Lord, then give me respite, until the day they are raised.”
38|80|God said, “Respite is granted you
38|81|“Until the day of the time appointed.”
38|82|Lucifer said, “Then by Your power, I will mislead them all
38|83|“Except Your servants among them, sincere and purified.”
38|84|God said, “Then it is just and fitting, and I say only what is just and fitting
38|85|“That I will certainly fill hell with you and those who follow you, all of them.”
38|86|Say, “No reward do I ask of you for this, nor am I a pretender
38|87|“This is no less than a message for all the systems of knowledge
38|88|“And you will certainly know the truth of it all, in due time.”
39|1|The revelation of this Book is from God, the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
39|2|Indeed it is We Who have revealed the Book to you in truth. So serve God, offering Him sincere devotion
39|3|Is it not to God that sincere devotion is due? But those who take for protectors other than God say, “We only serve them in order that they may bring us nearer to God.” Truly God will judge between them in that which they differ, but God does not guide those who are false and ungrateful
39|4|Had God wished to take for Himself a son, He could have chosen whom He pleased out of those whom He creates, but glory is to Him. He is God, the One, the Irresistible
39|5|He created the heavens and the earth in true proportion. He makes the night overlap the day, and the day overlap the night. He has subjected the Sun and the Moon, each one follows a course for a time appointed. Is He not the Exalted in Power? Does He not forgive again and again
39|6|He created you all from a single soul. Then created of like nature her mate. And He sent down for you eight heads of livestock in pairs. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, in stages one after another, in three veils of darkness. Such is God, your Lord. To Him belongs all control. There is no god but He. Then how are you turned away
39|7|If you reject God, truly God has no need of you, but He likes not ingratitude from His servants. If you are grateful, He is pleased with you. No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another. In the end, to your Lord is your return, then He will tell you the truth of all that you did, for He knows well all that is in the heart
39|8|When some trouble touches the people, they cry to their Lord, turning to Him in repentance, but when He bestows a favor upon them as from Himself, the people forget that they ever cried and prayed, and they set up rivals to God, misleading others from God's path. Say, “Enjoy your blasphemy for a little while, indeed you are of the companions of the fire.”
39|9|Is one who worships devoutly during the hours of the night, prostrating himself and standing, who is aware of the hereafter, and who places his hope in the mercy of his Lord like one who does not? Say, “Are those equal, those who know and those who do not know? It is those who are endued with understanding that remember.”
39|10|Say, “O my servants who believe, be conscious of your Guardian Evolver, good is for those who do good in the present, and it will be as spacious as God's earth. Those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without measure.”
39|11|Say, “Indeed I am asked to serve God with sincere devotion
39|12|“And I am asked to be the first of those who bow to God in religion.”
39|13|Say, “Indeed I fear, if I ignore my Guardian Evolver, the penalty of a mighty day.”
39|14|Say, “It is God I serve with sincere devotion
39|15|“Serve what you will besides Him.” Say, “Those who are indeed lost, are those who lose their souls and their people on the Day of Accountability. That is indeed an evident loss
39|16|They will have layers of fire above them, and layers of fire below them. With this does God warn his servants, “O My servants, be conscious of Me.”
39|17|Those who avoid wrong, and do not fall into its worship, and turn to God, for them is good news. So announce the good news to My servants
39|18|Those who listen to the word, and adhere to the best of it. Those are the ones who God has guided, and those are the ones endowed with understanding
39|19|Then is one against whom the decree of punishment is justly due, equal to one who avoids wrong? Can you then save one who is in the fire
39|20|But for those who are conscious of their Lord are lofty mansions, one above another, built high. Beneath them rivers flow. Such is the promise of God. Never does God fail in His promise
39|21|Do you not see that God sends down rain from the sky, and leads it through springs in the earth? Then He causes to grow there, produce of various colors. Then it withers. You will see it grow yellow. Then He makes it dry up and crumble away. Truly in this is a message of remembrance to people of understanding
39|22|Is one whose heart God has opened to Al-Islam, so that he has received enlightenment from God, no better than one hard-hearted? Woe to those whose hearts are hardened against celebrating the praises of God. They are clearly in error
39|23|God has revealed the best hadith, a book consistent with itself, repeating. The skin of those who fear their Lord shivers from it. Then their skin and their hearts soften to the celebration of God's praises. Such is the guidance of God. He guides with it whom He pleases, but those who God leaves to stray, can have none to guide
39|24|Is then one who has to fear the brunt of the penalty on the Day of Accountability on his face, like one guarded from it? It will be said to the wrongdoers, “Taste of what you earned.”
39|25|Those before them also rejected it, and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive
39|26|So God gave them a taste of humiliation in the present life, but greater is the punishment of the hereafter, if they only knew
39|27|We have put forth for humanity in this Quran, every kind of parable, in order that they may receive advice
39|28|A Quran in Arabic, without anything out-of-place, in order that they may guard against wrong
39|29|God puts forth a parable of a person belonging to many partners at odds with each other, and a person belonging entirely to one man. Are those two equal in comparison? Praise God, but most of them do not understand
39|30|Truly you will die, and truly they will die
39|31|In the end will you all, on the Day of Accountability, settle your disputes in the presence of your Lord. 31 (End of Part)
39|32|Who then does more wrong than one who tells a lie concerning God, and rejects the truth when it comes to him. Should hell not be a home for blasphemers
39|33|But he who brings the truth and he who confirms it. Such are the people who do right
39|34|They will have all that they wish for in the presence of their Lord. Such is the reward for those who do right
39|35|So that God will turn away from them the worst of their deeds, and give them their reward according to the best of what they have done
39|36|Is God not enough for his servant? But they threaten you with others besides Him. For those who God leaves to stray, there can be no guide
39|37|And those who God guides, there can be none to lead astray. Is God not Exalted in Power, Lord of Retribution
39|38|If you ask them who it is that created the heavens and the earth, they would be sure to say, “God.” Say, “Then do you see what you invoke besides God? Can they, if God wills some penalty for me, remove His penalty? Or if He wills some benefit for me, can they keep back His grace?” Say, “Sufficient is God for me. Those who are trusting, trust Him.”
39|39|Say, “O my people, do whatever you can, I will do my part, but soon will you know—
39|40|“Who it is to whom comes a penalty of disgrace, and on whom descends a penalty that persists.”
39|41|Indeed We have revealed the Book to you in truth for humanity. So he who receives guidance benefits his own soul, but he who strays, harms his own soul, nor are you set over them to manage their affairs
39|42|God removes the souls at the time of death. And those who did not die, He removes their soul while they sleep. He then keeps those who death has chosen, and He sends the others back for a time to be announced. Indeed in this are signs for those who reflect
39|43|What, do they take for intercessors others besides God? Say, “Even if they have no power whatsoever and no intelligence?”
39|44|Say, “To God exclusively belongs intercession. To Him belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. In the end, it is to Him Who you will be brought back.”
39|45|When God, the One and Only, is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter sink with aversion, but when those other than He is mentioned, behold, they are filled with joy
39|46|Say, “O God, Creator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of all that is hidden and open, it is You Who will judge between Your servants in those matters about which they have differed.”
39|47|Even if the wrongdoers had all that there is on earth, and as much more, in vain would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the penalty on the Day of Accountability, but something will confront them from God which they could never have imagined
39|48|For the harm of their deeds will confront them, and they will be encircled by that which they used to mock
39|49|Now, when trouble touches the human being they cry to Us, but when We bestow a favor upon them from Ourselves they say, “This has been given to me because of a certain knowledge I have.” No, this is but a trial. But most of them do not understand
39|50|Those before them said the same thing, but all that they did was of no profit to them
39|51|No, the harmful results of their deeds overtook them and the wrongdoers of this generation. The harmful results of their deeds will soon overtake them, and they will never be able to stop Our plan
39|52|Do they not know that God can increase the provisions or restrict them for any He pleases? Indeed, in this are signs for those who believe
39|53|Say, “O my servants who have transgressed against their souls, do not despair of the mercy of God, for God forgives all sins, for He is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
39|54|“Turn to our Lord and bow to His will, before the penalty comes on you. After that, you will not be helped.”
39|55|“And adhere to the best of what is revealed to you from your Guardian Evolver, before the penalty comes on you all of a sudden, while you perceive it not
39|56|“Lest a soul should say, ‘Shame on me, that I neglected my duty towards God, and was indeed among those who mocked.’
39|57|“Or lest she should say, ‘If only God had guided me, I would certainly have been among the righteous.’
39|58|“Or lest she should say when she sees the penalty, ‘If only I had another chance, I would certainly be among those who do right.’ ”
39|59|“No, but there came to you my signs, and you rejected them, you were arrogant, and became one of those who do not believe.”
39|60|On the Day of Accountability you will see those who told lies against God, their faces will be turned black. Is there not in hell a home for the arrogant
39|61|But God will deliver the righteous to their place of salvation. No evil will touch them, nor will they grieve
39|62|God is the Creator of all things, and He is the Guardian and Manager of all affairs
39|63|To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth, and those who reject the signs of God, it is they who will be loss
39|64|Say, “Is it someone other than God that you order me to worship, O you ignorant ones?”
39|65|But it has already been revealed to you, as it was to those before you, “If you were to join gods with God, truly fruitless will be your work, and you will surely be in the ranks of those who lose.”
39|66|No, but worship God, and be of those who give thanks
39|67|No just estimate have they made of God, though it is due to Him. On the Day of Accountability, the whole world will be entirely in His Grip, and the heavens will be rolled up in His Right Hand. Glory be to Him. High is He above the partners they attribute to Him
39|68|The trumpet will be sounded when all that is in the heavens and on earth will swoon, except those God chooses to exempt. Then a second one will be sounded, when behold, they will be standing and looking on
39|69|And the earth will shine with the glory of its Lord. The record will be placed open, the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward, and a just decision pronounced between them, and they will not be wronged
39|70|And every soul will be paid in full for her deeds, and God knows best all that they do
39|71|The unbelievers will be led to hell in a crowd. When they arrive, its gates will be opened, and its keepers will say, “Did messengers not come to you from among yourselves, rehearsing to you the signs of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this day of yours?” The answer will be, “True.” But the decree of punishment has been proved true against the unbelievers.”
39|72|To them it will be said, “Enter the gates of hell, to dwell therein, and terrible is this home of the arrogant.”
39|73|And those who were conscious of their Guardian Evolver will be led to the garden in crowds. Then behold, when they arrive there, its gates will be opened, and its keepers will say, “Peace be upon you, well done, enter and dwell therein forever.”
39|74|They will say, “Praise God, Who has truly fulfilled His promise to us, and has made us inherit the earth. We can dwell in the garden, as we will. How excellent a reward for those who work righteousness.”
39|75|And you will see the angels surrounding the throne on all sides, singing glory and praise to their Lord. The decision between them will be justified, and the cry will be, “Praise God, the Lord of all the worlds.”
40|1|Haa, Miim
40|2|The revelation of this Book is from God, Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge
40|3|He Who forgives harmful deeds, accepts repentance, is strict in punishment, and has a long reach. There is no god but He. To Him is the final goal
40|4|None dispute about the signs of God except the unbelievers. So do not let their strutting about through the land deceive you
40|5|There were people before them who denied the signs, like the people of Noah, and the confederates who came after them. Every people plotted against their messenger, to seize him, and disputed by falsehood to condemn the truth with him. But it was I Who seized them, and how terrible was My penalty
40|6|So the decree of your Lord was proven true against the unbelievers, that they are companions of the fire
40|7|Those who sustain the throne, and those around it sing glory and praise to their Lord. Believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe. “Our Lord, Your reach is over all things, in mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who turn in repentance and follow Your path, and preserve them from the penalty of the blazing fire
40|8|“And grant them, Our Lord, entrance into the gardens of eternity which You have promised to them, and to the righteous among their parents, their spouses, and their descendants, for You are the Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom
40|9|“And preserve them from all harm, and any whom You preserve from harm that day, on them will You have bestowed mercy indeed, and that will truly be the highest achievement.”
40|10|The unbelievers will be addressed, “Greater was the aversion of God to you than is your aversion to yourselves, seeing that you were called to the faith and you refused.”
40|11|They will say, “Our Lord, twice have You made us without life, and twice have You given us life. Now that we acknowledge our sins, is there any way out?”
40|12|This is because when God was invoked as One, you rejected faith, but when partners were joined to Him, you believed. The command is with God, Most High, Most Great
40|13|He is the One Who shows you His signs, and sends down sustenance for you from the universe, but only those receive advice who turn to God
40|14|Then call upon God with sincere devotion to Him, even though the unbelievers may detest it
40|15|Raised high above ranks is the Lord of the throne. By His command does He send the Spirit to any of His servants He pleases, that it may warn the people of the Day of the Meeting
40|16|The day they will all come forth. Not a single thing concerning them is hidden from God. For whom is the control that day? For God, the One, the Irresistible
40|17|That day will every soul be rewarded for what it earned, no injustice will there be that day, for God is swift in taking account
40|18|Warn them of the day that is drawing near, when the hearts will come right up to the throats to choke them. No close friend or intercessor will the wrongdoers have, and they cannot be obeyed
40|19|God knows of that which deceives the eyes, and all that the hearts conceal
40|20|And God will judge with truth. But those whom the people invoke besides Him, will not be in a position to judge at all, indeed it is God Who hears and sees all things
40|21|Do they not travel through the earth and see what the end of those before them was? They were superior to them in strength, and in the traces they have left in the land, but God called them to account for their wrongdoing, and they had none to defend them against God
40|22|That was because there came to them their messengers with guidance, but they rejected them. So God called them to account, for He is Full of Strength, Strict in Punishment
40|23|Indeed We sent Moses with Our signs and a manifest authority
40|24|To Pharaoh, Haman, and Qarun, but they called him a deceiver telling lies
40|25|Now when he came to them in truth from Us they said, “Slay the males of those who believe with him, but keep alive their females.” But the plots of unbelievers end in nothing but error
40|26|Pharaoh said, “Leave me to slay Moses, and let him call on his Lord. What I fear is that he should change your way of life, or that he will cause problems to appear in the land.”
40|27|Moses said, “I have indeed called upon my Lord and your Lord for protection from every arrogant one who does not believe in the Day of Account.”
40|28|A believing person from among the people of Pharaoh, who had concealed his faith said, “Will you slay a person because he says, ‘My Lord is God?’ When he has indeed come to you with guidance from your Lord? And if he were a liar, on him is his lie, but if he is telling the truth, then there will fall on you, something of that which he warns you. Truly God does not guide one who transgresses and lies
40|29|“O my people, yours is the control this day. You have the upper hand in the land, but who will help us from the punishment of God, should it befall us?” Pharaoh said, “I only point out to you that which I see, nor do I guide you, except to the path of right.”
40|30|Then the person who believed said, “O my people, truly I fear for you something like the day of disaster of the Confederates
40|31|“Something like the fate of the people of Noah, the ‘Ad, and the Thamud, and those who came after them, but God never wishes injustice on His servants
40|32|“And O my people, I fear for you, the Day of Calling
40|33|“A day when you will turn your backs and flee. No defender will you have against God. Any whom God leaves to stray, there is none to guide
40|34|“And to you, there came Joseph in times gone by, with clear signs, but you did not cease to doubt the mission for which he had come. Then when he died you said, ‘No messenger will God send after him.’ So God leaves to stray those who transgress and live in doubt
40|35|“Those who dispute about the signs of God, without any authority that has reached them, terrible is such conduct in the sight of God and the believers. So God seals up every heart of arrogant and obstinate transgressors.”
40|36|Pharaoh said, “O Haman, build me a lofty palace, that I may attain the destiny
40|37|“The destiny of the heavens, and that I may mount up to the God of Moses, but as far as I am concerned, I think Moses is a liar.” So it was made alluring in Pharaoh’s eyes, the harm from his deeds, and he was hindered from the path, and the plot of Pharaoh led to nothing but perdition
40|38|The person who believed said in addition, “O my people follow me. I will lead you to the right path
40|39|“O my people, this life of the present is nothing but temporary convenience. It is the hereafter that is the home that will last
40|40|“He who does wrong will not be rewarded except by the likes of it, and he who does a righteous deed, whether male or female, and is a believer, they will enter the garden. Therein they will have abundance without measure
40|41|“And O my people, how strange it is for me to call you to salvation while you call me to the fire
40|42|“You call upon me to reject God, and to join with Him partners of whom I do not know, and I call you to the Exalted in Power, Who forgives again and again.”
40|43|“Without doubt, you call me to one that is not fit to be called on. Whether in the present, or in the hereafter, our return will be to God, and the transgressors will be companions of the fire
40|44|“Soon will you remember what I say to you, my cause I commit to God, for God watches over His servants.”
40|45|Then God saved him from the harm that they plotted, and the pain of the penalty surrounded the people of Pharaoh on all sides
40|46|They will be brought in front of the fire, morning and evening, and the sentence will be on the day that Judgment will be established, “Go you people of Pharaoh into the severest penalty.”
40|47|Behold, they will dispute with each other in the fire. The weak ones will say to those who had been arrogant, “We were only following you. Can you then take from us some part of the fire
40|48|Those who had been arrogant will say, “We are all in this together.” Truly God will judge His servants
40|49|Those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell, “Pray to your Lord to lighten the penalty for us for a day.”
40|50|They will say, “Did there not come to you your messengers with clear signs?” They will say, “Yes.” They will reply, “Then pray.” But the prayer of those without faith is futile.”
40|51|We will, without doubt, help Our messengers and those who believe, both in the present life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth
40|52|The day when no profit will it be for wrongdoers to present their excuses, but they will have the curse and the worst of homes
40|53|We gave Moses the Guidance, and We gave the Book in inheritance to the Children of Israel
40|54|A guide and a message to people of understanding
40|55|Patiently persevere, for the promise of God is true, and ask forgiveness for your wrong, and glorify your Lord with praise, in the evening and in the morning
40|56|Those who dispute about the signs of God without any authority bestowed on them, there is nothing in their breasts but a quest of greatness which they will never attain. Seek refuge then in God. It is He Who hears and sees all things
40|57|Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of humankind. Yet most people do not understand
40|58|Not equal are the blind and those who see, nor those who believe and do deeds of righteousness and those who do wrong. Little do you learn by advice
40|59|The Hour will certainly come. There is no doubt about it. Yet most people do not believe
40|60|And your Lord says, “Call on Me, I will answer you, but those who are too arrogant to serve Me, will surely find themselves in hell, and in humiliation.”
40|61|It is God Who has made the night for you, that you may rest therein, and the days as that which helps you to see. Indeed God is Full of Grace and Bounty to humanity. Yet most people give no thanks
40|62|Such is God, your Guardian Evolver, the Creator of all things, there is no god but Him. Then how are you deluded away from the truth
40|63|Deluded are those who are accustomed to rejecting the signs of God
40|64|It is God Who has made for you the earth as a resting place, and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape, and made your shapes beautiful, and has provided for you sustenance of things pure and good. Such is God your Lord. So glory be to God, the Lord of all worlds
40|65|He is the Living, there is no god but Him. Call upon Him, giving Him sincere devotion, praise God, Lord of all worlds
40|66|Say, “I have been forbidden to invoke those whom you invoke besides God, seeing that the clear signs have come to me from my Lord, and I have been asked to bow to the Lord of all worlds.”
40|67|It is He Who has created you from dust, then from a zygote, then from a fetus, and then He delivers you as an infant. Then causes you to reach your age of full strength, then causes you to become old, although there are some who die before, and lets you reach a term appointed, in order that you may learn wisdom
40|68|It is He Who gives life and death, and when He decides upon an affair, He says to it: “Be”. And it is
40|69|Do you not see those who dispute concerning the signs of God? How are they turned away
40|70|Those who reject the Book and that with which We sent our messengers, but soon will they know
40|71|When the chains will be around their necks, and in the chains, they will be dragged along—
40|72|In the boiling fluid, then in the fire, they will be burned
40|73|Then it will be said to them, “Where are those to which you gave part worship
40|74|“To other than God?” They will reply, “They have left us lost. No, we invoked nothing from the past.” So God leaves the unbelievers to stray
40|75|“That is because you were accustomed to rejoicing on the earth in things other than the truth, and that you were accustomed to being insolent
40|76|“Enter the gates of hell, to dwell therein, and terrible is the abode of the arrogant.”
40|77|So persevere in patience, for the promise of God is true, and whether We show you some part of what We promise them, or We take your soul before that, it is to Us that they will all return
40|78|We sent messengers before you. Of them there are some whose story We have related to you, and some whose story We have not related to you. It was not possible for any messenger to bring a sign except by the permission of God, but when the command of God issued, the matter was decided in truth and justice, and they perished there, those who stood on falsehood
40|79|It is God Who made livestock for you, that you might use some for riding and some for food
40|80|And there are other advantages in them for you, that you may attain through them any need in your chest, and on them, and on ships you are carried
40|81|And He shows you His signs. Then which of the signs of God will you deny
40|82|Do they not travel through the earth and see what the end of those before them was? They were more numerous, and superior in strength, and in the traces they have left in the land. Yet all that they accomplished was of no profit to them
40|83|For when their messengers came to them with clear signs, they reveled in the knowledge and skill they had. But the very thing, at which they were accustomed to ridicule, captured them
40|84|But when they saw Our punishment they said, “We believe in God, the one God, and we reject the partners we joined with Him.”
40|85|But their professing the faith when they saw Our punishment was not going to profit them. Such has been God's way of dealing with His servants from the most ancient of times, and lost were the rejecters
41|1|Haa, Miim
41|2|A revelation from God, the Merciful Benefactor, the Merciful Redeemer
41|3|A book of verses explained in detail. A Quran in Arabic, for people who know
41|4|Giving good news and advice. Yet most of them turn away, so they do not hear
41|5|They say, “Our hearts are under veils, concealed from that which you invite us, and in our ears is deafness, and between us and you is a screen. So do what you will, and for us, we will do what we will.”
41|6|Say, “I am only a human being like you. It is revealed to me by inspiration that your God is one God. So stand true to Him, and ask for His forgiveness.” And woe to those who join gods with God
41|7|Those who do not give zakat, and who deny the hereafter
41|8|For those who believe and do deeds of righteousness is a reward that will never fail
41|9|Say, is it that you deny Him Who created the earth in two days? And do you join equals with Him? He is the Lord of all the worlds
41|10|He set on the earth mountains standing firm high above it, and bestowed blessings on the earth, and measure therein all things to give them nourishment in due proportion, in four days, in accordance with the needs of those who seek them
41|11|Moreover, He comprehended in His design, the sky while it was dust. He said to it and to the earth, “Come together, willingly or unwillingly.” They said, “We come in willing obedience.”
41|12|So He completed them as seven firmaments in two days, and He assigned to each heaven its duty and command. And We adorned the lower heaven with lights and with guards. This is His decree, the Exalted in Might, Full of Knowledge
41|13|But if they turn away say, “I have warned you of a stunning punishment like that which overtook the ‘Ad and the Thamud.”
41|14|Behold, the messengers came to them, from before them and behind them saying, “Serve none but God.” They said, “If our Lord had willed, He would certainly have sent down angels. So indeed we reject your mission.”
41|15|Now the ‘Ad behaved arrogantly through the land, against all truth and reason and said, “Who is superior to us in strength?” What, did they not see that God, Who created them, was Superior to them in strength? But they continued to reject Our signs
41|16|So We sent against them a furious wind through days of disaster, that We might give them a taste of a penalty of humiliation in this life, but the penalty of the hereafter will be more crushing, and they will find no help
41|17|As for the Thamud, We gave them guidance, but they preferred blindness to guidance. So the stunning punishment of humiliation seized them because of what they earned
41|18|But We delivered those who believed and practiced righteousness
41|19|On the day that the enemies of God will be gathered together to the fire, they will be marched in ranks
41|20|Then, when they reach the fire, their hearing, their sight, and their skin will bear witness against them, as to all their deeds
41|21|They will say to their skin, “Why do you bear witness against us?” They will say, “God has given us speech, He Who gives speech to everything. He created you for the first time, and to Him were you to return
41|22|“You did not seek to protect yourselves, so that your hearing, your sight, and your skin would not bear witness against you. But you thought that God did not know many of the things you used to do
41|23|“But this thought of yours which you entertained concerning your Lord has brought you to destruction, and you became of those utterly lost.”
41|24|Even if then they have patience, the fire will be a home for them, and if they beg for favor, favor they will not receive
41|25|And We have destined for them close companions, who made alluring to them that which was before them and behind them, and the accusation among the previous generations of jinn and humans who have passed away is proven against them, for they are utterly lost
41|26|The unbelievers say, “Do not listen to this Quran, but talk at random in the middle of its reading, that you may gain the upper hand.”
41|27|But We will certainly give the unbelievers a taste of a severe penalty, and We will charge them for the worst of their deeds
41|28|Such is the punishment for the enemies of God. In the fire will be their eternal home, repayment because they used to reject Our signs
41|29|And the unbelievers will say, “Our Lord, show us those among the jinn and humans who misled us. We will crush them beneath our feet, so that they become the lowest.”
41|30|In the case of those who say, “Our Lord is God,” and who also stand straight and steadfast, the angels descend on them, “Fear not, nor grieve, but receive the hope of the garden that you were promised
41|31|“We are your protectors in this life and in the hereafter. Therein you will have all that your soul desires. Therein you will have all that you ask for
41|32|“A hospitable gift from One Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
41|33|Who is better in speech than one who calls people to God, works righteousness, and says, “I am of those who bow in Al-Islam”
41|34|And not equal are benefit and harm. Repel wrong with what is better. Then the two who hated each other will become close friends
41|35|And no one will be granted such goodness except those who exercise patience and self-restraint, none but those of the greatest good fortune
41|36|And if a harmful suggestion is made to you by Satan, seek refuge with God. He is the One Who hears and knows all things
41|37|Among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not adore the sun and the moon, but adore God, Who created them, if it is Him you wish to worship
41|38|The unbelievers are arrogant, but in the presence of your Lord are those who praise Him by night and by day, and they never cease
41|39|And among His signs is this, you see the earth barren and desolate, but when We send down rain to it, it is stirred to life and yields increase. Truly, He Who gives life to the earth can surely give life to people who are dead, for He has power over all things
41|40|Those who corrupt the truth in Our verses are not hidden from Us. Which is better, he who is cast into the fire or he who passes by safely, on the Day of Accountability? Do what you will, indeed He sees all that you do
41|41|They are those who reject the message when it comes to them. But indeed it is a book of exalted power
41|42|No falsehood can approach it from before or behind it. It is sent down by One Full of Wisdom, Worthy of All Praise
41|43|Nothing is said to you that was not said to the messengers before you. That your Lord has at His command all forgiveness as well as a most terrible penalty
41|44|Had We sent this as a Quran in a language other than Arabic, they would have said, “Why are its verses not explained in detail? What, the message not in Arabic and the messenger an Arab?” Say, “It is a guide and a healing to those who believe, and for those who do not believe, there is deafness in their ears, and there is blindness in their eyes. They are being called from a place far away.”
41|45|We certainly gave Moses the Book, but disputes arose concerning it. Had it not been for a word that went forth before from your Lord, their differences would have been settled between them, but they remained in disquieting doubt
41|46|Whoever works righteousness, benefits their own soul, whoever does wrong, it is against their own soul, nor is your Lord ever unjust to His servants. 46 (End of Part)
41|47|To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour. No date-fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive or deliver on the day that God will ask them, “Where are the partners you associated with Me?” They will say, “We assure you, not one of us can bear witness.”
41|48|The deities they used to invoke will leave them, but they will see that they have no way to escape
41|49|Human beings do not tire of asking for good, but if harm touches them, they give up all hope, lost in despair
41|50|When we give him a taste of some mercy from Ourselves, after some adversity has touched him, he is sure to say, “This is due to me. I do not think the Hour will be established, but if I am brought back to my Lord, I have enough good stored in His sight.” But We will show the unbelievers the truth of all that they did, and We will give them the taste of a severe penalty
41|51|When We bestow favor on the human being, he turns away and distances himself, and when harm seizes him, he comes full of prolonged prayer
41|52|Say, “Do you see that it is truly from God, and yet you still reject it? Who is more astray than one who is in opposition, and far from the purpose?”
41|53|Soon We will show them our signs in all regions of the farthest horizons, and in their own selves, until it becomes clear to them that this is the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord witnesses all things
41|54|Ah indeed, they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their Lord. Ah indeed, it is He Who encompasses all things
42|1|Haa, Miim
42|2|Ayn, Siin, Qaaf
42|3|He sends inspiration to you, as He did to those before you. He is God, Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
42|4|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth, and He is the Most High, the Greatest
42|5|The heavens are almost rent asunder from above them, and the angels glorify their Lord by praising Him, and pray for forgiveness for all beings on earth. Behold, God is He, the Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
42|6|And those who take as protectors others besides Him, God watches over them, and you are not the manager of their affairs
42|7|So We have sent by inspiration to you an Arabic Quran. That you may warn the mother of the cities and all around her, and warn them of the Day of Assembly, of which there is no doubt, when some will be in the garden, and some in the blazing fire
42|8|If God had willed, He could have made them a single people, but He admits whom He wills to His mercy, and the wrongdoers will have neither protector nor helper
42|9|What, have they taken for worship protectors besides Him? But it is God, He is the Protector, and it is He Who gives life to the dead. It is He Who has power over all things
42|10|Whatever it is in which you differ, the decision of it is with God. This is God my Lord, in Him I trust, and to Him I turn
42|11|The Creator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you pairs from among yourselves, and pairs among livestock. By these means does He multiply you. There is nothing like Him, and He is the One Who hears and sees all things
42|12|To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlarges and restricts the sustenance to whom He wills, for He knows well all things
42|13|The way He has established things for you, is the same way that He enjoined those things on Noah. Those things which We have sent by inspiration to you, and that which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses, and Jesus. Namely, that you should remain steadfast, and make no divisions therein. For those who worship things other than God, difficult is the way to which you call them. God chooses for Himself those whom He pleases, and guides to Himself those who turn to Him
42|14|And they became divided only after knowledge reached them, because of selfish envy between themselves. Had it not been for a word that went forth before from your Lord, specified for a term appointed, the matter would have been settled between them. But indeed, those who have inherited the Book after them, are in suspicious doubt concerning it
42|15|Now then, for that reason, call them and stand steadfast as you are asked to, and do not follow their vain desires but say, “I believe in the Book that God has sent down, and I am asked to judge justly between you. God is our Lord and your Lord, for us is the responsibility for our deeds, and for you, your deeds. There is no contention between you and us. God will bring us together, and to Him is Our final goal
42|16|But those who dispute concerning God, after He has been accepted, futile is their dispute in the sight of their Lord. On them will be a terrible penalty
42|17|It is God Who has sent down the Book in truth, and the balance, but what will make you realize that the Hour is nearby
42|18|Only those wish to hasten it who do not believe in it. Those who believe, hold it in awe, and know that it is the truth. Behold, those who dispute concerning the Hour are far astray
42|19|Gracious is God to His servants. He gives sustenance to whom He pleases, He has power, and can carry out His will
42|20|To any who desire the fields of the hereafter, We give increase in his fields, and to any who desires the fields of the present, We grant them some of it, but he has no share in the hereafter
42|21|What, have they partners who have established for them some way without the permission of God? Had it not been for the decree of judgment, the matter would have been decided between them. But indeed the wrongdoers will have a terrible penalty
42|22|You will see the wrongdoers in fear because of what they have earned, and the burden of that must fall on them, but those who believe and work righteous deeds, will be in the luxurious meads of the gardens. They will have before their Lord all that they wish for. That will indeed be a magnificent bounty
42|23|That is the bounty by which God gives hope to His servants who believe and do righteous deeds. Say, “No reward do I ask of you for this, except the love of close family.” And if anyone earns any good, We will give him an increase of good in respect of it, for God is Oft-Forgiving, most ready to appreciate service
42|24|What, do they say, “He has fabricated a lie against God?” But if God willed, He could seal up your heart, and God blots out vanity, and proves the truth by His words, for He knows well the secrets of all hearts
42|25|He is the One Who accepts repentance from His servants and forgives sins, and He knows all that you do
42|26|And He listens to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, and gives them increase from His bounty, but for the unbelievers, theirs is a terrible penalty
42|27|If God were to enlarge provisions for His servants, they would indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth, but he sends it down in due measure as He pleases, for He is with His servants, and is Well-Acquainted, and Watchful
42|28|He is the One Who sends down rain after people have given up hope, and scatters His mercy, and He is the Protector, Worthy of All Praise
42|29|And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the living creatures that He has scattered through them, and He has power to gather them together when He wills
42|30|Whatever misfortune happens to you is because of the things your hands have done, and for many of them He grants forgiveness
42|31|Nor can you stop His will in the earth, nor do you have besides God, anyone to protect or to help
42|32|And among His signs are the ships running smoothly through the ocean as mountains
42|33|If it were His will, He could stop the wind. Then they would become motionless on the face of the ocean. Indeed in this are signs for all who patiently persevere and are grateful
42|34|Or He can cause them to perish because of the harm that they have earned, but much does He forgive
42|35|But let those know who dispute about Our signs, that there is for them no way of escape
42|36|Whatever you are given here is only a temporary enjoyment of this life, but that which is with God is better and longer lasting. It is for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
42|37|Those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds, and when they are angry, even then they forgive
42|38|Those who listen to their Lord, and establish prayer, who conducts their affairs by consultation, who gives out of what We bestow on them for sustenance
42|39|And those who when oppression is inflicted on them, defend themselves
42|40|The reward for an injury is an injury equal to it, but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is due from God, for God does not love those who do wrong
42|41|But indeed, if any help and defend themselves after a wrong is done to them, on them there is no cause for blame
42|42|The blame is only against those who oppress people, do wrong, and transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying right. For them there will be a terrible penalty
42|43|But indeed if any show patience and forgiveness, that would truly be a courageous resolution to their affairs
42|44|For any whom God leaves astray, there is no protector after that, and you will see the wrongdoers when in sight of the penalty say, “Is there any way to return?”
42|45|And you will see them brought forward to the penalty, in a humble frame of mind, because of their disgrace, and looking with a stealthy glance, and the believers will say, “Those are indeed in loss, who has given to perdition their own souls, and those belonging to them on the Day of Accountability. Behold, truly the wrongdoers are in a lasting penalty.”
42|46|And they have no protectors to help them, other than God, and for any whom God leaves to stray, there is no way to guide them
42|47|Listen to your Lord, before there comes a day which there will be no averting it from God. That day there will be for you no place of refuge, nor will there be for you any room for denial
42|48|If then they run away, We have not sent you as a guardian over them. Your duty is only to convey the message, and truly, when We give people a taste of mercy from Ourselves, they rejoice in it, but when some harm comes to them on account of the deeds which their hands have sent forth, then indeed people are ungrateful
42|49|To God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He delivers male or female according to His will
42|50|Or He delivers both males and females, and He leaves unable to have children, whom He wills, for He is full of knowledge and power
42|51|It is not possible for human beings that God should speak to them except by inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by the sending of a messenger to reveal, with God's permission, what God wills, for He is Most High, Most Wise
42|52|And so We have, by Our permission, sent inspiration to you. Before, you did not know what revelation was, or what faith was, but We have made it a light with which We guide such of Our servants as We will, and indeed you guide people to the straight way
42|53|The way of God, to Whom belongs what is in the heavens and what is on earth. Behold, all affairs reach God
43|1|Haa, Miim
43|2|By the Book that makes things clear
43|3|We have made it a Quran in Arabic that you may be able to understand
43|4|And indeed, it is in the mother of the Book, in Our presence, high and full of wisdom
43|5|Shall We then take away the message from you and disregard you, because you are a people transgressing beyond bounds
43|6|But how many were the messengers We sent among peoples throughout history
43|7|And there never came a messenger to them that they did not mock
43|8|So We caused them to perish. They were stronger than these in power are. And it is passed on, the parable of past peoples
43|9|If you were to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They would be sure to reply, “They were created by Him, the Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge.”
43|10|The same One Who has made for you the earth spread out, and has made for you roads and channels in it, in order that you may be guided
43|11|He Who sends down rain from the sky in due measure, and We raise to life with it a land that is dead, as will you be raised
43|12|He Who has created everything in pairs, and has made for you ships and livestock on which you ride
43|13|In order that you may sit firmly on them, and glorify the favor of your Lord and say, “Praise to Him Who has subjected these to our use, for we could never have done this
43|14|“And to our Lord, indeed we must return.”
43|15|Yet they attribute to some of His servants, a share with Him. Indeed human beings are clearly ungrateful
43|16|What, has He taken daughters out of what He Himself creates, and given sons to you
43|17|When news is brought to one of them of the birth of what he attributes to God, the Merciful Benefactor, his face darkens, and he is filled with inward grief
43|18|One who is to be reared to be a trophy, and finds themselves torn by inner conflict
43|19|And they created into females, angels who themselves serve God. Did they witness their creation? Their evidence will be recorded, and they will be called to account
43|20|They say, “If it had been the will of God, the Merciful Benefactor, we would not have worshipped such deities.” They have no knowledge of that, they do nothing but lie
43|21|What, have We given them a book before this, to which they hold fast
43|22|No, they say, “We found our fathers following a certain way, and we guide ourselves by their footsteps.”
43|23|In the same way that when We sent a warner before you to any people, the elite among them said, “We found our fathers following a certain way, and we will certainly follow in their footsteps.”
43|24|He said, “What, even if I brought you better guidance than that which you found your fathers following?” They said, “For us, we deny that you are sent on a mission at all.”
43|25|So We took retribution from them. Now see what the end of those who rejected it was
43|26|Behold, Abraham said to his father and his people, “I indeed clear myself of what you worship
43|27|“I worship only Him Who made me, and He will certainly guide me.”
43|28|And he left it as a word to endure among those who came after him, that they might return
43|29|Yes, I have given the good things of this life to these people and their parents, until the truth has come to them, and a messenger making things clear
43|30|But when the truth came to them they said, “This is deception, and we reject it.”
43|31|They also say, “Why is this Quran not sent down to some great person in either of the two cities?”
43|32|Do they distribute the mercy of your Lord? It is We Who distribute among them their livelihood in the life of the present, and We raise some of them above others in ranks, so that some may benefit from the work of others, but the mercy of your Lord is better than that which they amass
43|33|And were it not that all people might become one community, We would provide for everyone who rejects the Merciful Benefactor, silver roofs for their houses and silver stairways on which to climb
43|34|And silver doors to their houses, and thrones of silver on which they could recline
43|35|And adornments of gold. But all this is nothing but conveniences of the present life. The hereafter, in the sight of your Lord, is for the righteous
43|36|If anyone turns himself from remembrance of God, the Merciful Benefactor, We appoint for him a devil to be a close friend to him
43|37|They hinder them from the path, but they think that they are being guided aright
43|38|Then, when such a one comes to Us, he says to his friend, “I wish that between you and me were the distance of East and West.” How terrible this friend is
43|39|When you have done wrong, it will not benefit you that day, you will be partners in punishment
43|40|Can you then make the deaf to hear, or give direction to the blind, or to those who wander in manifest error
43|41|Even if We take you away, We will be sure to exact retribution from them
43|42|Or We will show you that which We have promised them, for indeed We will prevail over them
43|43|So hold fast to the revelation sent down to you, indeed you are on a straight way
43|44|The Quran is indeed the message for you and for your people, and soon will you be brought to account
43|45|And question those to whom we sent our messengers before you, did We appoint any deities other than God, the Merciful Benefactor, to be worshipped
43|46|We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his advisors. He said, “I am a messenger of the Lord of all worlds.”
43|47|But when he came to them with Our signs, behold, they ridiculed them
43|48|We showed them sign after sign, each greater than the other, and We seized them with punishment, in order that they might turn to Us
43|49|And they said, “O sorcerer, invoke your Lord for us according to His covenant with you, for we will truly accept guidance.”
43|50|But when We removed the penalty from them behold, they broke their word
43|51|And Pharaoh proclaimed among his people saying, “O my people, does not the control of Egypt belong to me? See these streams flowing underneath me? What, do you not see
43|52|“Am I not better than this one who is seemingly insignificant and can hardly express himself clearly
43|53|“Then why are not gold bracelets bestowed on him, or why do there not come with him angels accompanying him?”
43|54|So he made fools of his people, and they followed him. Truly were they a rebellious people
43|55|So when they provoked Us, We took retribution from them, and We drowned them all
43|56|And We made them a people of history and an example in the hereafter
43|57|When the son of Mary is held up as an example behold, your people protested aloud about it
43|58|And they said, “Are our gods best, or is he?” This was presented to you only for argument. Yes, they are a contentious people
43|59|He was no more than a slave. We granted Our favor to him, and We made him an example to the Children of Israel
43|60|And if it were Our will, We could make angels from among you, succeeding each other on the earth
43|61|And this will be a sign of the Hour. Therefore have no doubt about it, but follow Me. This is a straight way
43|62|Do not let Satan hinder you, for he is to you a sworn enemy
43|63|When Jesus came with clear signs he said, “Now I come to you with wisdom, and to make clear to you some of that which you dispute. Therefore be aware of God and follow me
43|64|“For God, He is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight way.”
43|65|But sects from among them fell into disagreement. Then woe to the wrongdoers, for the penalty of a terrible day
43|66|Do they only wait for the Hour, that it should come on them all of a sudden while they perceive it not
43|67|Friends on that day will be foes, one to another, except for the righteous
43|68|My devotees. No fear will be on you that day, nor will you grieve
43|69|Those who believed in Our signs and were submissive
43|70|Enter the garden, all of you and your spouses, rejoicing
43|71|To them will be passed around, gold plates and goblets of gold. There will be all that the souls could desire, all that their eyes could enjoy, and you will live therein forever
43|72|Such will be the garden of which you are made heirs because of your deeds
43|73|You will have therein abundance of fruit, from which you will have satisfaction
43|74|The wrong-doers will be in the punishment of hell, to dwell therein
43|75|The punishment will not be lightened for them, and they will be there in despair, overwhelmed
43|76|In no way will We be unjust to them, but they have been unjust to themselves
43|77|They will cry, “O Malik, have your Lord put an end to us.” He will say, “No, you must remain.”
43|78|Indeed We have brought the truth to you, but most of you have hatred for truth
43|79|What, have they settled some plan among themselves? But it is We Who settle things
43|80|Or do they think that We do not hear their secrets and their private counsels? Indeed We do, and Our messengers are by them to record
43|81|Say, “If God, the Merciful Benefactor had a son, I would be the first to worship him.”
43|82|Glory to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the throne. He is free from the things they attribute to Him
43|83|So leave them to converse vainly and play, until they meet that day of theirs which they have been promised
43|84|It is He Who is God in heaven and God on earth, and He is full of wisdom and knowledge
43|85|And blessed is He to Whom belongs the control of the heavens and the earth, and all between them. With Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and to Him will you be brought back
43|86|And those whom they invoke besides God have no power of intercession. Only he who bears witness to the truth, and know
43|87|If you ask them who created them, they will certainly say God. How then are they deluded away from the truth
43|88|God has knowledge of the messenger’s cry, “O my Lord, truly these are people who will not believe.”
43|89|But turn away from them, and say “Peace.” But soon they will know
44|1|Haa, Miim
44|2|By the Book that makes things clear
44|3|We sent it down during a blessed night, for We wish to warn
44|4|In the night is made clear every affair of wisdom
44|5|By command, from Our presence, for We send revelation
44|6|As mercy from your Lord, for He hears and knows all things
44|7|The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all between them, if you have an assured faith
44|8|There is no god but He. It is He Who gives life and gives death, the Guardian Evolver to you and your earliest ancestors
44|9|Yet they play around in doubt
44|10|Then watch for the day that the sky will bring forth a kind of smoke, plainly visible
44|11|Smothering the people. This will be a terrible penalty
44|12|“Our Lord, remove the penalty from us, for we really do believe.”
44|13|How can there be a reminder for them, seeing that a messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them
44|14|Yet they turn away from him and say, “Tutored by others, a person possessed.”
44|15|We will indeed remove the penalty for a while and truly you will return
44|16|One day We will seize you with a mighty onslaught. We will indeed exact retribution
44|17|We did, before them, try the people of Pharaoh. There came to them a messenger honorable
44|18|Saying, “Restore to me the servants of God. I am to you a messenger worthy of all trust
44|19|“And do not be arrogant as against God, for I come to you with clear authority
44|20|“For me, I have sought safety with my Lord and your Lord, against your injuring me
44|21|“If you do not believe, at least keep away from me.”
44|22|Then he cried to his Lord, “These are indeed people given to harmful deeds.”
44|23|“March forth with My servants by night, for you are sure to be pursued
44|24|“And leave the sea divided, for they are an army destined to be drowned.”
44|25|How many were the gardens and springs they left behind
44|26|And corn-fields, and impressive buildings
44|27|And wealth which they had taken such pride
44|28|All this We made other people inherit
44|29|And neither heaven nor earth shed a tear over them, nor were they given respite
44|30|We did deliver the Children of Israel from a crushing punishment–
44|31|Inflicted by Pharaoh, for he was arrogant and one of the transgressors
44|32|And We chose them above the nations knowingly
44|33|And granted them signs in which there were a manifest trial
44|34|As for these, they say humorously
44|35|“There is nothing beyond our first death, and we will not be raised again
44|36|“Then bring back our ancestors, if what you say is true.”
44|37|What, are they better than the people of Touba, and those who were before them? We caused them to perish because they were guilty of harmful deeds
44|38|We did not create the heavens, the earth, and all between them, for mere play
44|39|We did not create them except for just ends, but most of them do not understand
44|40|Indeed the day of sorting out is the time appointed for all of them
44|41|The day no protector can avail his client in anything, and no help can they receive
44|42|Except those who receive God's mercy, for He is Exalted in Might, the Merciful Redeemer
44|43|Indeed the tree of Zaqqum—
44|44|Will be the food of the sinful
44|45|Like molten brass, it will boil in their insides
44|46|Like the boiling of scalding water
44|47|“Seize him and drag him into the middle of the blazing fire
44|48|“Then pour over his head the penalty of boiling water
44|49|“Taste this. Truly were you mighty, full of pride
44|50|“Indeed this is what you used to doubt.”
44|51|As for the righteous, they will be in a position of security
44|52|Among gardens and springs
44|53|Dressed in fine silk and in rich brocade, they will face each other
44|54|And We will join them to companions with beautiful eyes
44|55|There they can call for every kind of fruit in peace and security
44|56|Nor will they taste death there, only the first death, and He will preserve them from the penalty of the blazing fire
44|57|As a bounty from your Lord. That will be the ultimate achievement
44|58|Indeed, We have made this easy in your tongue, in order that they may take heed
44|59|So wait and watch, for they too are waiting
45|1|Haa, Miim
45|2|The revelation of the Book is from God, the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
45|3|Indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe
45|4|And in the creation of yourselves, and the fact that animals are scattered through the earth, are signs for those of assured faith
45|5|And in the alternation of night and day, and the fact that God sends down sustenance from the sky, and revives the earth with it after its death. And in the change of the winds, are signs for those who are wise
45|6|Such are the signs of God which We rehearse to you in truth, and then in what hadith will they believe in after rejecting God and His signs
45|7|Woe to each harmful liar
45|8|He hears the signs of God rehearsed to him, yet is obstinate and arrogant, as if he had not heard them. Then announce to him a terrible penalty
45|9|And when he learns something of Our signs, he takes them without regard, for them there will be a crushing penalty
45|10|In front of them is hell, and of no profit to them is anything that they may have earned, nor is any protectors they may have taken for themselves besides God, for them is a tremendous penalty
45|11|This is guidance. And for those who reject the signs of their Lord, is a punishingly, painful penalty
45|12|It is God Who has subjected the sea to you, that ships may sail through it by His command, that you may seek of his bounty, and that you may be grateful
45|13|And He has subjected to you, from Himself, all that is in the heavens and on earth. Behold, indeed in that are signs for those who reflect
45|14|Tell those who believe, to forgive those who do not look forward to the days of God. It is for Him to reward each people according to what they have earned
45|15|If anyone does a righteous deed, it is surely to the benefit of their soul. If they does wrong, it works against their soul. In the end, you will all be brought back to your Lord
45|16|We granted to the Children of Israel the Book, and the Wisdom, and the prophetic office. We gave them for sustenance, things good and pure, and We favored them above the nations
45|17|And We granted them clear signs in all affairs. It was only after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into disagreements through insolent envy among themselves. Indeed your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Accountability, as to those matters in which they had differences
45|18|Then We put you in the best way of life. So follow that way, and do not follow the desires of those who know not
45|19|They will be of no use to you in the sight of God, it is only wrongdoers who stand as protectors, one to another, but God is the Protector of the righteous
45|20|This is clear evidences to humanity, and a guidance and mercy to those of assured faith
45|21|What, do those who seek corrupt ways think that We will hold them equal with those who believe and do righteous deeds, equal will be their life and their death? Wrong is their judgment
45|22|God created the heavens and the earth for just ends, and in order that each soul may find the reward of what it has earned, and none of them will be wronged
45|23|Then do you see the one who takes as his god his own vain desire? God has, knowing him as such, left him astray, and sealed his hearing and his heart, and put a veil on his sight. Who then will guide him after God? Will you not then receive advice
45|24|And they say, “What is there other than our life in the present? We will die and we live, and nothing but time can destroy us.” But of that, they do not know. They only theorize
45|25|And when Our clear signs are rehearsed to them, their argument is nothing but this, they say, “Bring back our ancestors, if what you say is true.”
45|26|Say, “It is God Who gives you life, then gives you death, then He will gather you together for the Day of Accountability, about which there is no doubt.” But most people do not understand
45|27|To God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth, and the day that the Hour of Judgment is established, that day will the liars perish
45|28|And you will see every community bowing on knee. Every community will be called to its record, “This day will you be rewarded for all that you did
45|29|“This, Our record, speaks about you with truth, for We put on record all that you did.”
45|30|Then, as to those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them to His mercy, and that will be the achievement for all to see
45|31|But as for those who rejected God, to them it will be said, “Were not Our signs rehearsed to you? But you were arrogant, and were a people given to harmful deeds
45|32|“And when it was said that the promise of God was true, and that as for the Hour, there was no doubt about its coming, you used to say, ‘We do not know what the Hour is. We only think it is a theory, and we have no firm assurance.’ ”
45|33|Then will appear to them the harmfulness of what they did, and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock
45|34|It will also be said, “This day We will ignore you as you ignored the meeting of this day of yours, and your abode is the fire, and you have no helpers
45|35|“This is because you used to take the signs of God without regard, and the life of the world deceived you.” Therefore, on that day, they will not be taken out, nor will they be taken into grace
45|36|Then praise God, Lord of the heavens, and Lord of the earth, Lord of all the worlds
45|37|To Him is glory throughout the heavens and the earth, and He is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom. 37 (End of Part)
46|1|Haa, Miim
46|2|The revelation of the Book is from God, the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
46|3|We did not create the heavens and the earth, and all between them, except for just ends, and for a term appointed. But those who do not believe turn away from that which they are warned
46|4|Say, “Do you see what you invoke besides God? Show me what it is they have created on earth. Or have they a share in the heavens? Bring it to me in a book revealed before this or any shred of evidence that you may have, if you are telling the truth
46|5|And who is more astray than one who invokes besides God, one that will not answer him on the Day of Accountability, and who in fact is unaware of their call
46|6|And when humanity is gathered together, these will be hostile to them, and these will reject their worship
46|7|When Our clear signs are rehearsed to them, the unbelievers say of the truth when it comes to them, “This is obviously deception.”
46|8|Or do they say, “He has fabricated it?” Say, “Had I fabricated it, then you could not obtain anything for me, from God. He knows best what you say. Enough is He for a witness between you and me, and He is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
46|9|Say, “I do not depart from the messengers, nor do I know what will be done with me or with you. I follow only that which is revealed to me by inspiration. I am only a warner open and clear.”
46|10|Say, “Look, if this is from God, and you reject it, and a witness from among the Children of Israel testifies to it as an example of scripture, and has believed while you are arrogant, then know that God does not guide people who are unjust.”
46|11|The unbelievers say about those who believe, “If this message were a good thing, such people would not have gone to it first before us.” And seeing that they do not guide themselves by it they will say, “This is a fake.”
46|12|And before this, the Book of Moses was a guide and a mercy, and this Book confirms it in the Arabic tongue, to advise the unjust, and as hope to those who do right
46|13|Indeed those who say, “Our Lord is God,” and remain firm, on them will be no fear, nor shall they grieve
46|14|These will be companions of the gardens, dwelling therein forever, a reward for their deeds
46|15|We have enjoined on the human being kindness to his parents. In pain did his mother carry him, and in pain did she give birth to him. Carrying the child and his weaning is a period of thirty months. Then, when he reaches the age of full strength and attains forty years he says, “My Lord, bless me to be grateful for Your favors that You have bestowed upon me, and upon both my parents, and to do the righteous deeds that You approve of, and be gracious to me for my harmful deeds. Indeed I have turned to You, and indeed I do submit.”
46|16|They are those from whom We will accept their better deeds and overlook their wrong. They will be among the companions of the garden. A promise of truth which was made to them
46|17|But there is one who says to his parents a word of disrespect. “Do you promise me that I will be raised up, as will the generations who have passed away before me?” Then the parents seek God's help and say, “Woe to you. Believe, for the promise of God is true.” But he says, “This is nothing but tales of the ancient.”
46|18|These are those against who is proved the sentence among the previous generations of jinn and humans who have passed away, for they will be lost
46|19|And to all are assigned degrees according to the deeds which they have done, and in order that God may reward their deeds, and no injustice is done to them
46|20|And on the day that the unbelievers will be placed before the fire, it will be said to them, “You received good things in the life of the world, and you took pleasure in them, but today you will be rewarded with a humiliating penalty, because you were arrogant on earth without just cause, and because you transgressed.”
46|21|Mention one of Ad’s brothers. Behold, he warned his people in the winding sand-tracts, although there have been warners before him and after him saying, “Worship none other than God. Truly I fear for you the penalty of a mighty day.”
46|22|They said, “Have you come in order to turn us away from our gods? Then bring upon us that which you threaten us with, if you are telling the truth?”
46|23|He said, “The knowledge of when it will come is only with God. I proclaim to you the mission on which I have been sent, but I see that you are a people in ignorance.”
46|24|Then when they saw a cloud traversing the sky, and approaching their valleys, they said, “This cloud will give us rain.” “No, it is that which you were asking to be hastened, a wind carrying a terrible penalty
46|25|“It will destroy everything by the command of its Lord.” Then by the morning, nothing was seen but their houses. This is how We reward those given to wrongdoing
46|26|And We had firmly established them as We have established none other, and We had endowed them with hearing, vision, and feeling, but of no profit to them was their hearing, vision, and feeling when they went on rejecting the signs of God, and they were surrounded by that which they used to mock
46|27|We caused populations all around you to perish, and We have shown the signs in various ways, that they may turn to Us
46|28|Why then was no help forthcoming from those who they worshipped as gods besides God, as a means to access Him? No, they left them, because they were not real
46|29|Behold, We turned towards you a group of jinn listening to the Quran. When they stood in the presence of it they said, “Listen in silence.” When the reading was finished, they returned to their people to warn them
46|30|They said, “O our people, we have heard a book revealed now, after Moses, reflecting the truth of what came before it. It guides people to the truth and to a straight path
46|31|“O our people, listen to the one who invites you to God, and believe in him. He will forgive you your faults, and deliver you from a terrible punishment
46|32|“If any does not listen to the one who invites to God, he cannot stop God's plan on earth, and no protectors can he have besides God. Such people wander in manifest error.”
46|33|Do they not see that God, Who created the heavens and the earth, and never wearied with their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes indeed, He has power over all things
46|34|And on the day that the unbelievers will be placed before the fire they will be asked, “Is this not the truth?” They will say, “Yes, by our Lord.” Then taste the penalty, because you were accustomed to denying truth
46|35|Therefore patiently persevere, as did all messengers with definite purpose, and be in no haste. On the day that they see the punishment that was promised them, it will be as if they had not stayed more than an hour in a single day. Proclaim the message, and none will be caused to perish except those who transgress
47|1|Those who reject God and hinder people from the path of God, God will cause their deeds to be lost
47|2|But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, and believe in the revelation sent down to Muhammad, because it is the truth from their Lord, He will remove from them their sins and improve their condition
47|3|Because those who reject God follow vanities, while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. So God sets out for humanity their lessons by similitude
47|4|Therefore, when you meet the unbelievers in war, strike at their necks, then when you have thoroughly subdued them, bind a bond firmly. Afterwards is the time for either generosity or ransom, but not until the war lays down its burdens, but if it had been God's will, He could certainly have taken retribution from them Himself. But He wills to challenge you with others, but those who are slain in the way of God, He will never let their deeds be lost
47|5|Soon will He guide them and improve their condition
47|6|And admit them to the garden which He has announced for them
47|7|O you who believe, if you will aid God, He will aid you, and plant your feet firmly
47|8|But those who reject God, for them is destruction, and God will render their deeds lost
47|9|Because they hate the revelation of God. So He has made their deeds fruitless
47|10|Do they not travel through the earth and see what the end of those before them was? God brought utter destruction on them, and a similar fate awaits those who reject God
47|11|Because God is the Protector of those who believe, but those who reject God have no protector
47|12|Indeed God will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds to gardens with rivers flowing through them, while those who reject God will enjoy themselves and eat as livestock eat, but the fire will be their abode
47|13|And how many cities, with more power than your city which has driven you out, have We caused to perish? And there was none to aid them
47|14|Then is one who is clearly on a path from his Lord, no better than one to whom the harmfulness of his conduct seems pleasing, and those who follow their own lusts
47|15|Here is a parable of the garden which the righteous are promised. In it are rivers of water incorruptible, rivers of milk of which the taste never changes, rivers of wine, a joy to those who drink, and rivers of honey, pure and clear. In it there are all kinds of fruits for them, and grace from their Lord. Can those in such bliss be compared to those who will dwell forever in the fire, and who will be given boiling water to drink, so that it cuts up their insides
47|16|And among them are people who listen to you, but in the end, after they leave from you, they say to those who have received knowledge, “What is it he said just then?” These are people whose hearts God has sealed, and who follow their own lusts
47|17|But to those who receive guidance, He increases the guidance, and bestows on them piety and restraint
47|18|Do they then only wait for the Hour, that it should come on them all of a sudden? But some signs of it have already come, and when it is on them, how then can they benefit by the advice
47|19|Therefore know that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for your faults, and for the men and women who believe. For God knows how you move about and how you dwell in your homes
47|20|Those who believe say, “Why is a Surah not sent down for us?” But when a precise Surah is revealed, and fighting is mentioned in it, you will see those in whose hearts is a disease, looking at you with a look of one about to faint at the prospect of death, but more fitting for them–
47|21|Would be to follow and say what is just, and when a matter is settled, it was best for them if they were true to God
47|22|Then is it to be expected of you, that if you were put in authority, that you will commit crimes in the land, and break your ties with friends and family
47|23|These are people who God has cursed, for He has made them deaf, and blinded their sight
47|24|Do they then not earnestly seek to understand the Quran, or are their hearts locked up by it
47|25|Those who turn back as traitors, after guidance was clearly shown to them, Satan has enticed them with false hopes
47|26|This is because they said to those who hate what God has revealed, “We will follow you in part of this matter,” but God knows their secrets
47|27|But how will it be when the angels take their souls at death, and strike their faces and their backs
47|28|This is because they followed that which deserved the punishment of God, and they hated God's blessings, so He made their deeds of no effect
47|29|Or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that God will not bring to light all their hatred
47|30|Had We so willed, We could have shown them to you, and you would have known them by their marks, but surely you will know them by the tone of their voice, and God knows all that you do
47|31|And We will try you until We make evident, those among you who strive their utmost and persevere in patience, and We will make your abilities evident
47|32|Those who reject God, hinder people from the path of God, and resist the messenger after guidance has been clearly shown to them, will not hurt God in the least, but He will make their deeds of no effect
47|33|O you who believe, follow God, and follow the messenger, and do not do work in vain
47|34|Those who reject God, hinder people from the path of God, then die rejecting God, God will not forgive them
47|35|Do not be weary and faint-hearted, crying for peace, when you should be assertive, for God is with you, and will never deprive you for your deeds
47|36|The life of the present is only play and entertainment, and if you believe and guard against harm, He will grant you your reward, and will not ask you to give up your possessions
47|37|If He was to ask you for all of them, and press you, you would withhold, and He would bring out all your ill feelings
47|38|Behold, you are those invited to give in the way of God, but among you are some who are greedy, but any who are greedy are so at the expense of their own souls. God is free of all wants, but it is you who are needy. If you turn back, He will substitute in your place another people, and they would not be like you
48|1|Indeed We have granted you a manifest victory
48|2|That God may forgive you the faults of your past and those to follow, fulfill His favor on you, and guide you on the straight way
48|3|And that God may help you with powerful help
48|4|It is He Who sent down tranquility to the hearts of the believers, that they may add faith to their faith, because to God belong the forces of the heavens and the earth, and God is Full of Knowledge and Wisdom
48|5|And that He may admit the men and women who believe, into gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell therein forever, and remove their sins from them, and that is in the sight of God, the highest achievement
48|6|And that He may punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the polytheist’s men and women, who have a terrible opinion of God. On them is a round of harm. The punishment of God is on them. He has cursed them and has hell ready for them, and terrible is it for a destination
48|7|For to God belong the forces of the heavens and the earth, and God is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
48|8|We have truly sent you as a witness, as a bringer of hope, and as one who warns
48|9|In order that you may believe in God and His messenger, that you may assist and honor Him, and praise Him morning and evening
48|10|Indeed those who pledge their allegiance to you, do no less than pledge their allegiance to God. The hand of God is over their hands. Then anyone who violates his pledge does so to the detriment of his own soul, and anyone who fulfills what he has covenanted with God, God will soon grant him a great reward
48|11|The desert Arabs who lagged behind will say to you, “We were engaged in looking after our flocks and herds, and our families. Can you then ask forgiveness for us?” They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, “Who then has any power to intervene on your behalf with God, if His will is to give you some loss or to give you some profit? No, for God is well acquainted with all that you do
48|12|“No, you thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families, this seemed pleasing in your hearts, and you had terrible thoughts, for you are a lost people.”
48|13|And if any do not believe in God and His messenger, We have prepared for those who reject God, a blazing fire
48|14|To God belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills, but God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
48|15|Those who lagged behind will say when you are free to march and take spoils of war, “Permit us to follow you.” They wish to change God's decree. Say, “You cannot follow us, God has already declared this beforehand.” Then they will say, “No, you are jealous of us.” No, but little do they understand
48|16|Say to the desert Arabs who lagged behind, “You will be summoned to fight against a people who possess great military might. You will fight, or they will submit. Then if you show obedience, God will grant you an excellent reward, but if you turn back as you did before, He will punish you with a terrible penalty.”
48|17|No blame is there on the blind, nor is there blame on those with other disabilities, nor on one who is ill, if they do not join the war. But those who follow God and his messenger, God will admit him to gardens with rivers flowing through them, and he who turns back, God will punish him with a terrible penalty
48|18|God's grace was on the believers when they pledged allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down tranquility to them, and He rewarded them with a speedy victory
48|19|And many gains will they acquire, and God is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom
48|20|God has promised that you will acquire many gains, much that He has given you beforehand, and He has restrained the hands of human beings from you, that it may be a sign for the believers, and that He may guide you to a straight path
48|21|And other gains that were not within your power, but which God has comprehended, and God has power over all things
48|22|If the unbelievers fought you, they would certainly turn their backs, and then they would find neither protector nor helper
48|23|Such was the Sunnah of God in the past, and no change will you find in the Sunnah of God
48|24|And it is He Who has restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in Mecca, after He gave you the victory over them, and God sees well all that you do
48|25|They are the ones who denied revelation and hindered you from the Sacred Masjid and the sacrificial animals which they kept from reaching their place of sacrifice. Had there not been believing men and believing women whom you did not know you were trampling, and on whose account a crime would have come to you without your knowledge, God would have allowed you to force your way. But He held back your hands, so that He may admit to His mercy those whom He wills. If they had been apart, We would certainly have punished the unbelievers among them with a terrible punishment
48|26|While the unbelievers had in their hearts distain, distain of ignorance, God sent down His tranquility to His messenger and to the believers, and made them adhere to the command of self-restraint, and they were well entitled to it and worthy of it, and God has full knowledge of all things
48|27|Truly God fulfilled this vision for His messenger, you will enter the Sacred Masjid, if God wills, with minds secure, heads shaved or cut, and without fear. And He knew what you did not, and He granted in addition to this, a speedy victory
48|28|It is He Who has sent His messenger with guidance and a true way of life, to proclaim over all other ways of life, and enough is God for a witness
48|29|Muhammad is the messenger of God, and those who are with him are strong against unbelievers and compassionate among each other. You will see them bow and prostrate themselves, seeking grace from God, and His favor. On their faces are their marks, and are the traces of their prostration. Their similitude in the Torah, and their similitude in the gospel, is a seed that puts forth its shoot, then is made strong, then becomes thick, then stands on its own, filling those who planted it with wonder and pleasure. Meanwhile, it fills the unbelievers with rage. But God has promised those among them who believe and do righteous deeds, forgiveness and a great reward
49|1|O you who believe, do not put yourselves ahead of God and His messenger, but be conscious of God, for God is He Who hears and knows all things
49|2|O you who believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of the messenger, nor speak loudly to him in conversation, as you speak to one another, or your deeds will become vain, though you perceive it not
49|3|Those who lower their voices in the presence of God's messenger, their hearts has God made to contain piety. For them is forgiveness and a great reward
49|4|Of those who continued to shout out to you from outside the inner apartments, most of them lack understanding
49|5|If only they had patience until you could come out to them, it would be best for them, but God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
49|6|O you who believe, if a questionable person comes to you with any information, investigate it, or you may harm people unknowingly, and afterwards become full of guilt for what you have done
49|7|And know that among you is God's messenger. Were he, in many matters, to follow you, you would certainly have fallen into misfortune, but God has endeared the faith to you, and has made it beautiful in your hearts, and He has made hateful to you unbelief, corruption, and rebellion. Indeed, these are those who walk in righteousness
49|8|A grace and favor from God, and God is full of Knowledge and Wisdom
49|9|If two groups among the believers fall into a quarrel, make peace between them. But if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the other, then all of you should argue against the one who transgressed, until it complies with the command of God, but if it complies, then make peace between them with justice and be fair, for God loves those who are fair and just
49|10|The believers are brothers. So make peace and reconciliation between your brothers, and be conscious of God, that you may receive mercy
49|11|O you who believe, do not let some people among you laugh at others, it may be that the latter are better than the former, nor let some women laugh at others, it may be that the latter are better than the former. Do not defame, or be sarcastic to each other, nor call each other by offensive nicknames. Terrible is a name of defamation to be used for one who has believed, and those who do not desist are acting wrongfully
49|12|O you who believe, avoid suspicion as much as possible, for suspicion in some cases is harmful. And do not spy on each other or backbite, would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? No, you would abhor it. So be conscious of God, for God is Oft-Returning, the Merciful Redeemer
49|13|O humanity, We created you from a single male and female, and made you into nations and tribes, that you may know each other. Indeed the most honored of you in the sight of God, is the most conscious of you, and God has full knowledge and is well acquainted with all things
49|14|The desert Arabs say, “We believe.” Say, “You have no faith, just say, ‘We have become Muslim,’ because faith has not yet entered your hearts, but if you follow God and His messenger, He will not deprive you of any of your deeds, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming.”
49|15|Only those are believers who have believed in God and His messenger, and have never since doubted, but have striven with their belongings and their persons in the cause of God. These are the sincere ones
49|16|Say, “What, will you teach God about your way of life, when God knows all that is in the heavens and on earth? He has full knowledge of all things
49|17|They consider it a favor to you that they have embraced Al-Islam. Say, “Count not your Islam as a favor upon me, no God has conferred a favor upon you, that He has guided you to the faith, if you were true and sincere
49|18|“Indeed God knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and God sees well all that you do.”
50|1|Qaaf. By the Glorious Quran, you are God's messenger
50|2|But they wonder how there has come to them a warner from among themselves. So the unbelievers say, “This is a wonderful thing
50|3|“What, when we die and become dust? That is far-fetched.”
50|4|We already know how many of them the earth takes away. With Us is a record guarding the full account
50|5|But they deny the truth when it comes to them. So they are in a confused state
50|6|Do they not look at the sky above them, how We have made it and adorned it, and there are no flaws in it
50|7|And the earth, We have spread it out, and set mountains standing firm, and produced therein every kind of beautiful growth–
50|8|To be observed and commemorated by every devotee turning to God
50|9|And We send down from the sky, rain charged with blessings, and We produce with it gardens and grain for harvest
50|10|And tall palm trees, with shoots of fruit-stalks, piled one over another–
50|11|As sustenance for God's servants. And We give life with it to land that is dead, as will be the resurrection
50|12|Before them, was denied the hereafter by the people of Noah, the companions of the Rass, the Thamud
50|13|The ‘Ad, Pharaoh, the brothers of Lot
50|14|The companions of the Wood, and the people of Touba. Each one rejected the messengers, and My warning was duly fulfilled
50|15|And did We tire during the first creation, so that they should be in confused doubt about a new creation
50|16|It was We Who created the human being, and We know what suggestions their soul makes to them, for We are nearer to them than their jugular vein
50|17|Imagine two guardian angels appointed to observe, one sitting on the right and one on the left
50|18|Not a word do they utter, except that there is with him a ready observer
50|19|And the shock at death will bring truth, “This was the thing which you were trying to escape.”
50|20|And the trumpet will be blown. That will be the day when warning will be given
50|21|And there will come forward every soul. With each will be an angel to drive, and an angel to bear witness
50|22|It will be said, “You were heedless of this, now We have removed your veil, and sharp is your sight this day.”
50|23|And his companion will say, “Here is his record ready with me.”
50|24|“Throw into hell, every stubborn rejecter
50|25|“Who made forbidden what was good, transgressed all bounds, cast doubts and suspicions
50|26|“And who established another god beside God. Throw him into a severe penalty.”
50|27|His companion will say, “Our Lord, I did not make him transgress, but he was himself far astray.”
50|28|He will say, “Do not dispute with each other in My presence. I had already in advance sent warning
50|29|“The word does not change before Me, and I do not the least injustice to My servants.”
50|30|One day We will ask hell, “Are you filled to capacity?” It will say, “Are there any more?”
50|31|And the garden will be brought near to the righteous, no more a thing distant
50|32|This is what was promised to you. Everyone who turned in sincere repentance, and who are saved
50|33|“Who had been conscious of God, the Merciful Benefactor, Unseen, and who brought a heart turned in devotion
50|34|“Enter there in peace and security, this is a day of eternal life.”
50|35|There will be for them all that they wish, and even more in Our presence
50|36|But how many generations before them did We destroy who were stronger in power than they were? Then they wandered through the land. Was there any place of escape for them
50|37|Indeed in this is a message for any who has a heart and understanding, or who gives ear and earnestly witnesses
50|38|We created the heavens and the earth, and all between them in six days, and no sense of weariness touched Us
50|39|So bear with patience all that they say, praise your Lord, before the rising of the Sun and before its setting
50|40|And during part of the night, praise Him, and after the positions of adoration
50|41|And listen for the day when the caller will call out from a near place
50|42|The day when they will hear a mighty blast. In fact, that will be the Day of Resurrection
50|43|Indeed it is We Who give life and death, and to Us is the final goal
50|44|The day when the earth will be split asunder from people hurrying out. That will be a gathering together that is easy for Us
50|45|We know best what they say, and you are not one to overwhelm them by force. So advise with the Quran, those who fear My warning
51|1|By that which scatters by broadcast
51|2|And those who lift and bear heavy weights
51|3|And those who flow with ease and gentleness
51|4|And those who distribute influence
51|5|Indeed that which you are promised is true
51|6|And indeed judgment and justice must come to pass
51|7|By the universe with its numerous paths
51|8|Indeed you are in a doctrine differing
51|9|Through which are deluded those who would be deluded
51|10|Cursed are the liars
51|11|Those who flounder heedlessly in a flood of confusion
51|12|They ask, “When is the Day of Accountability and Justice?”
51|13|A day when they will be tried over the fire
51|14|“Taste your trial. This is what you used to ask to be hastened.”
51|15|As for the righteous, they will be in the presence of gardens and springs
51|16|Taking joy in the things which their Lord gives them, because before then, they lived a good life
51|17|They were in the habit of sleeping only a little at night
51|18|And in the hours of early dawn, were found praying for forgiveness
51|19|And with their wealth and possessions, remembered the rights of those who asked, and those who were prevented from asking
51|20|On the earth are signs for those of assured faith
51|21|And in your own selves. Then will you not see
51|22|And in heaven is your sustenance, as you were promised
51|23|Then by the Lord of heaven and earth, this is the very truth, as much as the fact that you can communicate intelligible to each other
51|24|Has the story reached you of the honored guests of Abraham
51|25|Behold, they entered his presence and said, “Peace.” He said, “Peace.” And thought, “These seem unusual.”
51|26|Then he turned quickly to his household, and brought out a fattened calf
51|27|And placed it before them. He said, “Will you not eat?”
51|28|Then he conceived a fear of them. They said, “Fear not.” And they gave him good news of a son endowed with knowledge
51|29|But his wife came forward laughing aloud. She held her forehead and said, “A barren old woman.”
51|30|They said, “Even so, your Lord has spoken, and He is Full of Wisdom and Knowledge.” 30 (End of Part)
51|31|He said, “And what, O messengers, is your mission?”
51|32|They said, “We have been sent to a people in sin
51|33|“And to bring on stones of clay
51|34|“Marked by your Lord, for those who trespass beyond bounds.”
51|35|Then We saved those believers who were there
51|36|But We did not find there any just muslim, except in one house
51|37|And We left there a sign for those who fear the terrible penalty
51|38|And in Moses was another sign. Behold, We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority
51|39|But Pharaoh turned back with his advisors and said, “A liar, or one possessed.”
51|40|So We led him and his forces, and cast them into the sea, and the blame was his
51|41|And the ‘Ad was another sign. Behold, We sent against them the devastating wind
51|42|It left nothing that it came up against. It reduced it to ruin
51|43|And the Thamud was another sign. Behold, they were told, “Enjoy yourselves for a little while.”
51|44|But they rebelled against the command of their Lord. So the stunning noise seized them, even while they looked on
51|45|Then they could not stand, nor could they help themselves
51|46|So were the people of Noah before them, for they wickedly transgressed
51|47|With power and skill did We construct the firmament, for it is We Who create the vastness of space
51|48|And We have spread out the earth. How excellently do We spread it out
51|49|And of everything We have created pairs, that you may receive instruction
51|50|Then hasten to God. I am from Him a warner to you, clear and open
51|51|And do not make an object of worship with God. I am from Him a warner to you, clear and open
51|52|Similarly, no messenger came to the peoples before them, except that they said of him in like manner, “A deceiver, or one possessed.”
51|53|Is this the legacy they have transmitted one to another? No, they are a people transgressing beyond bounds
51|54|So turn away from them. There will be no blame on you
51|55|But teach, for teaching benefits the believers
51|56|I only created jinn and humans so that they may worship Me
51|57|No sustenance do I require of them, nor do I require that they feed Me
51|58|For God is He Who gives all sustenance. He is Lord, powerful, and steadfast forever
51|59|For the wrongdoers, their portion is like the portion of their people of earlier generations. So do not let them ask Me to hasten that portion
51|60|Woe then to the unbelievers on account of their day. The day promised to them
52|1|By the mountain
52|2|By a decree inscribed
52|3|In parchment unfolded
52|4|By the much-frequented house
52|5|By the canopy raised high
52|6|And by the ocean that is filled
52|7|Indeed the doom from your Lord will indeed come to pass
52|8|There are none who can avert it
52|9|On the day that the firmament will be in dreadful commotion
52|10|And the mountains will fly near and far
52|11|Then woe that day to those who treat truth as falsehood
52|12|That play in shallow things
52|13|That day they will be thrust down to the fire of hell, irresistibly
52|14|“This,” it will be said, “Is the fire that you used to deny
52|15|“Is this then a fake, or is it you who do not see
52|16|“Burn therein, for it is the same whether you bear it with patience or not. You will receive the reward of your deeds.”
52|17|As for the righteous, they will be in gardens, and in happiness
52|18|Enjoying the bliss that their Lord has bestowed on them. And their Lord will deliver them from the penalty of the fire
52|19|Eat and drink for enjoyment and health, because of your deeds
52|20|They will recline on thrones arranged in ranks, and We will join them to companions with beautiful eyes
52|21|And those who believe and whose family follow them in faith, We will join them with their family, and We will not deprive them of any of their works, each person is responsible for their deeds
52|22|And We will give them all fruit and meat, anything they desire
52|23|There they will exchange, one with another, a cup free of nonsense, and free of harm
52|24|Around them will be youthfulness, like pearls well guarded
52|25|They will advance each other, engaging in mutual inquiry
52|26|They will say, “Before, we were not without fear, because of our people
52|27|“But God has been good to us, and has delivered us from the penalty of the scorching wind
52|28|“Indeed we used to call on Him. Truly it is He, the Merciful Benefactor, the Merciful Redeemer.”
52|29|Therefore proclaim His praises, for by the grace of your Lord, you are no oracle, nor are you one possessed
52|30|Or do they call you a poet? We await them with calamity in due time.”
52|31|Say, “Wait, I too will wait with you.”
52|32|Is it that their mind leads them to this, or are they just a people transgressing beyond bounds
52|33|Or do they say, “He fabricated the message?” No, they have no faith
52|34|Let them produce a hadith like it, if they speak the truth
52|35|Were they created of nothing, or did they create themselves
52|36|Or did they create the heavens and the earth? No, they have no firm beliefs
52|37|Or are the treasures of your Lord with them, or are they the managers
52|38|Or have they a ladder, by which they can listen? Then let such a listener produce clear proof
52|39|Or has He only daughters and you have sons
52|40|Or is it that you ask for a reward, so that they are burdened with a load of debt
52|41|Or is the unknown in their hands, and they write it down
52|42|Or do they plot and scheme? But those who defy God are themselves the subject of a plan
52|43|Or do they have a god other than God. Exalted is God, far above the things they associate with Him
52|44|If they saw a piece of the sky falling, they would say, “Fog-clouds gathered in heaps.”
52|45|So leave them alone until they encounter that day of theirs, when they will faint
52|46|The day when their plotting will not avail them, and no help will be given to them
52|47|And indeed, for those who do wrong, there is another punishment besides this, but most of them do not understand
52|48|Now wait in patience, the command of your Lord, for indeed you are in Our Eyes, and glorify your Lord with praise while you stand forth
52|49|And for part of the night praise Him, and at the retreat of the stars
53|1|By the star when it goes down
53|2|Your companion is neither astray nor being misled
53|3|Nor does he say anything of his own volition
53|4|It is no less than inspiration sent down to him
53|5|He was taught by one mighty in power
53|6|Endued with wisdom, for he appeared
53|7|While he was in the highest part of the horizon
53|8|Then he approached and came closer
53|9|And was at a distance of only two bow-lengths or nearer
53|10|So God conveyed the inspiration to His servant which He meant to convey
53|11|His heart in no way falsified that which he saw
53|12|Will you then dispute with him concerning what he saw
53|13|For indeed he saw him at a second descent
53|14|Near the lotus-tree beyond which none may pass
53|15|Near is the garden of abode
53|16|Behold, the lotus-tree was shrouded
53|17|His sight never deviated, nor did it go wrong
53|18|For truly he saw the signs of his Lord, the Greatest
53|19|Have you seen Lat and ‘Uzza
53|20|And another, the third, Manat
53|21|What, for you the male, and for Him, the female
53|22|Behold, that would indeed be a division unfair
53|23|These are nothing but names which you have made up, you and your fathers, for which God has sent down no authority. They follow nothing but speculation, and what their own soul’s desire. Even though there has already come to them guidance from their Lord
53|24|No, will human beings have everything they pursue
53|25|But it is to God that the end and the beginning belong
53|26|However many angels there are in the heavens, their intercession will avail them nothing, except after God has given permission to whom He pleases, and that they are acceptable to Him
53|27|Those who do not believe in the hereafter, name the angels with female names
53|28|But they cannot know. They follow nothing but speculation, and speculation avails nothing against truth
53|29|Therefore turn away from those who turn away from Our message, and desire nothing but the life of the present
53|30|That is as far as their knowledge will take them, indeed your Lord knows best those who stray from His path, and He knows best those who receive guidance
53|31|Yes, to God belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth. He rewards those who do wrong, according to their deeds, and He rewards those who do right, with what is best
53|32|Those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds, only falling into small faults, indeed your Lord is ample in forgiveness. He knows you well when He brings you out of the earth, and when you are hidden in your mothers’ wombs. Therefore do not justify yourselves. He knows best who it is that guards against harm
53|33|See the one, who turns back
53|34|Gives a little, then hardens
53|35|What, have they knowledge of the unknown and can they see it
53|36|No, is he not acquainted with what is in the Books of Moses
53|37|And of Abraham, who fulfilled his engagements
53|38|Namely, that no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another
53|39|That human beings can have nothing but what they strive for
53|40|That their striving will soon come into sight
53|41|Then they will be rewarded with a reward complete
53|42|That to your Lord is the final goal
53|43|That it is He Who grants laughter and tears
53|44|That it is He Who grants death and life
53|45|That He created in pairs, male and female
53|46|From a zygote when lodged in its place
53|47|That He has promised a second creation
53|48|That it is He Who gives wealth and satisfaction
53|49|That He is the Lord of Sirius
53|50|And that it is He Who caused to perish, the ancient ‘Ad people
53|51|And the Thamud, nor gave them a lease of perpetual life
53|52|And before them, the people of Noah, because they were all most unjust and most insolent transgressors
53|53|And He caused to perish the overthrown cities
53|54|And they have been covered up
53|55|Then about which of the gifts of your Lord will you dispute
53|56|This is a warner, of the series of warners ahead of him
53|57|The Ever Approaching draws near
53|58|None but God can remove it
53|59|Do you then wonder at this recital
53|60|And will you laugh and not weep
53|61|Wasting your time in vanities
53|62|But fall down in prostration to God, in worship to Him
54|1|The Hour is near, and the Moon is cleft asunder
54|2|But if they see a sign, they turn away and say, “This is a mysterious illusion.”
54|3|They reject it and follow their lusts, but every issue has its appointed time
54|4|There have already come to them recitals with which there is enough to check them
54|5|Perfect wisdom, but warners do not profit them
54|6|Therefore, turn away from them. The day that the caller will call them to a terrible affair
54|7|They will come forth, their eyes humbled from their graves, torpid like locusts scattered abroad
54|8|Hastening with eyes transfixed towards the caller. “This is a trying day,” the unbelievers will say
54|9|Before them the people of Noah rejected it. They rejected Our servant and said, “This one is possessed.” And he was driven out
54|10|Then he called on his Lord, “I am one overcome, will You help me?”
54|11|So We opened the gates of heaven, with water pouring out
54|12|And We caused the earth to gush forth with springs, so the waters met and rose to the extent decreed
54|13|But We bore him on an ark made of broad planks and caulked with palm-fiber
54|14|It floats under our eyes. A reward for one who had been rejected
54|15|And We have left it as a sign. Then is there any who will receive advice
54|16|But how was My penalty and My warning
54|17|And We have indeed made the Quran intuitive. Then are there any who will receive advice
54|18|The ‘Ad also rejected it. Then how was My penalty and My warnings
54|19|For We sent against them a furious wind, on a day of violent disaster
54|20|Plucking out human beings, as if they were roots of palm trees torn up
54|21|Yes, how was My penalty and My warning
54|22|And indeed We have made the Quran intuitive. Then will any experience it
54|23|The Thamud rejected their warners
54|24|For they said, “What, a human being, one from among ourselves? Should we follow such a one? Truly we would then be in error, and in madness
54|25|“Is it that the message is sent to him of all people among us? No, he is a liar, an insolent one.”
54|26|They will know on the morrow, who is the liar, and the insolent one
54|27|For We will send the she-camel as a trial for them. So watch them, and be patient
54|28|And tell them that the water is to be divided between them. Each one’s right to drink being brought forward
54|29|But they called to their companion, and he took a sword in hand, and hamstrung her
54|30|How was My penalty and My warning
54|31|For We sent against them a single mighty blast, and they became like the dry stubble used by one who pens livestock
54|32|And indeed We have made the Quran intuitive. Then will any experience it
54|33|The people of Lot rejected the warning
54|34|We sent against them a violent tornado with showers of stones which caused them to perish, except Lot’s household. We delivered them by early dawn
54|35|As a grace from Us. This is how We reward those who give thanks
54|36|And Lot warned them of Our punishment, but they disputed about the warning
54|37|And they even sought to abduct his guests, but We blinded their eyes. Now taste My punishment and My warning
54|38|Early in the morning an abiding punishment indeed seized them
54|39|“So taste My punishment and My warning.”
54|40|And indeed We have made the Quran intuitive. Then will any experience it
54|41|Also to the people of Pharaoh came warners
54|42|The people rejected all of Our signs, but We seized them with a penalty from One Exalted in Power, able to carry out His will
54|43|Are your unbelievers better than they are? Or have you immunity in the sacred books
54|44|Or do they say, “We, acting together, can defend ourselves”
54|45|Soon will their party be on the retreat, and they will show their backs
54|46|No, the Hour is the time promised them, and that Hour will be more terrible and most bitter
54|47|Truly those in sin are the ones straying in mind, and in madness
54|48|The day they will be dragged through the fire on their faces. Taste the touch of hell.”
54|49|Indeed, We have created all things in due proportion and measure
54|50|And Our command is only a single act, like the blink of an eye
54|51|And in the past, We have caused groups like you to perish. Then is there any who will receive advice
54|52|All that they do is noted in books
54|53|Every matter, small and great, is on record
54|54|As for the righteous, they will be in the presence of gardens and rivers
54|55|In an assembly of truth, in the presence of the Sovereign, Omnipotent
55|1|God, the Merciful Benefactor
55|2|It is He Who has taught the Quran
55|3|He has created the human being
55|4|He has taught him speech
55|5|The Sun and the Moon follow courses computed
55|6|And the herbs and the trees both bow in adoration
55|7|And the firmament has He raised high, and He has established the balance
55|8|In order that you may not transgress the balance
55|9|So establish weight with justice, and do not fall short with balance
55|10|It is He Who has spread out the earth for His creatures
55|11|Therein is fruit and date palms producing spathes
55|12|Also corn with leaves and stalk for fodder, and sweet-smelling plants
55|13|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|14|He created the human being from sounding clay like pottery
55|15|And He created jinn from fire free of smoke
55|16|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|17|Lord of the two Easts and Lord of the two Wests
55|18|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|19|He has let free the two bodies of flowing water meeting together
55|20|Between them is a barrier that they do not transgress
55|21|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|22|Out of them come pearls and coral
55|23|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|24|And His are the ships sailing smoothly through the seas lofty as mountains
55|25|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|26|All that is on earth will perish
55|27|But will live forever is the Face of your Lord, Full of Majesty, Bounty, and Honor
55|28|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|29|Of Him seeks every creature in the heavens and on earth. Every day in splendor does He shine
55|30|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|31|Soon will We settle your affairs, O both you worlds
55|32|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|33|O you assembly of jinns and humans. If you can pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth, then pass. But not without power will you be able to pass
55|34|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|35|On you will be sent a flame of fire and smoke, no defense will you have
55|36|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|37|When the sky is rent asunder, and it becomes red like ointment
55|38|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|39|On that day no question will be asked of human or jinn as to his harmful deeds
55|40|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|41|The wrong-doers will be known by their marks, and they will be seized by their hair and their feet
55|42|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|43|This is the hell which those who are corrupt deny
55|44|In it and in boiling hot water which they will wander round
55|45|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|46|But for those who fear the time when they will stand before their Lord, there will be two gardens
55|47|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|48|Containing plants of all kind
55|49|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|50|In them will be two flowing springs
55|51|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|52|In them will be fruits of every kind, two and two
55|53|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|54|They will recline on carpets, whose inner linings will be of rich brocade. The fruit of the gardens will be near
55|55|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|56|In them will be those who are chaste, restraining their glances, whom neither human nor jinn has touched before
55|57|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|58|Like unto rubies and coral
55|59|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|60|Is there any reward for good, other than good
55|61|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|62|And besides these two, there are two other gardens
55|63|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|64|Dark-green in color
55|65|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|66|In them will be two springs pouring forth water in continuous abundance
55|67|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|68|In them will be fruit, dates and pomegranates
55|69|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|70|In them will be those good, and beautiful
55|71|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|72|Companions subtle, in pavilions
55|73|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|74|Whom no human or jinn has touched before them
55|75|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|76|Reclining on green cushions and rich carpets of beauty
55|77|Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny
55|78|Blessed is the name of your Lord, Full of Majesty, Bounty, and Honor
56|1|When the inevitable event comes to pass
56|2|Then will no soul entertain falsehood concerning its coming
56|3|Many will it bring low, many will it exalt
56|4|When the earth will be shaken to its depths
56|5|And the mountains will be crumbled to atoms
56|6|Becoming dust scattered abroad
56|7|And you will be sorted out into three classes
56|8|The companions of the right, what are the companions of the right
56|9|And the companions of the left, what are the companions of the left
56|10|And those foremost, will be foremost
56|11|These will be those nearest to God
56|12|In gardens of bliss
56|13|A number of people from those of the past
56|14|And a few from those of later times
56|15|On thrones encrusted
56|16|Reclining on them, facing each other
56|17|Around them will be youth of perpetual innocence
56|18|With goblets, bowls, and cups filled from clear-flowing fountains
56|19|No after-ache will they receive from it, nor will they suffer intoxication
56|20|And fruits, any they may select
56|21|And the meat of fowl, any that they may desire
56|22|And companions with beautiful eyes
56|23|Like pearls well guarded
56|24|A reward for the deeds of their past
56|25|Neither frivolousness will they hear therein, nor any taint of harm
56|26|Only the saying, “Peace, peace.”
56|27|The companions of the right hand, what are the companions of the right hand
56|28|They will be among lotus trees without thorns
56|29|Among Talh trees with flowers piled one above another
56|30|In shade long extended
56|31|By water flowing constantly
56|32|And fruit in abundance
56|33|Whose season is not limited, nor prevented
56|34|And on thrones, raised high
56|35|We have created their companions of a special creation
56|36|And made them virgin - pure
56|37|Beloved, equal in age
56|38|For the companions of the right hand
56|39|A number from those in the past
56|40|And a number from those of later times
56|41|The companions of the left hand, who will be the companions of the left hand
56|42|They will be in the middle of a fierce blast of fire and in boiling water
56|43|And in the shades of black smoke
56|44|Nothing to refresh, or to please them
56|45|Because they were accustomed to indulging, before that, with their wealth
56|46|And insisted on great harm
56|47|And they used to say, “What, when we die and become dust and bones, will we then indeed be raised up again
56|48|“And our ancestors?”
56|49|Say, “Yes, those in the past and those of later times
56|50|“All will certainly be gathered together, for the meeting appointed for a day well-known
56|51|“Then will you truly, O you who go wrong by treating truth as falsehood
56|52|“You will surely taste of the Tree of Zaqqum
56|53|“Then and there you will fill your insides
56|54|“And drink boiling water on top of it
56|55|“Indeed you will drink like thirsty camels.”
56|56|Such will be their entertainment on the Day of Punishment
56|57|It is We Who have created you. Why will you not witness the truth
56|58|Do you then see that which you throw out
56|59|Is it you who create it, or are We the Creators
56|60|We have decreed death for you, and We are not to be stopped–
56|61|From changing your forms, and creating you in forms that you know not
56|62|And you certainly already know the first form of creation. Why then do you not praise Him
56|63|Do you see the seed that you sow in the ground
56|64|Is it you who cause it to grow, or are We the cause
56|65|Were it Our will, We could crumble it to dry powder, and you would be left in wonderment–
56|66|Saying, “We are indeed left with debts
56|67|“Indeed we are shut out.”
56|68|Do you see the water which you drink
56|69|Do you bring it down from the cloud or do We
56|70|If it were Our will, We could make it salty. So why do you not give thanks
56|71|Do you see the fire which you kindle
56|72|Is it you who causes the tree to grow which feeds the fire, or do We cause it to grow
56|73|We have made it a memorial, an article of comfort, and convenience for the denizens of deserts
56|74|Then glorify with praises the name of your Lord, the Supreme
56|75|Furthermore, I call to witness the setting of the stars
56|76|And that is indeed a mighty adjuration if you only knew
56|77|That this is indeed a Quran most honorable
56|78|In a book well guarded
56|79|Which none will touch but those who are clean
56|80|A revelation from the Guardian Evolver of all the systems of knowledge
56|81|Is it such a message that you would hold in light esteem
56|82|And have you made it your life to declare it false
56|83|Then why do you not intervene when the soul reaches the throat
56|84|But you just stand there looking on
56|85|But We are nearer to him than you, but you see not
56|86|Then why do you not, if you are exempt from account
56|87|Call back the soul, if you are truthful
56|88|Then if he is of those nearest to God
56|89|There is for him rest and satisfaction, and a garden of pleasure
56|90|And if he is of the companions of the right hand
56|91|Then for him is the salutation, “Peace be unto you,” from the companions of the right hand
56|92|And if he is of those who treat truth as false, and who go wrong
56|93|For him is entertainment with boiling water
56|94|And burning in hellfire
56|95|Indeed, this is the truth with certainty
56|96|So glorify with praises the name of your Lord, the Supreme
57|1|That which is in the heavens and on earth, let it declare the praises and glory of God, for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise
57|2|To Him belongs the control of the heavens and the earth. It is He Who gives life and death, and He has power over all things
57|3|He is the First and the Last, the Evident and the Hidden, and He has full knowledge of all things
57|4|He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and is firmly established on the throne. He knows what enters within the earth, and what comes forth out of it, what comes down from heaven, and what mounts up to it, and He is with you wherever you are, and God sees well all that you do
57|5|To Him is the control of the heavens and the earth, and all affairs are referred back to God
57|6|He merges night into day, and He merges day into night, and He has full knowledge of the secrets of all hearts
57|7|Believe in God and His messenger, and give out of that which He has made you inheritors. For those of you who believe and give, for them is a great reward
57|8|What cause do you have that you should not believe in God? The messenger invites you to believe in your Lord, and has indeed taken your covenant, if you are people of faith
57|9|He is the One Who sends to His servant clear signs, that He may lead you from the depths of darkness into the light. And indeed God is to you Most Kind and Merciful
57|10|And what cause do you have that you should not give in the cause of God, for to God belong the origins of the heavens and the earth. Not equal among you are those who sacrificed and fought before the victory, and those who did so later. They are higher in rank than those who sacrificed and fought afterwards, but to all has God promised the best reward, and God is well acquainted with all that you do
57|11|Who is he who will loan to God a handsome loan? For God will increase it abundantly to his credit, and he will have a gracious reward
57|12|One day you will see of the believing men and the believing women, how their light runs forward before them and by their right hands. Good news for you this day, gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever. This is indeed the highest achievement.”
57|13|One day the hypocrites, men and women, will say to the believers, “Wait for us. Let us borrow from your light.” It will be said, “Turn back behind you and seek a light.” So a wall will be put up between them, with a gate therein forever. Within it will be mercy inside and outside, and all throughout will be punishment
57|14|Those without will call out, “Were we not with you?” The others will reply, “True, but you led yourselves into temptation, you looked forward but you doubted, and your desires deceived you, until there issued the command of God, and the Deceiver deceived you in respect to God
57|15|“This day will no ransom be accepted of you, from those who rejected God.” Your abode is the fire. That is the proper place to claim you, and what a terrible place it is.”
57|16|Has not the time arrived for the believers, that their hearts, with all humility, should engage in the remembrance of God and of the truth which has been revealed, and that they should not become like those to whom was given revelation? But long ages passed over them and their hearts grew hard. For many among them are rebellious transgressors
57|17|Do you not know that God gives life to the earth after its death? We have already shown the signs plainly to you, that you may learn wisdom
57|18|For those who give in charity, men and women, and loan to God a handsome loan, it will be increased abundantly, and they will have a noble reward
57|19|And those who believe in God and His messengers, they are the sincere and the witnesses, in the eyes of their Lord. They will have their reward and their light. But those who reject God and deny Our signs, they are the companions of hellfire
57|20|Know that the life of the present is but play and entertainment, pomp and boasting, and increasing for yourselves, wealth and children. Here is a similitude, the rain and the growth which it brings forth pleases the hearts of those who plant it, soon it withers, and you will see it grow yellow, then it becomes dry and crumbles away, but in the hereafter is a penalty severe, and forgiveness from God and His grace, and what is the life of the present but stuff of illusion
57|21|And for those of you foremost, is forgiveness from your Lord, and a garden the width of heaven and earth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers. That is the grace of God which He bestows on whom He pleases, and God is the Lord of grace abounding
57|22|No misfortune can happen on earth or in yourselves, except that it is recorded in a decree before We bring it into existence. That is truly easy for God
57|23|In order that you may not despair over opportunities that missed you, nor exult over favors bestowed upon you, for God does not love any vain boaster
57|24|Such people are greedy, and recommend greed to others. And if any turn back, indeed God is free of all needs, worthy of all praise
57|25|We sent our messengers with clear signs, and sent down with them the Book and the balance, that humanity may stand up for justice. And We sent down iron, in which is great power, and many benefits for humanity, that God may make evident who it is who will help, even if unseen, Him and His messengers, for God is Full of Strength, Exalted in Might
57|26|And We sent Noah and Abraham, and established in their line the prophetic office and revelation, and some of them were on right guidance, but many of them became rebellious transgressors
57|27|Then in their footsteps, We followed them up with more of Our messengers. We sent after them Jesus the son of Mary, and bestowed on him the gospel, and We ordained in the hearts of those who followed him, compassion and mercy. But monasticism which they invented for themselves, We did not prescribe for them. We asked only the seeking for the grace of God, but that, they did not develop as they should have. Still We bestowed on those among them who believed, their reward, but many of them are rebellious transgressors
57|28|O you who believe, be conscious of God, and believe in His messenger, and He will bestow on you a double portion of His mercy. He will provide for you a light, by which you will walk, and He will forgive you, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
57|29|So the people of the Book may know that they have no power at all over the grace of God, that His grace is in His hand, to bestow on whomever He wills, for God is the Lord of grace abounding. 29 (End of Part)
58|1|God has indeed heard the statement of the woman who pleads with you concerning her husband, directing her complaint to God, and God hears the arguments between both sides among you, for God hears and sees all things
58|2|Some men among you attempt to divorce their wives by Zihar, by prohibiting himself from relations with her as he would his mother, but they are not their mothers. None can be their mothers except those who gave birth to them, so in fact, they use words that are both hurtful and false, but truly God is the One who corrects and forgives you
58|3|But those who divorce their wives by Zihar, then wish to go back on the words they spoke, should free a slave before they touch each other. This you are advised to perform, and God is well acquainted with all that you do
58|4|And if any do not have the means, he should fast for two months consecutively, before they touch each other, but if any are unable to do so, he should feed sixty indigent ones, in order that you may show your belief in God and His messenger. Those are limits set by God, and for those who reject Him, there is a terrible penalty
58|5|Those who resist God and His messenger will be humbled to dust, as were those before them, for We have already sent down clear signs, and the unbelievers will have a crushing penalty
58|6|On the day that God will raise them all and show them the truth of their conduct. God has decreed its value though they may have forgotten it, for God is witness to all things
58|7|Do you not see that God knows all that is in the heavens and on earth? There is not a secret meeting between three, that He does not make the fourth, nor between five that He does not make the sixth, nor between fewer nor more. He is in their presence wherever they are. In the end He will tell them the truth of their conduct, on the Day of Accountability, for God has full knowledge of all things
58|8|Do you not turn your sight toward those who were forbidden secret meetings, but yet return to that which they were forbidden? And they hold secret counsels among themselves for immorality, hostility, and to ignore the messenger, and when they come to you, they greet you, but not as God greets you. And they say to themselves, “Why does God not punish us for our words?” Enough for them is hell. In it they will burn, and terrible is that destination
58|9|O you who believe, when you hold secret meetings, do not do it for immorality, hostility, and to ignore the messenger, but do it for righteousness and self-restraint, and be conscious of God, to Whom you will be brought back
58|10|Secret meetings are only inspired by Satan in order that he may cause grief to the believers, but he cannot harm them in the least, except as God permits, and on God let the believers put their trust
58|11|O you who believe, when you are asked to make room in the assembly, make room. Ample room will God provide for you. And when you are asked to rise up, rise up. God will raise up in ranks those of you who believe, and who have been granted knowledge. And God is well acquainted with all you do
58|12|O you who believe, when you consult the messenger in private, give something in charity before your private consultation. That will be best for you, and most conducive to refinement. But if you cannot, God is Forgiving, Redeeming
58|13|Is it that you are afraid of giving in charity before your private consultation with him? If you do not do so, and God forgives you, then establish prayer, give zakat, and follow God and His messenger, and God is well acquainted with all that you do
58|14|Do you not turn your attention to those who turn to them who have the punishment of God upon them? They are neither of you nor of them, and they swear on falsehood knowingly
58|15|God has prepared for them a severe penalty. Harmful indeed are their deeds
58|16|They have made their promises a screen. So they obstruct the people from the path of God. Therefore they will have a crushing penalty
58|17|Of no profit to them against God will be their wealth or their sons. They will be companions of the fire, to dwell therein forever
58|18|One day God will raise them all. Then they will promise to Him as they promise to you, and they think that they have something on which to stand. No, indeed they are only liars
58|19|Satan has gotten the better of them. So he has made them lose the remembrance of God. They are of the association of Satan. Truly, it is the association of Satan that will perish
58|20|Those who resist God and His messenger will be among those most humiliated
58|21|God has decreed, “It is I and My messengers who will prevail,” for God is One, full of strength, able to enforce His will
58|22|You will not find any of the people who believe in God and the Last Day, loving those who resist God and His messenger, even though they be their parents or their children, or their brothers, or other family members. For them He has written faith in their hearts, and strengthened them with a spirit from Himself, and He will admit them to gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell therein forever. God will be well pleased with them, and they with Him. They are of God. And truly it is the people of God who will achieve felicity
59|1|Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the praises and glory of God, for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise
59|2|It is He Who removed the unbelievers among the people of the Book from their homes at the first gathering. You hardly thought that they would leave, and they thought that their fortresses would defend them from God, but God came to them from places they hardly expected, and casted fear into their hearts, so that they caused to be destroyed, their dwellings by their own hands and the hands of the believers, take warning then, O you with eyes to see
59|3|And had it not been that God had decreed banishment for them, He would certainly have punished them in the present, and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire
59|4|Because they oppose God and His messenger, and if anyone opposes God, indeed God is severe in punishment
59|5|Whether you cut down the tender palm trees, or you left them standing on their roots, it was by permission of God. In order that He might cover with shame the rebellious transgressors
59|6|What God has bestowed on His messenger from them, you made no expedition with neither horses nor camels, but God gives power to His messengers over any He pleases, and God has power over all things
59|7|What God has bestowed on His messenger from the people of the townships belongs to God, His messenger, to family and orphans, the needy, and to displaced persons, in order that it may not circulate between the wealthy among you. So take what the messenger assigns to you, and deny yourselves that which he withholds from you. And be conscious of God, for God is strict in punishment
59|8|And some part is due to the indigent Muhajirs, those who were expelled from their homes and their property, while seeking grace and favor from God, and aiding God and His messenger. Such are indeed the sincere ones
59|9|As well as those who before them had homes and had accepted the faith, showed their affection to those who came to them for refuge, and entertained no desire in their hearts for things given to the latter, but gave them preference over themselves, even though poverty ensued. And those saved from the greed of their own selves, they are the ones who achieve prosperity
59|10|And those who came after them say, “Our Lord, forgive us, and our brothers who came before us into the faith, and do not leave in our hearts hatred against those who have believed. Our Lord, You are indeed Full of Kindness, the Merciful Redeemer.”
59|11|Did you not observe the hypocrites that said to their misbelieving brothers among the people of the Book? “If you are expelled, we too will go out with you, and we will never listen to anyone concerning your situation, and if you are attacked we will help you.” But God is witness that they are indeed liars
59|12|If they are expelled, never will they go out with them, and if they are attacked, they will never help them, and if they do help them, they will turn their backs, so that they will receive no help
59|13|Truthfully, you are stronger because of the fear in their hearts sent by God. This is because they are people void of understanding
59|14|They will not even fight you together, except in a fortified town, or from behind walls. Strong is their fighting among themselves. You would think they were united, but their hearts are divided. That is because they are a people devoid of wisdom
59|15|Like those of late. They have tasted the harmful result of their conduct, and for them is a terrible penalty
59|16|Like Satan, when he says to the human being, “Deny God.” But once he denies God he says, “I disassociate myself from you. I fear God, the Guardian Evolver of all the systems of knowledge.”
59|17|The end of both will be that they will go into the fire, dwelling therein. Such is the reward of the wrongdoers
59|18|O you who believe, be conscious of God, and let every soul look to what he has sent forth for the morrow. Yes, be conscious of God, for God is well acquainted with all that you do
59|19|And do not be like those who forgot God, and He made them forget their own souls. Such are the rebellious transgressors
59|20|Not equal are the companions of the fire and the companions of the garden. It is the companions of the garden who will achieve felicity
59|21|Had We sent down this Quran on a mountain, indeed you would have seen it humble itself and cleave asunder for fear of God. Such is the similitude which We propound to humanity that they may reflect
59|22|God is He. There is no other god, who knows all things both secret and open, He is the Merciful Benefactor, the Merciful Redeemer
59|23|God is He, there is no other god, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of Peace, the Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the Supreme. Glory be to God, High is He above the partners they attribute to Him
59|24|He is God, the Creator, the Guardian Evolver, the Bestower of Forms. To Him belong the most beautiful names. Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, declares His praises and glory, and He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise
60|1|O you who believe, do not take my enemies and yours, as friends, offering them your love, because they have rejected the truth that has come to you, and have driven out the messenger and yourselves, because you believe in God, your Lord. And because you have come out to strive in My way, and to seek My favor. Thus do not hold secret conversations, nor keep ties and friendships with them, for I know all that you conceal and all that you reveal. And any of you who does this has strayed from the straight path
60|2|If they were to gain dominance over you, they would behave as enemies to you, and lash out their hands and their tongues against you wrongfully, and they desire that you should reject the truth
60|3|Of no profit to you will be your relatives and your children on the Day of Accountability. He will judge between you, for God sees well all that you do
60|4|There is for you an excellent example in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, “We are clear of you and of whatever you worship besides God. We have rejected you, and there has arisen, between us and you, enmity and hatred forever, unless you believe in God, and Him alone”. Except when Abraham said to his father, “I will pray for forgiveness for you, though I have no power on your behalf from God, “Our Lord, in You do we trust, and to You do we turn in repentance, to You is our final goal.”
60|5|“Our Lord, do not make us a trial for the unbelievers, but forgive us Our Lord, for You are the Exalted in Might, the Wise.”
60|6|Indeed there is in them an excellent example for you to follow, for those whose hope is in God and in the Last Day. But if any turn away, truly God is free of all want, worthy of all praise
60|7|It may be that God will grant love and friendship between you and those whom you hold as enemies, for God has power over all things, and God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
60|8|God does not forbid you, with regard to those who do not fight you because of your faith nor drive you out of your homes, from dealing kindly and justly with them, for God loves those who are just
60|9|God only forbids you, with regard to those who fight you for your faith, and drive you out of your homes, or help in driving you out, from turning to them. It is those who turn to them who do wrong
60|10|O you who believe, when there comes to you believing women who are refugees, test them. God knows best as to their faith. If you think that they are believers, then do not send them back to the unbelievers. They are not permissible wives for the unbelievers, nor are the unbelievers permissible husbands for them. But pay the unbelievers what they have given for dowries, and there will be no blame on you if you marry them on payment of their dowry to them. But do not hold on to ties to unbelieving women. Ask for what you have given as their dowries, and let the unbelievers ask for what they have given as dowries. Such is the command of God. He judges between you, and God is Full of Knowledge and Wisdom
60|11|And if any of your wives desert you, and go to the unbelievers, and your turn comes, then pay to those whose wives have left, the equivalent of what they had given as their dowry, and be conscious of God, in Whom you believe
60|12|O messenger, when believing women come to you, and promise that they will not associate in worship any other thing with God, that they will not steal, that they will not have impermissible sex, that they will not kill their children, that they will not commit slander to intentionally misrepresent and deceive, and that they will not ignore you in what they know to be right, then take their word, and pray to God for their forgiveness, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
60|13|O you who believe, do not turn to the people on whom is the punishment of God. Of the hereafter they are already in despair, just as the unbelievers are in despair of the companions of the graves
61|1|Whatever is in the heavens and on earth, declares the praises and glory of God, for He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise
61|2|O you who believe, why do you say that which you do not do
61|3|It is wrong in the sight of God that you say that which you do not do
61|4|Truly God loves those that fight in His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid cemented structure
61|5|And remember Moses said to his people, “O my people, why do you anger and insult me, though you know that I am the messenger of God sent to you?” Then when they went wrong, God let their hearts go wrong, for God does not guide those who are rebellious transgressors
61|6|And remember Jesus, the son of Mary said, “O Children of Israel, I am the messenger of God sent to you, reflecting the truth of the Law before me, and giving hope of a messenger to come after me, whose name will be Ahmad.” But when he came to them with clear signs they said, “This is evident deception.”
61|7|Who does greater wrong than one who creates lies against God, even as he is being invited to Al-Islam? And God does not guide those who do wrong
61|8|Their intention is to extinguish God's light with their mouths. But God will brighten His light, even though the unbelievers detest it
61|9|It is He Who has sent His messenger with guidance and this way of life, in truth. That he may proclaim it over all ways of life, even though the pagans detest it
61|10|O you who believe, will I lead you to a transaction that will save you from a terrible penalty
61|11|Believe in God and His messenger, and strive in the cause of God, with your property and your persons. That will be best for you, if you only knew
61|12|He will forgive you your sins, and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing through them, and to beautiful mansions in gardens of eternity. That is indeed the greatest achievement
61|13|And another favor will He bestow which you will love, help from God and a speedy victory. So give hope to the believers
61|14|O you who believe, be helpers of God, as Jesus, the son of Mary, said to the Disciples, “Who will be my helpers for God?” The disciples said, “We are God's helpers.” Then a group of the Children of Israel believed, and a group disbelieved. But We gave power to those who believed to be used against their enemies, and they became the ones that prevailed
62|1|Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the praises and glory of God, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Exalted in Might, the Wise
62|2|It is He Who has sent among the unlettered, a messenger from among themselves, to rehearse to them His signs, to refine them, and to instruct them in scripture and wisdom, although they had been before in obvious error
62|3|As well as to them who have not already joined them, and He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise
62|4|Such is the bounty of God that He bestows on whom He wills. And God is Lord of the greatest bounty
62|5|The similitude of those who were charged with the obligations of the Mosaic Law, but who failed in those obligations, is that of a donkey that carries huge tomes. Unenviable is the similitude of people who falsify the signs of God, and God does not guide people who do wrong
62|6|Say, “O you who stand on Judaism, if you think that you are friends to God to the exclusion of others then express your desire for death, if you are truthful.”
62|7|But never will they express that desire because of the deeds their hands have sent on before them, and God knows well those who do wrong
62|8|Say, “The death from which you flee will indeed overtake you. Then you will be sent back to the Knower of all things secret and open, and He will inform you concerning the things that you did.”
62|9|O you who believe, when the call is made for prayer on Friday, hasten earnestly to the remembrance of God, and leave off business. That is best for you if you only knew
62|10|Then when the prayer is finished, disperse through the land, and seek of the bounty of God. And remember God much, that you may flourish
62|11|But when they see some deal or some entertainment, they disperse headlong into it, and leave you standing there. Say, “That which is from the presence of God is better than any entertainment or deal, and God is the best to provide.”
63|1|When the hypocrites come to you they say, “We bear witness that you are indeed the messenger of God.” Yes, God knows that you are indeed His messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars
63|2|They have made their promises a screen, and they obstruct the people from the path of God. Truly harmful are their deeds
63|3|Because they believed, then they rejected faith, a seal was set on their hearts, therefore they do not understand
63|4|When you look at them, their appearance pleases you, and when they speak, you listen to their words. They are as pieces of timber propped up, unable to stand on their own. They think that every complaint is against them. They are enemies, so beware of them. The curse of God is on them, and indeed they are deluded
63|5|And when it is said to them, “Come, the messenger of God will pray for your forgiveness,” they turn their heads away, and you will see them turning away their faces in arrogance
63|6|It is the same for them whether you pray for their forgiveness or not, God will not forgive them. Truly God does not guide rebellious transgressors
63|7|They are the ones who say, “Give nothing to those who are with God's messenger until they disband.” But to God belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites understand not
63|8|They say, “If we return to Medina, surely the elites will expel the meek from there.” But honor belongs to God and His messenger, and to the believers, but the hypocrites know not
63|9|O you who believe, do not let your wealth or your children divert you from the remembrance of God. If any does so, the loss is their own
63|10|And give something in charity out of the sustenance which We have bestowed on you before death comes to any of you and he will say, “O my Lord, why did You not give me respite for a little while? I would then have given in charity, and I would have been one of the doers of good.”
63|11|But to no soul will God grant respite when the time appointed has come, and God is well acquainted with all that you do
64|1|Whatever is in the heavens and on earth declares the praise and glory of God. To Him belongs control, and to Him belongs praise, and He has power over all things
64|2|It is He Who has created you, and of you are some who are unbelievers, and some who are believers, and God sees well all that you do
64|3|He has created the heavens and the earth in just proportions, and has given you shape, and made your shapes beautiful. And to Him is the final goal
64|4|He knows what is in the heavens and on earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. Yes, God knows well that which is in the heart
64|5|Has not the story reached you, of those who rejected faith? So they tasted the painful result of their conduct, and they had a terrible penalty
64|6|Because there came to them messengers with clear signs, but they said, “Shall human beings direct us?” So they rejected the message and turned away, but God can do without them, and God is free of all needs, worthy of all praise
64|7|The unbelievers think that they will not be raised up. Say, “Yes, by my Lord, you will surely be raised up. Then will you be told about all that you did, and that is easy for God.”
64|8|Therefore, believe in God and His messenger, and in the Light which we have sent down. And God is well acquainted with all that you do
64|9|The day that He assembles you all for a Day of Assembly, that will be a day of mutual loss and gain, and those who believe in God and work righteousness, He will remove from them their sins, and He will admit them to gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell therein forever. That will be their greatest achievement
64|10|But those who do not believe and treat Our signs as falsehood, they will be companions of the fire, to dwell therein forever, and terrible is that destination
64|11|No kind of calamity can occur except by the permission of God, and if anyone believes in God, God guides their heart, for God knows all things
64|12|So follow God, and follow His messenger. But if you turn back, the duty of Our messenger is only to proclaim the message clearly and openly
64|13|God, there is no god but He, therefore on God, let the believers put their trust
64|14|O you who believe, indeed among your spouses and your children are enemies to you, so beware of them. And whether you forgive, overlook, or cover up their faults, indeed God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
64|15|Your riches and your children may be only a trial, but in the presence of God is the highest reward
64|16|So be conscious of God as much as you can. Listen, follow, and give in charity for the benefit of your own soul. And those saved from the greed of their own selves, they are the ones who achieve prosperity
64|17|If you loan to God a handsome loan, He will double it to your credit, and He will grant you forgiveness. For God is most ready to appreciate service, Most Understanding
64|18|Knower of what is open, Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom
65|1|O messenger, when you divorce women, divorce them at their prescribed periods, and count accurately their prescribed periods, and be conscious of God, your Lord, and do not turn them out of their houses, nor should they leave, except in case they are guilty of some open lewdness, those are limits set by God, and any who transgress the limits of God, indeed wrongs his soul. You do not know if God will bring about thereafter some new situation
65|2|So when they fulfill their term appointed, either take them back on fair terms or part with them on fair terms, and take for witness two people from among you, endued with justice, and establish the evidence before God. Such is the advice given to him who believes in God and the Last Day, and for those who are conscious of God, He prepares a way out
65|3|And He provides for him from sources he never could imagine, and if anyone puts his trust in God, sufficient is God for him, for God will surely accomplish His purpose indeed, for all things has God appointed a due proportion
65|4|Those of your women who have passed the age of monthly periods, for them the prescribed period, if you have any doubts, are three months. And for those who have no period, it is the same. For those pregnant, their time is until they deliver, and for those who are conscious of God, He will make their path easy
65|5|That is the command of God which He has sent down to you, and if anyone is conscious of God, He will remove his sins from him, and will enlarge his reward
65|6|Let the women live in ‘iddat in the same manner as you live, according to your means. Do not annoy them, as to restrict them. And if they are pregnant, then provide for them until they deliver, and if they breastfeed your offspring, give them their due, and take mutual counsel together, according to what is just and reasonable, and if you find yourselves in difficulties, let another woman breastfeed the child on their behalf
65|7|Let the man of means give according to his means, and the man whose resources are scarce, let him give according to what God has given him. God puts no burden on any person beyond what He has given him. With difficulty, God grants relief
65|8|How many were the peoples who insolently opposed the command of their Lord and of His messengers? Did We not then call them to account, to severe account? And We imposed on them an exemplary punishment
65|9|Then they tasted the consequence of their conduct, and the end of their conduct was perdition
65|10|God has prepared for them a severe punishment. Therefore be conscious of God, O you people of understanding who have believed, for God has indeed sent down to you a message
65|11|And a messenger, who rehearses to you the signs of God containing clear explanations, that he may lead forth those who believe and do righteous deeds, from the depths of darkness into light, and those who believe in God and work righteousness, He will admit to gardens with rivers flowing through them, to dwell therein forever. God has indeed granted for them an excellent provision
65|12|God is He Who created seven firmaments, and of the earth a similar number. Through them all, descends His command, that you may know that God has power over all things and that God comprehends all things in His knowledge
66|1|O messenger, why do you prohibit that which God has made permissible, in order to please your wives? But God is Oft-Forgiving, Mercifully Redeeming
66|2|God has already ordained for you the dissolution of your promises in some cases, and God is your Protector, and He is Full of Knowledge and Wisdom
66|3|When the messenger disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives, and she then divulged it, and God made it known to him, he confirmed part of it and avoided a part. Then when he told her of it she said, “Who told you this?” He said, “He Who told me, knows all and is well acquainted with all things.”
66|4|Turn you two, in repentance to Him, as your hearts are indeed inclined. But if you back up each other against him, truly God is his Protector, and Gabriel, and the righteous ones among those who believe, and in addition the angels, will back him up
66|5|It may be that if he divorced you all, God will give him instead, wives better than you, who are loyal, who believe, who are devout, who turn to God in repentance, who worship and fast, who have been previously married or virgins
66|6|O you who believe, save yourselves and your families from a fire whose fuel is people and stones, over which are angels stern and severe, who do not hesitate when executing the commands they receive from God, but do what they are asked
66|7|O you unbelievers, make no excuses this day. You are only being rewarded for all that you did
66|8|O you who believe, turn to God with sincere repentance, in the hope that your Lord will remove from you your sins and admit you to gardens with rivers flowing through them, the day that God will not permit to be humiliated, the messenger and those who believe with him. Their light will run forward before them and by their right hands while they say, “Our Lord, perfect our light for us, and grant us forgiveness, for You have power over all things.”
66|9|O messenger, strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm against them. Their abode is hell, a miserable refuge
66|10|God sets forth, for an example to the unbelievers, the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were under two of our righteous servants, but they were disloyal, and they profited nothing before God on their account, but were told, “Enter the fire along with the others who enter.”
66|11|And God sets forth, as an example to those who believe, the wife of Pharaoh. Behold she said, “O my Lord, build for me near You, a mansion in the garden, and save me from Pharaoh and his doings, and save me from those who do wrong.”
66|12|And Mary the daughter of ‘Imran, who guarded her chastity, We breathed into her of Our spirit. And she testified to the truth of the words of her Lord and of His revelation, and was one of the devout. 12 (End of Part)
67|1|Blessed is He in Whose Hands is the control, and He has power over all things
67|2|He Who created death and life, that He may make evident which of you is best in conduct, and He is the Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving
67|3|He Who created the seven heavens, one above another. No lack of proportion will you see in the creation of God, the Merciful Benefactor. So turn your vision again, do you see any flaw
67|4|Then turn your vision twice more. Your vision will come back to you humbled and fatigued
67|5|And We have equipped the lowest heaven with torches, and We have made them as weapons to drive away the devils, and have prepared for them the penalty of the blazing fire
67|6|For those who reject their Guardian Evolver is the penalty of hell, and miserable is that destination
67|7|When they are cast therein, they will hear the drawing in of its breath as it blazes forth
67|8|Almost bursting with fury. Every time a group is cast therein, its keepers will ask, “Did no warner come to you?”
67|9|They will say, “Yes, indeed a warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said, ‘God never sent down anything. You are no doubt in great error.’ ”
67|10|They will further say, “Had we only listened, or used our intelligence, we would not be among the companions of the blazing fire.”
67|11|They will then confess their sins, but forgiveness will be far from the companions of the blazing fire
67|12|As for those who fear their Guardian Evolver, though unseen, for them is forgiveness and a great reward
67|13|And whether you hide your word or publish it, He certainly has knowledge of the secrets of all hearts
67|14|Should He not know, He Who created? And He is the One Who understands the finest mysteries, and is well acquainted with them
67|15|It is He Who has placed the earth at your disposal, so traverse through its tracts and enjoy the sustenance which He provides, and to Him is the resurrection
67|16|Do you feel secure that He Who is in heaven will not cause you to be swallowed up by the earth when it shakes
67|17|Or do you feel secure that He Who is in the sky will not send against you a violent tornado, so that you will know how terrible My warning is
67|18|But indeed the people before them rejected it. So terrible was My rejection
67|19|Do they not observe the birds above them, spreading their wings and folding them in? None can hold them up except God, the Merciful Benefactor. Truly God the Merciful Benefactor is He Who watches over all things
67|20|Who is there that can help you? Not even an army, besides the Merciful Redeemer's. In nothing but delusion are the unbelievers
67|21|Or who is there that can provide you with sustenance if He was to withhold His provisions? No, they persist in impiety and in flight
67|22|Is then one who walks headlong with his face groveling better guided or one who walks evenly on a straight path
67|23|Say, “It is He Who has created you and made for you the faculties of hearing, seeing, feeling, and understanding. Little thanks is it you give
67|24|Say, “It is He Who has multiplied you through the earth, and to Him will you be gathered together.”
67|25|They ask, when will this promise be fulfilled, if you are telling the truth
67|26|Say, “As for the knowledge of the time, it is with God alone. I am sent only to warn clearly and publicly.”
67|27|Then when they see it nearby, grieved will be the faces of the unbelievers, and it will be said, “This is that which you were inviting.”
67|28|Say, “Do you see that God can destroy me, and those with me, or He can bestow His mercy on us. Yet who can deliver the unbelievers from a terrible penalty?”
67|29|Say, “He is God, the Merciful Benefactor, we believed in Him, and we put our trust in Him. So soon you will know which of us it is that is in manifest error.”
67|30|Say, “Look, if your stream is lost one morning, who then can supply you with flowing water?”
68|1|Nuun. By the pen and what they write
68|2|You are not, by the grace of your Lord, insane or possessed
68|3|No, indeed for you is a reward unfailing
68|4|And you stand on an exalted standard of character
68|5|Soon will you see, and they will see
68|6|Which of you are afflicted with insanity
68|7|Indeed it is your Lord Who knows best who has strayed from His path, and He knows best those who receive guidance
68|8|So do not listen to those who reject it
68|9|Their desire is that you would let up, so that they might regroup
68|10|Do not compromise with this type of despicable person, ready with promises
68|11|A slanderer going about with slander
68|12|Hindering all good, transgressing beyond bounds, deep in sin
68|13|Violent and cruel, with all that– useless
68|14|Because he possesses wealth and sons
68|15|When Our signs are rehearsed to him, “Tales of the ancients,” he says
68|16|Soon We will brand them on the nose
68|17|Indeed We have tried them as We tried the people of the farm-orchard, when they decided to gather the fruits in the morning
68|18|But without making a contingency plan
68|19|Then there came on them a visitation from your Lord, from all around while they slept
68|20|So it became, by the morning, like a dark and desolate spot
68|21|As the morning broke, they called out one to another
68|22|“Go to your land in the morning, if you will gather the fruits.”
68|23|So they departed, conversing in secret low tones saying
68|24|“Let not a single, indigent person break in upon you this day.”
68|25|And they started the morning strong in resolve
68|26|But when they saw it they said, “We have surely lost our way
68|27|“Indeed we are shut out.”
68|28|One of them more just than the others said, “Did I not say to you, ‘Why not praise God?’ ”
68|29|They said, “Glory to Our Lord, indeed we have done wrong.”
68|30|Then they turned one against another in blame
68|31|They said, “Unfortunately for us, we have indeed transgressed
68|32|“It may be that our Lord will give us something better than this in exchange, for we turn to Him.”
68|33|Such is this punishment, but greater is the punishment in the hereafter, if they only knew
68|34|Indeed for the righteous are gardens of pleasure in the presence of their Lord
68|35|Shall We then treat the people of faith like the people of sin
68|36|What is the matter with you, how do you judge
68|37|Or do you have a book through which you learn
68|38|That you will have through it whatever you wish
68|39|Or do you have covenants with Us reaching to the Day of Accountability, that you will have whatever you demand
68|40|Ask them which of them will stand for that
68|41|Or have they partners? Then let them produce their partners, if they are truthful
68|42|The day that the leg will be laid bare, and they will be summoned to bow in adoration, though they will not be able
68|43|Their eyes will be cast down, disgrace will cover them, seeing that they had been asked to bow in adoration while they were whole
68|44|Then leave Me alone with those who reject this message. By degrees We will punish them from directions they do not perceive
68|45|I will grant them respite. Truly powerful is My plan
68|46|Or is it that you ask them for a reward, so that they are burdened with a load of debt
68|47|Or that the unknown is in their hands, so that they can write it down
68|48|So wait with patience for the command of your Lord, and do not be like the companion of the fish when he cried out in agony
68|49|Had grace from his Lord not reached him he would indeed have been cast up on the naked shore in disgrace
68|50|So his Lord chose him and made him of the company of the righteous
68|51|And the unbelievers would nearly trip you up with their eyes when they hear the message and they say, “Surely he is possessed.”
68|52|But it is nothing less than a message for all the systems of knowledge
69|1|The sure reality
69|2|What is the sure reality
69|3|And what will cause you to realize what the sure reality is
69|4|The Thamud and the ‘Ad people branded as false the stunning calamity
69|5|But the Thamud, they were caused to perish, by a terrible storm
69|6|And the ‘Ad, they were caused to perish by a furious wind, extremely violent
69|7|He made it rage against them seven nights and eight days in succession. So that you could see the people lying prostrate in its path, as if they had been roots of hollow palm trees tumbled down
69|8|Do you see then any of them left surviving
69|9|And Pharaoh, and those before him, and the cities overthrown, committed habitual, harmful deeds
69|10|And they did not follow the messenger of their Lord, so He punished them with a sufficient penalty
69|11|We, when the water overflowed beyond its limits, carried you in the Ark
69|12|That We might make it a message for you, and that ears which hear the tale retain it to memory, and bear its lessons in mind
69|13|Then when a single trumpet is blown
69|14|And the earth and its mountains are moved, and they are crushed to powder with a single pound
69|15|On that day will the Event come to pass
69|16|And the universe will be rent asunder, for it will be flimsy that day
69|17|And the angels will be on its sides, and eight will that day, bear the throne of your Lord above them
69|18|That day you will be brought to Judgment. Not an act of yours that you hide will be hidden
69|19|Then he, who will be given his record in his right hand will say, “Ah here, read my record
69|20|“I indeed understood that my account would reach me.”
69|21|And he will be in a life of bliss
69|22|In a garden on high
69|23|Fruits hanging low and near
69|24|“Eat and drink with full satisfaction, because of that which you sent before you, in days gone by.”
69|25|And he who will be given his record in his left hand will say, “I wish that my record had not been given to me
69|26|“And that I had never realized how my account stood
69|27|“I wish that death had been the end of me
69|28|“Of no profit to me is my wealth
69|29|“My power has vanished from me.”
69|30|Then it will be said, “Seize him and bind him
69|31|“And burn him in the blazing fire
69|32|“Further, make him march in a chain-gang, with a length of seventy cubits
69|33|“This was he who would not believe in God, Most High
69|34|“And would not encourage the feeding of the indigent
69|35|“So no friend has he here this day
69|36|“Nor has he any food, except of what remains from the washing of wounds
69|37|“Which none eat but the wrong-doers.”
69|38|So I call to witness what you see
69|39|And what you see not
69|40|That this is indeed the word of an honored messenger
69|41|It is not the word of a poet. Little is it you believe
69|42|Nor is it the word of an oracle. Little advice is it you receive
69|43|A message sent down from the Lord of all worlds
69|44|And if the messenger were to invent any sayings in Our name
69|45|We would certainly seize him by his right hand
69|46|Then We would certainly cut off the artery of his heart
69|47|Nor could any of you protect him
69|48|But indeed this is a message for those who are conscious
69|49|And We certainly know that there are among you those who reject it
69|50|But truly it is a cause of sorrow for the unbelievers
69|51|But indeed it is certainly true
69|52|So glorify the name of your Lord, Most High
70|1|A questioner asked about a penalty to befall
70|2|The unbelievers which there is none to ward off
70|3|A penalty from God, Lord of the ways of ascent
70|4|The angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day the duration of fifty thousand years
70|5|Therefore be patient, beautifully patient
70|6|They see it as indeed distant
70|7|But We see it as near
70|8|The day that the sky will be like molten brass
70|9|And the mountains will be like wool
70|10|And no friend will ask about a friend
70|11|Though they will be put in sight of each other. Those who are corrupt, their desire will be that he could redeem himself from the penalty of that day with his children
70|12|His wife, and his brother
70|13|His family who sheltered him
70|14|And all who are on earth, so that it could save him
70|15|By no means, for it would be the fire of hell
70|16|Burning down to the skull
70|17|Inviting all those who turn their backs and turn away their faces
70|18|Collecting and hiding it
70|19|Truly the human being was created impatient
70|20|Depressed when harm touches him
70|21|And arrogant when good reaches him
70|22|Not so those who pray
70|23|Those who stay focused on their prayer
70|24|And those who recognize a right to their wealth
70|25|For those who ask, and those unable to ask
70|26|And those who hold to the truth of the Day of Accountability
70|27|And those who fear the displeasure of their Lord
70|28|For their Lord’s displeasure is unlike peace and tranquility
70|29|And those who guard their chastity
70|30|Except with their spouses and those that their right hands possess, for they are not to be blamed
70|31|But those who trespass beyond this are transgressors
70|32|And those who respect their trusts and covenants
70|33|And those who stand firm in their testimonies
70|34|And those who guard their worship
70|35|These will be the honored ones in the gardens
70|36|Now what is the matter with the unbelievers that they rush madly before you
70|37|From the right and from the left, in crowds
70|38|Does every person among them long to enter the garden of bliss
70|39|By no means, for We have created them from what they know
70|40|No, I call to witness the Lord of all points in the East and the West. That We can certainly
70|41|Substitute for them better people than them. And We will not be defeated
70|42|So leave them to plunge in vain talk and play, until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised
70|43|The day when they will suddenly rise from their graves, as if they were rushing to a goal post
70|44|Their eyes lowered, disgrace covering them. Such is the day which they are promised
71|1|We sent Noah to his people, “Warn your people before there comes to them a terrible penalty.”
71|2|He said, “O my people, I am to you a warner, clear and open
71|3|“You should worship God, be conscious of Him, and follow me
71|4|“So that He may forgive you your sins, and give you respite for a stated term, for when the term given by God is accomplished, it cannot be delayed, if you only knew.”
71|5|He said, “O my Lord, I have called to my people night and day
71|6|“But my call only increases their flight from right
71|7|“And every time I have called to them, so that You might forgive them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up with their garments, grown obstinate, and given themselves up to arrogance
71|8|“Again, I have called to them publicly
71|9|“Further I have delivered by speaking to them in private
71|10|“Saying, ‘Ask forgiveness from your Lord, for He is Oft-Forgiving
71|11|“ ‘He will send rain to you in abundance
71|12|“ ‘Give you increase in wealth and children, bestow on you gardens, and bestow on you rivers
71|13|“ ‘What is the matter with you that you do not attribute grandeur to God
71|14|“ ‘Seeing that it is He Who has created you in diverse stages
71|15|“ ‘Do you not see how God has created the seven heavens, one above another
71|16|“ ‘And made the Moon a light in the middle of them, and made the Sun as a lamp
71|17|“ ‘And God has produced you from the growing earth
71|18|“ ‘And in the end He will return you to it, and raise you out
71|19|“ ‘And God has made the earth a wide expanse for you
71|20|“That you may go about therein, in spacious roads.”
71|21|Noah said, “O my Lord, they did not follow me, but they follow the people whose wealth and children give them no increase, but only loss
71|22|“And they have devised a great plot
71|23|“And they said, ‘Do not abandon your gods. Abandon neither Wadd nor Suwa, neither Yaguth nor Ya’uq, nor Nasr
71|24|“They have already misled many, and grant no increase to the wrong-doers, except in misguidance.”
71|25|So because of their sins they were drowned, and were made to enter the fire, and they found, in lieu of God, none to help them
71|26|And Noah said, “O my Lord, do not leave from the unbelievers, a single one on earth
71|27|“For if You do leave them, they will only mislead Your devotees, and they will breed none but wicked ungrateful ones
71|28|“O my Lord, forgive me, my parents, and all who enter my house with belief, and all believing men and believing women, and to the wrongdoers, grant no increase except in perdition.”
72|1|Say, “It has been revealed to me that a company of jinn listened and they said, “ ‘We have indeed heard a wonderful recital
72|2|“ ‘It gives guidance to the right way, and we believe in it. We will not join any with our Lord
72|3|“ ‘And Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord. He has neither wife nor child
72|4|“ ‘There were some foolish ones among us who used to speak elaborate lies against God
72|5|“ ‘But we think that no human nor jinn should say anything that is untrue about God
72|6|“ ‘True, there were men among the humans who sought refuge with men among the jinn, and they increased them in being unwise
72|7|“ ‘They think, as you thought, that God would not raise up anyone
72|8|“ ‘And we pried into the secrets of heaven, but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires
72|9|“ ‘We used to sit there in position to listen, but any who listen now will find a flaming fire watching them in ambush
72|10|“ ‘And we do not understand whether harm is intended to those on earth, or whether their Lord intends to guide them to right conduct
72|11|“ ‘There are among us some who are righteous, and some who are not. We follow different paths
72|12|“ ‘But we know that by no means can we stop God throughout the earth, nor can we stop Him by flight
72|13|“ ‘And as for us, since we have listened to the guidance, we have accepted it, and any who believes in his Lord has no fear, loss, nor burden
72|14|“ ‘Among us are some who submit their will, and some that stray from justice. Now those who submit their will, they have found the right path
72|15|“But those who stray, they are fuel for hellfire.”
72|16|If they had remained on the path, We should certainly have bestowed on them rain in abundance
72|17|That We might try them. But if any turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will cause him to undergo a severe penalty
72|18|“And the places of worship are for God. So do not invoke any one along with God
72|19|“Yet when the devotee of God stands forth to invoke Him, they make around him a dense crowd.”
72|20|Say, “I do no more than invoke my Lord, and I do not join any with Him.”
72|21|Say, “It is not in my power to cause you harm, nor to bring you to right conduct.”
72|22|Say, “No one can save me from God, nor would I find refuge except with Him
72|23|“Unless I proclaim what I receive from God and His messages. For any who goes against God and His messenger, for them is hell. They will dwell therein forever.”
72|24|Then, when they see that which they are promised, then will they know who it is that is weakest in support and least in numbers
72|25|Say, “I do not know whether that which you are promised is near, nor whether my Lord will appoint for it a distant term
72|26|“He knows the unknown, and He does not show anyone His unknown
72|27|“Except a messenger whom He has chosen, and then He makes a group of watchers march before him and behind him
72|28|“That He may know that they have brought and delivered the Messages of their Lord, and He surrounds all that are with them, and takes account of every single thing.”
73|1|O you who are covered
73|2|Arise at night, but not all night
73|3|Half of it, or a little less
73|4|Or a little more, and sing the Quran in moderate, well-arranged tones
73|5|Soon We will place on you a weighty message
73|6|Truly the rising by night is most conducive and most suitable for the Word
73|7|Certainly there is for you, by day, prolonged occupation
73|8|But keep in remembrance the name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him whole-heartedly
73|9|Lord of the East and the West, there is no god but He, therefore take Him to manage your affairs
73|10|And have patience with what they say, and leave them with dignity
73|11|And leave Me with those in possession of the good things in life who deny the truth, and bear with them for a little while
73|12|With Us are shackles, a fire
73|13|A food that chokes, and a terrible penalty
73|14|One day the earth and the mountains will be in violent commotion, and the mountains will be as a heap of sand poured out and flowing down
73|15|Indeed we have sent to you a messenger to be a witness for you, as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh
73|16|But Pharaoh did not follow the messenger, so We seized him with a terrible punishment
73|17|Then how will you, if you deny God, guard yourselves on a day that will make children gray-headed
73|18|When the universe will be cleft asunder? His promise must be accomplished
73|19|Indeed this is a warning. Therefore, whosoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord
73|20|Your Lord knows that you rise nearly two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night, and so does a group of those with you. But God appoints night and day in due measure, He knows that you are unable to keep count of it. So He has turned to you. Therefore read of the Quran as much as is easy for you. He knows that there may be some among you in ill-health, others traveling through the land, seeking God's bounty, and others fighting in God's cause. Therefore read as much of the Quran as is easy, and establish prayer and give zakat, and loan to God a handsome loan, and whatever good you send forth for your souls, you will find it in God's presence. Yes, better and greater in reward. And seek the grace of God, for God is Oft-Forgiving, Redeeming
74|1|O you wrapped up
74|2|Arise and deliver your warning
74|3|And praise your Lord
74|4|And your garments, keep free from stain
74|5|And avoid all abomination
74|6|Nor expect from giving, any increase
74|7|But for your Lord’s sake, be patient and constant
74|8|Finally, when the trumpet is sounded
74|9|That day, will be a day of distress
74|10|Far from easy for those without faith
74|11|Leave Me alone with those that I created alone
74|12|To whom I granted resources in abundance
74|13|And children to be by his side
74|14|To whom I made life smooth and comfortable
74|15|Yet he is greedy. Should I add even more
74|16|By no mean, because to Our signs he has been rebellious
74|17|Soon I will visit him with a mount of disasters
74|18|For he thought and he plotted
74|19|Oh, how he plotted
74|20|Yes, woe to him, how he plotted
74|21|Then he looked around
74|22|Then he frowned and he scowled
74|23|Then he turned back and was arrogant
74|24|Then said he, “This is nothing but deception, derived from those before
74|25|“This is nothing but the word of a mortal.”
74|26|Soon I will cast him into hellfire
74|27|And what will explain to you what hellfire is
74|28|Nothing does it permit to endure, and nothing does it leave alone
74|29|Darkening and changing the color of human beings
74|30|Over it are nineteen
74|31|And We have set none other than angels as guardians of the fire. And We have fixed their number only as a challenge for unbelievers, in order that the people of the Book may arrive at certainty, and the believers may increase in faith, and that no doubts may be left for the people of the Book and the believers, and that those in whose hearts is a disease, and the unbelievers may say, “What meaning does God intend by this?” So God leaves to stray whom He pleases, and guides whom He pleases, and none can know the forces of your Lord except Him. And this is no other than a warning to humanity
74|32|No, indeed by the Moon
74|33|And by the night as it retreats
74|34|And by the dawn as it shines forth
74|35|Indeed it is one of the greatest
74|36|A warning to humanity
74|37|To any of you who chooses to press forward, or to fall behind
74|38|Every soul will be held responsible for its deeds
74|39|Except the companions of the right hand
74|40|They will be in gardens. They will ask
74|41|Those who were corrupt
74|42|“What led you into hellfire?”
74|43|They will say, “We were not of those who prayed
74|44|“Nor were we of those who fed the indigent
74|45|“But we used to speak vainly with vain people
74|46|“And we used to deny the Day of Accountability
74|47|“Until there came to us that which is certain.”
74|48|Then will no intercession of intercessors profit them
74|49|Then what is the matter with them that they turn away from advice
74|50|As if they were affrighted animals
74|51|Fleeing from a lion
74|52|Still each one of them wants to be given scrolls spread out
74|53|By no means, but they are not conscious of the hereafter
74|54|No, indeed it is a reminder
74|55|Let any who wills keep it in remembrance
74|56|But none will keep it in remembrance except as God wills. He is the Lord of righteousness, and the Lord of forgiveness
75|1|I call to witness the day of resurrection
75|2|And I call to witness the self-accusing soul
75|3|Does the human being think that We cannot assemble his bones
75|4|Indeed We are able to put together in perfect order, the very tips of their fingers
75|5|But the human being wishes to do wrong in the time in front of him
75|6|He questions, “When is the Day of Resurrection?”
75|7|Then, when the sight is dazed
75|8|And the Moon is buried in darkness
75|9|And the Sun and Moon are synchronized
75|10|That day the human being will say, “Where is the refuge?”
75|11|By no means is it a place of safety
75|12|Before your Lord that day will be the place of rest
75|13|That day the human being will be told all that he pushed forward, and all that he keep back
75|14|No, the human being will be evidence against himself
75|15|Even though he were to put forth his excuses
75|16|Move not your tongue to hasten it
75|17|It is for Us to collect it and to recite it
75|18|But when We have recited it, follow its recital
75|19|And indeed it is upon Us to explain it
75|20|No, but you love the fleeting life
75|21|And forget the hereafter
75|22|Some faces that day will beam
75|23|Looking towards their Lord
75|24|And some faces that day will be sad and dismal
75|25|In the thought that some backbreaking calamity was about to be inflicted on them
75|26|Yes, when it reaches to the collarbone
75|27|And there will be a cry, “Is this an illusion?”
75|28|And he will conclude that it was the time of parting
75|29|And one leg will be joined with another
75|30|That day all will strive to your Lord
75|31|So he gave nothing in charity, nor did he pray
75|32|Instead he rejected truth and turned away
75|33|Then he went to his family conceited
75|34|Woe to you, yes woe
75|35|Again, woe to you, yes, woe
75|36|Does the human being think that he will be left uncontrollable
75|37|Were they not a zygote from sperm emitted
75|38|Then did they become a leech-like fetus, then God made and fashion them in due proportion
75|39|And of them He made two genders, male and female
75|40|Then does He not have the power to give life to the dead
76|1|Has there ever been a period of time when the human being was not something to consider
76|2|Indeed We created the human being from a zygote. In order to try them, We then gave him hearing and sight
76|3|We showed him the way, but whether they are grateful or ungrateful rests on their will
76|4|For the rejecters we have prepared chains and a blazing fire
76|5|As for the righteous, they will drink from a cup mixed with kafur
76|6|A fountain where the devotees of God drink, making it flow in abundance
76|7|They honor their promise, and they are conscious of a day whose harm flies far and wide
76|8|And they feed, for the love of God, the indigent, the orphan, and the captive
76|9|Saying, “We feed you for the sake of God alone. No reward do we desire from you, nor thanks
76|10|“Indeed we fear a day of distressful punishment.”
76|11|But God will deliver them from the harm of that day, and will shed over them a light of beauty and joy
76|12|And because they were patient and constant, He will reward them with a garden and garments of silk
76|13|Reclining in the garden on raised thrones, they will find there, neither a sun nor extreme cold
76|14|And the shade of the garden will come low over them, and bunches of fruit there will hang low
76|15|And among them will be passed round bowls of silver and goblets of crystal
76|16|Crystal and silver. They will determine its amount
76|17|And they will be given to drink there, from a cup mixed with zanjabil
76|18|A fountain there called Salsabil
76|19|And around them will be youth of perpetual innocence. If you see them, you would think they were scattered pearls
76|20|And when you look, it is there you will see bliss and a realm magnificent
76|21|Upon them will be green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver, and their Lord will give to them a natural drink
76|22|“Indeed this is a reward for you, and your endeavor is accepted and recognized.”
76|23|It is We Who have sent down the Quran to you in stages
76|24|Therefore, be patient with constancy to the command of your Lord, and do not listen to those who are unethical or the disbeliever among them
76|25|And glorify the name or your Lord morning and evening
76|26|And part of the night, prostrate yourself to Him, and praise Him throughout the night
76|27|As for these, they love the fleeting life, and put away behind them a trying day
76|28|It is We who created them, and We have made their forms strong, but when We will, We can substitute the like of them with a change
76|29|This is advice, whosoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord
76|30|But you cannot, except as God wills, and God is full of Knowledge and Wisdom
76|31|He will admit to His mercy whom He wills, but the wrongdoers, for them has He prepared a terrible penalty
77|1|By those sent forth one after another
77|2|That blow violently in tempestuous gusts
77|3|And scatter far and wide
77|4|Then separate them, one from another
77|5|Then spread abroad a message
77|6|Whether of justification or of warning
77|7|Surely what you are promised must come to pass
77|8|Then when the stars become dim
77|9|When the heaven is cleft asunder
77|10|When the mountains are scattered as dust
77|11|And when the messengers are all appointed a time
77|12|For what day are these deferred
77|13|For the day of sorting out
77|14|And what will explain to you what the day of sorting out is
77|15|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|16|Did We not destroy people in the past
77|17|So We will make those of late follow them
77|18|This is how We deal with the people of sin
77|19|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|20|Have We not created you from a fluid seemingly worthless
77|21|Which We placed in a place of rest, firmly fixed
77|22|For a period determined
77|23|And We decide, for We are the best to decide
77|24|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|25|Have We not made the earth to draw together–
77|26|The living and the dead
77|27|And made therein mountains standing firm and lofty, and provided for you sweet water
77|28|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|29|It will be said “Go to that which you used to reject as false
77|30|“Depart to a shadow in three columns
77|31|“Which yields no shade of coolness, and is of no use against the fierce blaze.”
77|32|“Indeed it throws about sparks as forts
77|33|“As if there were yellow camels.”
77|34|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|35|That will be a day when they will be unable to speak
77|36|Nor will it be open to them to put forth pleas
77|37|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|38|That will be a day of sorting out. We will gather you together with those before you
77|39|Now, if you have a plot, use it against Me
77|40|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|41|As for the righteous, they will be amid shade and springs
77|42|And fruits, all they desire
77|43|“Eat and drink to your heart’s content, for all that you did
77|44|We certainly reward the doers of good
77|45|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|46|Eat and enjoy yourselves a little while, because you are wrong-doers
77|47|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|48|And when it is said to them, “Prostrate yourselves,” they do not do so
77|49|Ah woe that day to the rejecters of truth
77|50|Then in what message after that will they believe? 50 (End of Part)
78|1|Concerning what they are disputing
78|2|Concerning the great announcement
78|3|About which they cannot agree
78|4|Indeed they will soon come to know
78|5|Again, indeed they will soon come to know
78|6|Have We not made the earth as a wide expanse
78|7|And the mountains as pegs
78|8|And created you mates
78|9|And made your sleep for rest
78|10|And made the night as a covering
78|11|And made the day as a means of subsistence
78|12|And built over you the seven firmaments
78|13|And placed a light of splendor
78|14|And do We not send down from the clouds water in abundance
78|15|That We may produce with it grains and vegetables
78|16|And gardens of luxurious growth
78|17|Indeed the day of sorting out is a thing appointed
78|18|The day the trumpet will be sounded, and you will come forth in crowds
78|19|And the heavens will be opened as if there were doors
78|20|And the mountains will vanish, as if they were a mirage
78|21|Truly hell is a place of ambush
78|22|For the transgressors a place of destination
78|23|They will dwell therein for ages
78|24|Nothing cool will they taste therein, nor any drink
78|25|Except a boiling fluid, and a fluid dark, murky, intensely cold
78|26|A fitting reward
78|27|Because they feared not any account for their deeds
78|28|And they treated Our signs as false
78|29|All things have We preserved on record
78|30|So taste this, for no increase will We grant you, except in punishment
78|31|Indeed for the righteous there will be a fulfillment of their desires
78|32|Gardens enclosed, and grapevines
78|33|Companions of equal age
78|34|And a cup, full
78|35|No vanity will they hear therein, nor lies
78|36|Reward from your Lord, a gift sufficient
78|37|From the Guardian Evolver of the heavens and the earth, and all between. God, the Merciful Benefactor, none will have power to argue with Him
78|38|The day the Spirit and the Angels will stand forth in ranks. None will speak except those permitted by God, the Merciful Benefactor, and he will say what is true
78|39|That day will be the true reality. Therefore, whoever wills, let him anticipate the return to his Lord
78|40|Indeed, We have warned you of a penalty near, the day when humanity will see that which their hands have sent forth, and the unbeliever will say, “Oh my God, I wish that I were mere dust.”
79|1|By those who tear it out with violence
79|2|By those who gently draw it out
79|3|And by those who glide along
79|4|Then press forward as in a race
79|5|And plan to do it
79|6|One day all that can be in commotion will be in violent commotion
79|7|Followed by repeated commotions
79|8|Hearts that day will be in agitation
79|9|Their eyes will be caste down
79|10|They say, “What, will we indeed be returned to our former state
79|11|“What, when we will have become decayed bones?”
79|12|They say, “It would, in that case, be a return with loss.”
79|13|But indeed, it will be but a single cry
79|14|When behold, they will be in the awakening
79|15|Has the story of Moses reached you
79|16|Behold, your Lord called to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa
79|17|“Go to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds
79|18|“And say to him, ‘Do you want to be purified
79|19|“And that I guide you to your Lord, so you can fear Him?”
79|20|Then Moses showed him the great sign
79|21|But he rejected it and did not follow
79|22|Further, he turned his back, striving hard
79|23|Then he gathered them and made a proclamation
79|24|Saying, “I am your Lord, Most High”
79|25|But God punished him, and made an example of him, in the hereafter, and in the present life
79|26|Indeed in this is an instructive warning for whoever is conscious of God
79|27|What, are you more difficult to create or the heaven? God has constructed it
79|28|And on high has He raised its canopy, and He has given it order and perfection
79|29|Its night does He endow with darkness, and its splendor does He bring out
79|30|And the earth, moreover, has He extended
79|31|He draws out from there its moisture and its pasture
79|32|And the mountains has He firmly fixed
79|33|For use and convenience for you and your livestock
79|34|Therefore, when there comes the great overwhelming event
79|35|The day when humanity will remember all that they strove for
79|36|And hellfire will be placed in full view, for all to see
79|37|Then for those who transgressed all bounds
79|38|And had preferred the life of the present
79|39|The abode will be hellfire
79|40|And for those who had entertained the fear of standing before their Lord, and have restrained their soul from lower desires
79|41|Their abode will be the garden
79|42|They ask you about the Hour, “When will its appointed time be?”
79|43|Are you concerned with the declaration of it
79|44|With your Lord is the finale
79|45|You are only a warner for those who fear it
79|46|The day they see it, it will be as if they had stayed but a single evening, or until the following morn
80|1|He frowned and turned away
80|2|Because there came to him the blind man
80|3|But how could you know whether he might be purified
80|4|Or that he might receive advice, and the teaching might profit him
80|5|As for one who regards Himself as self-sufficient
80|6|To him you attend
80|7|Though it is no blame on you if he grows not
80|8|But as to him who came to you striving earnestly
80|9|And with consciousness
80|10|Of him were you unmindful
80|11|By no means should this be so, for it is indeed a message of instruction
80|12|So whosoever wills, may ponder it
80|13|In books held in honor
80|14|Exalted and purified
80|15|By the hands of scribes
80|16|Honorable, pious and just
80|17|Woe to humanity, what has made them reject God
80|18|From what has He created them
80|19|From a zygote, He has created him, and then molds them in due proportions
80|20|Then He makes his path smooth for him
80|21|Then He causes him to die, and puts him in his grave
80|22|Then, when it is His will, He will raise him up
80|23|By no means has he fulfilled what God has asked of him
80|24|Then let the human being look at his food
80|25|And that We pour out water in abundance
80|26|And We split the earth into pieces
80|27|And produce therein corn
80|28|Grapes and nutritious plants
80|29|Olives and dates
80|30|And enclosed gardens, dense with lofty trees
80|31|And fruits and fodder
80|32|For use and convenience for you and your livestock
80|33|Then when there comes the deafening noise
80|34|The day one will flee from his own brother
80|35|And from his mother and his father
80|36|And from his wife and children
80|37|Each one of them, that day, will have enough concern to make him indifferent to the others
80|38|Some faces that day will be beaming
80|39|Laughing, rejoicing
80|40|And other faces that day will be dust-stained
80|41|Darkness will cover them
80|42|Such will be the rejecters of God, the immoral
81|1|When the sun is folded up
81|2|When the stars fall, losing their luster
81|3|When the mountains vanish
81|4|When the she-camels, ten months with young, are left untended
81|5|When the wild creatures are herded together
81|6|When the oceans are made to overflow
81|7|When the souls are sorted out
81|8|When the female infant buried alive is asked
81|9|For what crime she was killed
81|10|When the scrolls are laid open
81|11|When the world on high is unveiled
81|12|When the blazing fire is kindled to a fierce blaze
81|13|And when the garden is brought near
81|14|Then will each soul know what it has put forward
81|15|So indeed I call to witness the planets that recede
81|16|Go straight or hide
81|17|And the night as it disappears
81|18|And the dawn as it breathes away the darkness
81|19|Indeed it is the word of an honorable messenger
81|20|Endued with power, with rank before the Lord of the throne
81|21|With authority there, and faithful to his trust
81|22|And your companion is not one possessed
81|23|And without doubt he saw him on the clear horizon
81|24|He neither grudgingly withholds knowledge of the unknown
81|25|Nor is it the word of Satan
81|26|So where are you going
81|27|Indeed it is no less than a message to all the worlds
81|28|For whomever among you wills to go straight
81|29|But you will not will, except as God wills, the Lord of all the worlds
82|1|When the universe is ripped apart
82|2|When the stars are scattered
82|3|When the oceans are made to gush forth
82|4|And when the graves are turned upside down
82|5|Then each soul will know what it has sent forward and what it has kept back
82|6|O human being, what has seduced you from your Guardian Evolver, the Most Honorable
82|7|He Who created you, fashioned you and balanced you
82|8|In whatever form He wills, He puts you together
82|9|No, you reject right and judgment
82|10|But indeed over you are appointed angels to protect you
82|11|Kind and honorable, writing
82|12|They know all that you do
82|13|As for the righteous, they will be in bliss
82|14|And as for the wicked, they will be in the fire
82|15|Which they will enter on the Day of Accountability
82|16|And they will not be able to stay away from it
82|17|And what will explain to you what the Day of Accountability is
82|18|Again, what will explain to you what the Day of Accountability is
82|19|The day when no soul will have power to do anything for another, for the decision, that day, will be with God
83|1|Shame on those who are unethical
83|2|Those who, when they have to receive an amount from others, demand the full amount
83|3|But when they have to give an amount to others, give less than owed
83|4|Do they not think that they will be called to account
83|5|On a mighty day
83|6|A day when all of humanity will stand before the Lord of all the worlds
83|7|No, surely the record of the corrupt is in sijjin
83|8|And what will explain to you what sijjin is
83|9|It is a register inscribed
83|10|Woe that day, to those who deny it
83|11|Those who deny the Day of Accountability
83|12|And none deny it but every transgressor beyond bounds, those who are corrupt
83|13|When Our signs are rehearsed to him, he says, “Tales of the ancients.”
83|14|By no means, but on their hearts is the stain of that which they do
83|15|Indeed, from their Lord that day, they will be veiled
83|16|Further, they will enter the fire of hell
83|17|Further, it will be said to them, “This is that which you rejected as false
83|18|No, indeed the record of the righteous is in illiyin
83|19|And what will explain to you what illiyin is
83|20|It is a register inscribed
83|21|To which those nearest bear witness
83|22|Truly the righteous will be in bliss
83|23|From on thrones, they observe
83|24|You will recognize in their faces the beaming brightness of bliss
83|25|Their thirst will be quenched with natural juice, sealed
83|26|The seal of it will be musk, and for this let those aspire who have aspirations
83|27|With it will be a mixture of tasnim
83|28|A spring, from which those nearest to God will drink
83|29|Those in sin used to laugh at those who believed
83|30|And whenever they passed by them, they used to wink at each other
83|31|And when they returned to their people, they would return joking
83|32|And whenever they saw them, they would say, “Behold, these are indeed people astray.”
83|33|But they had not been sent as keepers over them
83|34|But on this day, the believers will laugh at the unbelievers
83|35|On thrones they will observe
83|36|Will the unbelievers not have been paid back for what they did
84|1|When the universe is ripped apart
84|2|And it listens to its Guardian Evolver, as it must
84|3|And when the earth is flattened out
84|4|And casts up what is within it and becomes empty
84|5|And listens to its Lord, as it must
84|6|O human beings, indeed you are toiling on towards your Lord, ever toiling, but you will meet Him
84|7|Then he who is given his record in his right hand
84|8|Soon his account will be taken by an easy reckoning
84|9|And he will turn to his people rejoicing
84|10|But he who is given his record behind his back
84|11|Soon he will cry for perdition
84|12|And he will enter a blazing fire
84|13|Indeed he went about among his people, rejoicing
84|14|Indeed he thought that he would not have to return to Us
84|15|No, no, for his Lord was watchful of him
84|16|So I call to witness the ruddy glow of sunset
84|17|The night and its homing
84|18|And the moon in its fullness
84|19|You will surely travel from stage to stage
84|20|What then is the matter with them that they do not believe
84|21|And when the Quran is read to them, they do not fall prostrate
84|22|But instead the unbelievers reject it
84|23|But God has full knowledge of what they hide
84|24|So announce to them a terrible penalty
84|25|Except to those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them is a reward that will never fail
85|1|By the sky, displaying the constellations
85|2|By the promised day
85|3|By one who witnesses, and the subject of the witness
85|4|Woe to the makers of the pit
85|5|The fire supplied with fuel
85|6|Behold, they sat over against the fire
85|7|And they witnessed all that they were doing against the believers
85|8|And they treated them wrongfully for no other reason than that they believed in God, the All Mighty, the Praiseworthy
85|9|Him to Whom belongs the control of the heavens and the earth, and God is witness to all things
85|10|Those who persecute or draw into temptation the believers, men and women, and do not turn in repentance, will have the penalty of hell. They will have the penalty of the burning fire
85|11|For those who believe and do righteous deeds, will be gardens with rivers flowing through them. That is the great salvation
85|12|Truly strong is the Grip of your Lord
85|13|It is He Who originates and repeats
85|14|And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Full of Loving-Kindness
85|15|Lord of the throne of glory
85|16|Doer of all that He intends
85|17|Has the story reached you, of the forces
85|18|Of Pharaoh and the Thamud
85|19|And yet the unbelievers persist in rejecting
85|20|But God encompasses them from behind
85|21|No, this is a glorious Quran
85|22|On material preserved
86|1|By the galaxy and the night visitant
86|2|And what will explain to you what the night-visitant is
86|3|It is the star of piercing brightness
86|4|There is no soul that does not have a protector over it
86|5|Now let the human being think about from what he is created
86|6|He is created from a drop emitted
86|7|Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs
86|8|Surely God is able to bring him back
86|9|The day that all things secret will be tested
86|10|They will have no power and no helper
86|11|By the firmament which returns
86|12|And by the earth which cracks open
86|13|Behold this is the word that is decisive
86|14|It is not a thing for entertainment
86|15|As for them, they are plotting a scheme
86|16|But I am devising a plan
86|17|Therefore grant respite to the unbelievers. Give respite to them for a while
87|1|Glory to the name of your Lord Most High
87|2|Who has created, and further gives order and proportion
87|3|Who has ordained laws, and granted guidance
87|4|And Who makes the pasture grow
87|5|And then makes it dark stubble
87|6|By degrees We will teach you to declare the message, so you will not forget
87|7|Except what God wills, for He knows what is manifest and what is hidden
87|8|And We will ease you to what is easy
87|9|Therefore give advice, in case the advice profits
87|10|The advice will be received by those who are conscious of God
87|11|But it will be avoided by the most unfortunate ones
87|12|Who will enter the great fire
87|13|In which they will then neither die nor live
87|14|But those will flourish who refine themselves
87|15|And glorify the name of their Lord in prayer
87|16|No, you prefer the life of the present
87|17|But the hereafter is better and longer lasting
87|18|And this is in the Ancient Books
87|19|The Books of Abraham and Moses
88|1|Has the story reached you of the overwhelming event
88|2|Some faces that day will be humiliated
88|3|Laboring hard
88|4|While they are entering the blazing fire
88|5|While they are given drink, from a boiling hot spring
88|6|No food will there be for them but a bitter Dhari’
88|7|That will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger
88|8|Faces that day will be joyful
88|9|Pleased with their striving
88|10|In a garden on high
88|11|Where they will hear no vanity
88|12|There will be a bubbling spring
88|13|There will be thrones raised on high
88|14|Goblets placed
88|15|And cushions set in rows
88|16|And rich carpets spread out
88|17|Do they not look at the camels, how they are made
88|18|And at the sky, how it is raised high
88|19|And at the mountains, how they are firmly fixed
88|20|And at the earth, how it is spread out
88|21|Therefore give advice, for you are one to advise
88|22|You are not one to manage their affairs
88|23|But if any turn away and reject God
88|24|God will punish him with a mighty punishment
88|25|To Us will be their return
88|26|Then it will be for Us to call them to account
89|1|By the dawn
89|2|By the ten nights
89|3|By the even and odd
89|4|And by the night when it passes away
89|5|Is there not in these an oath for those who understand
89|6|Do you not see how your Lord dealt with the ‘Ad
89|7|Of Iram, with lofty pillars
89|8|The like of which were not produced in all the land
89|9|And with the Thamud, who carved out rocks in the valley
89|10|And with Pharaoh, lord of stakes
89|11|All of these transgressed beyond bounds in the lands
89|12|And spread corruption therein
89|13|Therefore your Lord poured on them a scourge of diverse chastisements
89|14|For your Lord is on a watchtower
89|15|Now, as for humanity, when their Lord tries them, giving them honor and gifts, they then say, “My Lord has honored me.”
89|16|But when He tries them, restricting subsistence from them, he says then, “My Lord has humiliated me.”
89|17|But no, you do not honor the orphans
89|18|Nor do you encourage one another to feed the poor
89|19|And you devour inheritance, all with greed
89|20|And you love wealth with inordinate love
89|21|No, when the earth is pounded to powder
89|22|And your Lord comes, and His angels, rank upon rank
89|23|And hell, that day, is brought forth, on that day will the human being remember, but how will that remembrance profit him
89|24|He will say, “I wish that I had invested in my life.”
89|25|For that day, their chastisement will be such as none else can inflict
89|26|And His bonds will be such as none other can bind
89|27|To the righteous soul it will be said, “O you soul in complete rest and satisfaction
89|28|“Come back to your Lord, well pleased, and well-pleasing
89|29|“Enter then among My devotees
89|30|“Yes, enter My paradise
90|1|I call to witness this city
90|2|And you are free in this city
90|3|As are the parent and child
90|4|Indeed We have created the human being into toil and struggle
90|5|Do they think that none has power over them
90|6|They may say, “Wealth have I accumulated in abundance
90|7|Does he think that no one sees him
90|8|Have We not made for him a pair of eyes
90|9|And a tongue, and a pair of lips
90|10|And shown him the two highways
90|11|But he has made no rush to the path that is steep
90|12|And what will explain to you the path that is steep
90|13|It is freeing the captive
90|14|Or giving food in a day of hunger
90|15|To the orphan who claims relationship
90|16|Or to the indigent down in the dust
90|17|Then will he be of those who believe, and encourage patience, and encourage deeds of kindness and compassion
90|18|These are the companions of the right hand
90|19|But those who reject Our signs, they are the companions of the left hand
90|20|On them will be fire vaulted all around
91|1|By the sun and its splendor
91|2|By the moon as it follows it
91|3|By the day as it shows its glory
91|4|By the night as it conceals it
91|5|By the firmament and its structure
91|6|By the earth and its expanse
91|7|By the soul, and the proportion and order given to it
91|8|And its enlightenment as to its difficulty and its consciousness
91|9|Certainly she succeeds who purifies it
91|10|And she fail who corrupts it
91|11|The Thamud rejected through their inordinate wrongdoing
91|12|Behold, their representative was the most terrible person among them
91|13|But the messenger of God said to them, “It is a she-camel of God, so let it have a drink.”
91|14|Then they rejected him, and they hamstrung it. So their Lord, on account of their crime, obliterated their traces and leveled them
91|15|And for Him is no fear of its consequences
92|1|By the night as it conceals
92|2|By the day as it appears in glory
92|3|By the creation of male and female
92|4|Indeed, what you strive for is diverse
92|5|So he who gives and is conscious of God
92|6|And testifies to the best
92|7|We will indeed make smooth for him the path to bliss
92|8|But he who suffers from greed and thinks himself self-sufficient
92|9|And denies the best
92|10|We will indeed make smooth for him the path to misery
92|11|Nor will his wealth profit him when he falls headlong
92|12|Indeed We take upon Ourselves to guide
92|13|And indeed to Us belong the end and the beginning
92|14|Therefore I warn you of a fire blazing fiercely
92|15|None will reach it but the most unfortunate ones
92|16|Who give the lie to truth and turn their backs
92|17|But those most devote will be removed far from it
92|18|Those who give their wealth for self-purification
92|19|And have in their minds no favor from anyone, for which a reward is expected in return
92|20|But only the desire to seek for the Countenance of their Lord Most High
92|21|And soon will they attain satisfaction
93|1|By the glorious morning light
93|2|And by the night when it is still
93|3|Your Lord has not abandoned you, nor is He displeased
93|4|And indeed the future will be better for you than the present
93|5|And soon your Lord will give you that with which you will be well pleased
93|6|Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter
93|7|And He found you wandering, and He gave you guidance
93|8|And He found you in need, and made you independent
93|9|Therefore, treat not the orphan with harshness
93|10|Nor refuse the petitioner
93|11|But the bounty of your Lord, proclaim
94|1|Have We not expanded your chest
94|2|And removed from you your burden
94|3|Which galled your back
94|4|And raised high the esteem you are held
94|5|So indeed, with every difficulty there is relief
94|6|Indeed, with every difficulty there is relief
94|7|Therefore, when you are free, still labor hard
94|8|And turn all of your attention to your Lord
95|1|By the fig and the olive
95|2|And Mount Sinai
95|3|And this city of security
95|4|We have indeed created the human being in the best of forms
95|5|Then We debase them to the lowest of the low
95|6|Except those who believe and do righteous deeds, for they will have a reward unfailing
95|7|Then what can, after this, deceive you about the judgment
95|8|Is not God the Wisest of Judges
96|1|Read, in the name of your Lord who created
96|2|Created the human being from a zygote
96|3|Proclaim, and your Lord is Most Bountiful
96|4|He Who taught the use of the pen
96|5|Taught the human being that which he knew not
96|6|No, but the human being transgresses all bounds
96|7|When he looks upon himself as self-sufficient
96|8|Indeed, to your Lord is the return
96|9|Do you see one who forbids
96|10|A worshipper when he turns to pray
96|11|Have you seen whether he has guidance
96|12|Or encourages righteousness
96|13|Do you see if he denies and turns away
96|14|Does he not know that God sees
96|15|Let him beware, that if he does not desist, We will drag him by the hair of his head
96|16|His lying, sinful head
96|17|Then let him call to his advisers
96|18|We will call on the angels of punishment
96|19|No, do not follow, but bow down in adoration, and bring yourself ever closer
97|1|We have indeed revealed it in the Night of Power
97|2|And what will explain to you what the Night of Power is
97|3|The Night of Power is as good as a thousand months
97|4|There comes down the angels and the spirit by God's permission, for every will
97|5|Peace, until the rise of morn
98|1|Those who reject it among the people of the Book and among the polytheists were not going to depart until there came to them clear evidence
98|2|A messenger from God, rehearsing scriptures kept pure
98|3|In it are laws, right and straight
98|4|Nor did the people of the Book form sects, until after there came to them clear evidence
98|5|And they have been asked no more than this— to worship God, offer Him sincere devotion, be truthful, establish prayer, and give zakat, and that is the way of life which is right and straight
98|6|Those who reject it among the people of the Book and among the polytheists, will be in hellfire, to dwell therein forever. They are the worst of creatures
98|7|Those who have faith and do righteous deeds, they are the best of creatures
98|8|Their reward with God is gardens of eternity, beneath which rivers flow, they will dwell therein forever, God well pleased with them, and they with Him. All this for those who are conscious of their Lord
99|1|When the earth is shaken to its utmost convulsion
99|2|And the earth throws up its burden
99|3|And the human being yells, “What is the matter with it?”
99|4|On that day it will declare its information
99|5|Because your Lord would have given it inspiration
99|6|On that day, humanity will proceed in groups sorted out, to be shown their deeds
99|7|Then anyone who has done an atom’s weight of good see it
99|8|And anyone who has done an atom’s weight of wrong will see it
100|1|By those who race with panting breath
100|2|And strike sparks of fire
100|3|And push home the charge in the morning
100|4|And raise the dust in clouds
100|5|And move forward en masse
100|6|Truly the human being is ungrateful to their Guardian Evolver
100|7|And to that they bear witness
100|8|And violent is their love of wealth
100|9|Does he not know, when that which is in the graves is scattered abroad
100|10|And that which is in the chest is made manifest
100|11|That their Guardian Evolver had been well acquainted with them that day
101|1|The Disaster
101|2|What is the Disaster
101|3|And what will explain to you what the Disaster is
101|4|It is a day when humanity will be like scattered moths
101|5|And the mountains will be as wool
101|6|Then he whose scales will be heavy
101|7|Will be in a life of blessings and satisfaction
101|8|But he whose scale will be found light
101|9|Will have his home in a pit
101|10|And what will explain to you what this is
101|11|It is a fire blazing fiercely
102|1|The competition for accumulating diverts you
102|2|Until you all visit the graves
102|3|But no, you will soon know
102|4|Again, you will soon know
102|5|No, were you to know with certainty of mind
102|6|You will certainly see hellfire
102|7|Again, you will see it with certainty of sight
102|8|Then, you will be questioned that day about the pleasure you indulged in
103|1|By time
103|2|Indeed the human being is lost
103|3|Except those who have faith, work to make things right, and join together in the mutual teaching of truth, patience, and constancy
104|1|Woe to every scandalous, backbiter
104|2|Who accumulates wealth and counts it
104|3|Thinking that his wealth will make him last forever
104|4|By no means. He will surely be thrown into that which breaks into pieces
104|5|And what will explain to you about that which breaks into pieces
104|6|It is the fire of God kindled to a blaze
104|7|That mounts right up to the hearts
104|8|It will be made into a vault over them
104|9|In columns, extended
105|1|Do you not see how your Lord dealt with the companions of the elephant
105|2|Did He not make their treacherous plan go astray
105|3|And He sent against them flocks of birds
105|4|Striking them with stones of baked clay
105|5|Then He made them like an empty field of stalks and straw which has been eaten
106|1|For the security enjoyed by the Quraysh
106|2|Their security covering journeys by winter and summer
106|3|Let them adore the Guardian Evolver of this house
106|4|Who provides them with food against hunger, and with security against fear of danger
107|1|Do you see the one who denies the Judgment
107|2|They are those who repulse the orphan
107|3|And do not encourage the feeding of the indigent
107|4|So woe to the worshippers
107|5|Who are neglectful of their prayers
107|6|Those who want to be seen
107|7|But refuse to do even neighborly deeds
108|1|To you, We have granted the fountain of abundance
108|2|Therefore turn in prayer and sacrifice to your Lord
108|3|For he who hates you, he will be cut off
109|1|Say, O you who do not believe
109|2|I do not worship that which you worship
109|3|Nor will you worship that which I worship
109|4|And I will not worship that which you are accustomed to worshiping
109|5|Nor will you worship that which I worship
109|6|To you your way, and to me, my way
110|1|When the help of God and victory comes
110|2|And you see the people enter God's religion in crowds
110|3|Glorify by Praising your Guardian Evolver, and pray for His forgiveness, for He is Oft-Forgiving
111|1|May the hands of the father of the flame perish, and may he perish
111|2|No profit will he have for all his wealth, and all his gains
111|3|He will soon burn in a fire of a blazing flame
111|4|His wife will carry the wood as fuel
111|5|With a twisted rope of palm-leaf fiber around her neck
112|1|Say, He is God, the One and Only
112|2|God, the Eternal, Absolute
112|3|He has no children, nor was He born
112|4|And nothing is like Him
113|1|Say, I seek refuge with the Guardian Evolver of the dawn
113|2|From the harm of created things
113|3|From the harm of darkness as it overspreads
113|4|From the harm of those who whisper into convictions
113|5|And from the harm of the envious one as he practices envy
114|1|Say, I seek refuge with the Guardian Evolver of humanity
114|2|The King of humanity
114|3|The God of humanity
114|4|From the harm of the whisperer, who withdraws after he whispers
114|5|And who whispers into the hearts of humanity
114|6|Among jinn and humanity
{
    "name": "eng-albilalmuhammad",
    "author": "Al Bilal Muhammad Et Al",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-albilalmuhammad.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-albilalmuhammad.min.json"
}