1|1|In the name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful
1|2|All the praises be for Allah, the Lord of the worlds
1|3|The Gracious, the Merciful
1|4|The Owner of the Day of Judgment
1|5|You alone we worship and You alone we seek help
1|6|Guide us to the Right Way
1|7|The way of those whom You have favored; not of those who earned Your anger, nor of those who went astray
2|1|Alif-Lam-Mim
2|2|This is the book (the Qur’an) in which there is no doubt, a guidance for those who fear Allah
2|3|who believe in the unseen, establish prayers, and spend in charity of what We have provided for them
2|4|and who believe in this revelation (the Qur’an) sent to you (O Muhammad) and in that which was revealed before you (like Torah, Psalms, Gospel), and firmly believe in the Hereafter
2|5|They are on true guidance from their Lord, and they are the successful
2|6|Surely, those who disbelieve, it is the same whether you (Muhammad) warn them or don’t warn them, they will not believe
2|7|Allah has sealed on their hearts, on their hearings, and on their eyes there is a covering. For them there is a severe punishment
2|8|And there are some people who say: “We believe in Allah and the Last Day,” while in fact they don’t believe
2|9|They (think to) deceive Allah and those who believe, while they deceive only themselves, and they don’t realize it
2|10|In their hearts there is a disease (of doubt and hypocrisy), and Allah has increased their disease. For them there is a painful punishment because they used to tell lies
2|11|And when it is said to them: “Don’t make mischief on earth,” they say: “We are only peace-makers.”
2|12|Surely! They are the ones who make mischief but they don’t realize it
2|13|And when it is said to them: “Believe as the other people believe,” they say: “Shall we believe as the fools believe?” Surely, they themselves are the fools, but they don’t know
2|14|And when they meet those who believe, they say: “We believe,” but when they are alone with their Satans, they say: “Truly, we are with you, we were only mocking.”
2|15|Allah mocks at them and gives them (increase) in their wrong-doings to wander blindly
2|16|These are they who have purchased error for guidance, so their business is profitless and they are not guided
2|17|Their example is like the one who kindled a fire; then when it lighted all around him, Allah took away their light (eyesight) and left them in darkness, so they could not see
2|18|(They are) deaf, dumb, and blind, so they will not return (to Right Way)
2|19|Or like a rainstorm from the sky with darkness, thunder, and lightning. They press their fingers in their ears from (the sound of) thunderclaps for fear of death. But Allah surrounds the disbelievers
2|20|The lightning almost snatches away their sight; whenever it flashes for them, they walk in it; and when it darkens against them, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He could have taken away their hearing and their sight. Certainly, Allah has power over all things
2|21|O mankind! Worship your Lord, Who created you and those who were before you so that you may become pious
2|22|It is He Who has made for you the earth a resting place, the sky as a canopy, sends down rain from the sky, and brings out with it fruits as a provision for you. So don’t set up rivals to Allah (in worship) while you know
2|23|And if you are in doubt about what We have sent down (the Qur’an) to Our servant (Muhammad), then produce a chapter like this, and call your witnesses besides Allah, if you are truthful
2|24|But if you can not do it, and you are not able do it, then fear the hellfire, whose fuel is men and stones, prepared for the disbelievers
2|25|And give glad tidings to those who believe and do good deeds, for them there will be gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise). Whenever they will be provided with fruit from there, they will say: “This is what we were provided with before," and they will be given from there things having resemblance (of earth); and for them therein will be chaste spouses, and they will live therein forever
2|26|Surely, Allah is not reluctant to set forth an example even of a mosquito or even something more (insignificant) than it. As for those who believe, they know that it is the truth from their Lord; but as for those who disbelieve, they say: “What does Allah mean by this example?” By it He misleads many and guides many. He misleads only the disobedient ones
2|27|those who break the Covenant of Allah after its approval, sever what Allah has ordered to be joined, and do mischief on earth. It is they, who are the losers
2|28|How can you disbelieve in Allah? While you were lifeless and He gave you life. Then He will give you death, then again will bring you to life (on the Day of Resurrection), and then you will return to Him
2|29|It is He, Who has created for you all that is on earth. Then He rose over towards the heaven and made them 7 heavens and He is the All- Knower of everything
2|30|And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels: “Surely, I am going to place a successor on earth.” They said: “Will You place in it those who will make mischief in it and shed blood, while we praise You and glorify Your name?” He (Allah) said: “Indeed I know what you don’t know.”
2|31|And He taught Adam the names of all things, then He showed them to the angels and said: “Tell Me the names of these if you are truthful.”
2|32|They (angels) replied: “Glory to You; we have no knowledge except what You have taught us. Surely, it is You, the All-Knower, the All-Wise.”
2|33|He (Allah) said: “O Adam! Inform them their names.” When he informed them their names, He (Allah) said: “Did I not tell you that I know the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you reveal and what you conceal?”
2|34|And (remember) when We ordered the angels: “Prostrate before Adam,” they all prostrated except Satan; he refused and was proud and was one of the disbelievers
2|35|And We said: “O Adam! You and your wife reside in the Paradise and both of you eat freely in it with pleasure from wherever you wish, but don’t come near this tree, or you both will be of the wrongdoers.”
2|36|Then the Satan made them (disobey Allah’s commandment) slip from there (Paradise), and got them out from where they were. We said: “Get down from here, some of you as enemy to others. There is for you in the earth a residing place and provisions for a specific time.”
2|37|Then Adam received Words (after repentance) from his Lord and Allah pardoned him. Surely, He is the Acceptor of repentance, the Merciful
2|38|We said: “Get down all of you from it (Paradise), then whenever guidance comes to you from Me, and whoever follows My guidance, there shall be no fear on them, nor shall they grieve
2|39|But those who disbelieve and deny Our Verses, they are the inmates of the hellfire. They shall reside in it forever.”
2|40|O children of Israel! Remember My Favor which I bestowed upon you, and fulfill your covenant with Me and I will fulfill My covenant with you, and fear none but Me
2|41|And believe in what I have sent down (this Qur’an) confirming that which is with your (Scriptures); don’t be first disbeliever in it, and don’t buy a small price (by selling) My Verses, and fear Me alone
2|42|And don’t mix the truth with the falsehood, or conceal the truth while you know
2|43|And establish prayers, give obligatory charity (Zakat), and bow down with those who bow down (in worship)
2|44|Do you enjoin piety and righteousness on the people, and forget (to practice) yourselves when you recite the scripture? Don’t you understand
2|45|And seek the help (of Allah) in patience and prayer. Truly it is very hard except on the humble minded
2|46|who realize that surely they are going to meet their Lord and that they are going to return to Him (for Judgment)
2|47|O children of Israel! Remember My Favor which I bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you over all the nations
2|48|And fear a Day (of Judgment) when a person shall not avail another: no intercession shall be accepted, no compensation shall be taken, and no help shall be given
2|49|And (remember) when We delivered you (people of Moses) from the people of Pharaoh, who were afflicting you with a horrible punishment, killing your sons, sparing your women, and that was a mighty trial from your Lord
2|50|And (remember) when We separated the sea for you, saved you, and drowned the people of Pharaoh while you were looking (at them covered by water)
2|51|And (remember) when We appointed for Moses 40 nights, and during his absence, you took the calf for worship, and you were wrongdoers
2|52|Then We forgave you after that, so that you might be grateful
2|53|And (remember) when We gave Moses the book (Torah) and the criterion (of right and wrong) so that you may be (rightly) guided
2|54|And (remember) when Moses said to his people: “O my people! Surely, you have wronged yourselves by your taking (for worship) the calf. So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill (the wrongdoers among you), that is better for you with your Creator.” Then He accepted your repentance. Truly, He is the one Who accepts repentance, the Merciful
2|55|And (remember) when you said: “O Moses! We shall never believe in you till we see Allah plainly (with our own eyes),” you were seized (fell dead) with a thunderbolt (lightening) while you were looking
2|56|Then We raised you after your death so that you might be grateful
2|57|And We even shaded over you with clouds, sent down on you Manna (sweet dish) and Salva (quail’s meat) (saying): “Eat from good things which We have provided for you.” They did not wrong Us but they wronged themselves
2|58|And (remember) when We said: “Enter this town (Jerusalem), eat there wherever you wish with pleasure, enter the gate in prostration (with humility), and say: ‘Forgive us’, We shall forgive you your sins, and We shall increase provision for the righteous.”
2|59|But they did wrong by changing the word other than that which was told to them. So We sent upon those wrongdoers a punishment from the heaven because of their disobedience
2|60|And (remember) when Moses asked for water for his people, We said: “Strike the stone with your stick.” Then 12 springs gushed out from it. Each tribe knew its drinking place. (They were commanded): “Eat, drink from the provision of Allah, and don’t act corruptly, making mischief in the earth.”
2|61|And (remember) when you (people of Moses) said: “O Moses! We cannot endure on one kind of food. So invoke your Lord for us to bring out for us which the earth grows: its herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions.” He said: “Would you exchange that which is better for that which is worse? You go down to any town and you will find what you have asked for!” And they were stuck upon them with humiliation, misery, and they drew the wrath from Allah. That was because they used to disbelieve in the Verses of Allah and killed the prophets without just cause. That was because they disobeyed and used to transgress
2|62|Surely! Those who believe and those who are Jews, Christians, and Sabians; whoever believes in Allah, the Last Day, and do good deeds; they will have their reward with their Lord, there will be no fear on them, nor they will grieve
2|63|And (O children of Israel, remember) when We took your covenant and We raised above you the mount (Toor) (saying): “Hold with strength (firmly) to what We have given you (Torah), and remember what is therein so that you may become pious.”
2|64|Then after that you turned away. Had it not been for the Grace of Allah upon you and Allah’s Mercy, indeed you would have been among the losers
2|65|Indeed you know those who transgressed amongst you in the matter of the Sabbath (Saturday). We ordered them: “You be monkeys, and rejected.”
2|66|So We made this an example of punishment in front of them (own people) and to those after them (succeeding generations), and a lesson for the pious
2|67|And (remember) when Moses said to his people:“Surely, Allah commands you that you slaughter a cow,” they said: “Do you make fun of us?” He said: “I take refuge with Allah from being among the ignorant.”
2|68|They said: “Call upon your Lord for us so that He will make clear to us what it is!” He said: “He (Allah) says, surely, it should be a cow neither old nor young but between that (2 conditions), so do what you are commanded.”
2|69|They said: “Call upon your Lord for us to make clear to us what its color is.” He said: “Surely, He (Allah) says, it is a cow yellow bright in its color that pleases the beholders (who look at).”
2|70|They said: “Call upon your Lord for us to make clear to us what it is. Surely, the cows are all alike to us. And surely, if Allah wills, we shall be guided.”
2|71|He said: “He (Allah) indeed says, it is neither a cow trained to till the soil nor waters the fields; a healthy one with no mark in it.” They said: “Now you have brought the truth.” So they slaughtered it and they were near to not doing it
2|72|And (remember, Moses) when you killed a man and then you disputed it, but Allah brought out what you were concealing
2|73|So We said: “Strike him (dead body) with a piece of it (slaughtered cow).” Thus Allah brought the dead to life and showed you His Signs so that you may understand
2|74|Then after (seeing) that your hearts were hardened and became as stones or even worse in hardness. And indeed, there are some stones from which rivers gush out, and indeed, there are of them (stones) which split apart so that the water flows from them, and indeed, there are of them (stones) which fall down for fear of Allah. Allah is not unaware of what you do
2|75|Do you (believers) still hope that they (people of the book) will believe in you (religion) while indeed a group of them used to hear the Word of Allah, then they used to change knowingly after what they understood it
2|76|And when they (people of the book) meet those who believe (Muslims), they say: “We (also) believe,” but when they meet privately with one another, they say: “Will you tell those (Muslims) what Allah has revealed to you so that they (Muslims) may argue with you about it before your Lord? Don’t you understand?”
2|77|Don’t they know that Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal
2|78|And among them, there are unlettered people who don’t know the book, but they trust false desires and they don’t but guess
2|79|So woe to those who write the book with their own hands and then they say: “This is from Allah,” so that they may purchase it with a little price! Woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they have earned
2|80|They (Jews) say: “The hellfire shall never touch us but for a few numbered days.” Say (O Muhammad to them): “Have you taken a covenant from Allah which Allah will not break? Or do you say of Allah what you don’t know?”
2|81|Yes! Those who earn evil and their sins surround them, they are the inmates of the hellfire; they shall reside therein forever
2|82|Those who believe and do good deeds, they are residents of Paradise; they will reside in it forever
2|83|And (remember) when We took a covenant from the children of Israel, (saying): “You shall worship none but Allah; be good to parents, relatives, orphans, poor, speak good to the people, establish the prayer, and give obligatory charity.” Then you turned back, except a few of you, while you were opposed
2|84|And (remember) when We took your covenant (saying): You shall not shed your people’s blood and you shall not turn out yourself (expel own people) from your homes. You ratified and you bore witness (to this)
2|85|Yet, you are those who kill yourselves, drive out a group of you from their homes, and assist (their enemies) against them in sin and transgression. And if they come to you as captives, you ransom them, though their expulsion was forbidden to you. Then do you believe in a part of the Scripture and reject the rest? Then what is the punishment of those who do so among you, except disgrace in the life of this world, and they would be consigned to the most grievous punishment on the Day of Resurrection? Allah is not unaware of what you do
2|86|Those are they who have bought the life of this world for the price of the Hereafter. The punishment on them neither shall be lightened nor shall they be helped
2|87|Indeed, We gave Moses the book (Torah) and followed him up with a succession of prophets. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs and supported him with the Holy Spirit (Gabriel). Then whenever a Messenger came to you with what you yourselves did not desire, you grew arrogant, some you disbelieved, and some you killed
2|88|And they said: “Our hearts are wrapped (don’t hear or understand Allah’s Word).” Nay, Allah has cursed them for their disbelief, so little is that which they believe
2|89|And when there has come to them a book (this Qur’an) from Allah confirming what is with the previous Scriptures, even though previously they were invoking Allah for victory over those who disbelieved, and when what came to them which they recognized, they disbelieved in it. So the curse of Allah is on the disbelievers
2|90|How bad is that (for which) they have sold their own selves, that they should disbelieve in which Allah has revealed (the Qur’an), grudging that Allah should reveal His Grace on whom He wills of His servants! So they have drawn (on themselves) wrath upon wrath. And for the disbelievers, there is a disgraceful punishment
2|91|And when it is said to them: “Believe in what Allah has sent down,” they say: “We believe in what was sent down to us (Torah).” And they disbelieve in that what came after it; while it is the truth confirming what is with them. Ask (O Muhammad): “Then why did you kill the prophets of Allah previously, if you were true believers?”
2|92|And indeed Moses came to you with clear proofs, yet you took (for worship) the calf after he left, and you were wrongdoers
2|93|And (remember) when We took your covenant and raised above you the Mount (Toor) (saying): “Hold firmly to what We have given you and hear (Our Word).” They said: “We have heard and disobeyed.” And their hearts loved (the worship of) the calf because of their disbelief. Say: “Evil is what commands you by your faith if you are believers.”
2|94|Say (O Muhammad): “If the home of the Hereafter with Allah is indeed exclusively for you and not for other people, then wish for death if you are truthful.”
2|95|But they will never ever wish for the death because of what their hands have sent ahead (their deeds). Allah is All-Knower of the wrong-doers
2|96|Surely, you will find them the greediest of mankind for life and of those who ascribed partners to Allah. Each one of them wishes that a life of 1,000 years could be given. But the grant of such life will not save anyone even a little from the punishment. Allah is All-Seer of what they do
2|97|Say (O Muhammad): “Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel should know that indeed Gabriel has brought it (this Qur’an) down to your heart by the permission of Allah, confirming what came before it, and is a guidance and glad tidings for the believers
2|98|Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His angels, His Messengers, Gabriel, and Michael; then surely, Allah is the enemy to the disbelievers.”
2|99|And indeed Allah has sent down to you clear Verses (of the Qur’an) and none disbelieve in them but disobedient ones
2|100|Is it not (the case) that whenever they made a covenant, a group of them threw it away? Nay! Most of them don’t believe
2|101|And whenever a Messenger from Allah came to them confirming what was with them, a group of those who were given the Scripture threw away the book of Allah behind their backs as if they did not know
2|102|and they followed what the devils (falsely) recited in the kingdom of Solomon. Solomon did not disbelieve, but the devils disbelieved, teaching people magic and what was revealed at (the city of) Babylon to the 2 angels, Harut and Marut. Neither of these 2 angels taught (magic) anyone till they had said: “We are only for trial, so don’t disbelieve.” (In spite of this warning) people did learn from these 2 angels by which they could separate between husband and wife, but they could not harm anyone with it except by the permission of Allah. And they learned what harms them and not profits them. Indeed they knew that whoever buys it (magic), there is no share in the Hereafter. How bad indeed was what they sold it for their own selves, if they but knew
2|103|If they would have believed and became pious, indeed for them reward from Allah would be better if they but know
2|104|O you who believe! Don’t say (to the prophet): “Raina” (pay attention to us) but say “Unzurna” (please look upon us) and listen. And for the disbelievers there is a painful punishment
2|105|Those who disbelieved among the people of the Scripture or polytheists don’t like that there should be sent down upon you (O Muhammad) any good from your Lord. But Allah chooses for His Mercy whom He wills. Allah is the owner of great Bounty
2|106|Whatever a Verse do We repeal or cause it to be forgotten, We bring better than it or similar to it. Do you not know that Allah has power over every thing
2|107|Don’t you know that to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth? Besides Allah you have neither any guardian nor any helper
2|108|Or do you want to ask your Messenger (Muhammad) as Moses was asked before? Whoever changes faith for disbelief, surely went astray from the Right Way
2|109|Many people of the Scripture wish that if they could turn you back as disbeliever after you have believed, (out of) envy from their own selves what has become clear to them after the truth. So forgive and overlook, till Allah brings His command. Surely, Allah has power over every thing
2|110|And establish prayers, give obligatory charity, and whatever good deeds you send ahead for yourselves; you shall find it with Allah. Certainly, Allah is All-Seer of what you do
2|111|They say: “None shall enter Paradise except who is a Jew or a Christian.” These are their own desires. Say (O Muhammad): “Produce your proof if you are truthful.”
2|112|Yes, whoever submits itself to Allah and is a righteous, then his reward is with his Lord, and will have nothing to fear or to grieve
2|113|The Jews say: “The Christians are not on anything right” and the Christians say: “The Jews are not on anything (right),” though they both recite the Scripture (Torah or Gospel). Similarly those who have no knowledge (the pagan Arabs) say: they like (both) their words. So Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that in which they have been differing
2|114|Who is more unjust than those who forbid mentioning Allah’s name in Allah’s Masjids and strive for their ruin? It is not proper for them to enter them (Masjids) except in fear. For them there is disgrace in the world and for them there is great punishment in the Hereafter
2|115|To Allah belongs the east and the west, so wherever you turn (face) there will be the face (presence) of Allah. Surely! Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing
2|116|They say: “Allah has taken a son.” Glory is to Allah! But to Him belongs what is in the heavens and the earth, and all are obedient to Him
2|117|He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. When He decrees a matter, He only says to it: “Be” and it becomes
2|118|Those who don’t know say: “Why does not Allah speak to us (face to face) or a sign come to us?” Those people who were before them have said similar words. Their hearts are alike. We have indeed made clear the signs for people who believe firmly
2|119|Surely, We have sent you (O Muhammad) with the truth (Islam), a bearer of glad tidings and a Warner. And you will not be asked about the residents of the blazing fire
2|120|The Jews or the Christians will never be pleased with you (O Muhammad) until you follow their religion. Say: “Surely, the Guidance of Allah is the only Guidance.” If you (Muhammad) follow their desires after what you have received of the knowledge (the Qur’an), there shall be no protector or any helper for you from the wrath of Allah
2|121|Those whom We gave the book, recite it as it has right to be recited, are those who believe in it. Whoever disbelieves in it, then they are those who are the losers
2|122|O children of Israel! Remember My Favor which I bestowed upon you, and that I preferred you over all the nations
2|123|And fear the Day (of Judgment) when neither one shall avail another, nor any ransom (compensation) shall be accepted from anyone, nor intercession shall benefit anyone, nor any help will be given
2|124|And (remember) when the Lord of Abraham tried him with commands, he fulfilled them. He (Allah) said (to him): “Surely, I will make you a leader for mankind.” Abraham asked: “And of my offspring?” (Allah) said: “My Covenant will not include wrongdoers.”
2|125|And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka’bah at Makkah) a resort for mankind and safety, and took the station of Abraham as a place of prayer. We commanded Abraham and Ishmael that they purify My House (the Ka’bah) for those who walk around it, those who stay (in I’tikaf), and those who bow down and prostrate (in prayers)
2|126|And (remember) when Abraham said: “My Lord, make this city (Makkah) a place of security and provide its people with fruits, those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day." He (Allah) answered: "Those who disbelieve, I would let them enjoy in contentment for a while, then I will compel them to the punishment of the hellfire, and worst indeed is that destination
2|127|And (remember) when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House (the Ka’bah) (saying): "Our Lord! Accept from us. Surely! You are the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
2|128|Our Lord! Make us submissive to You and our offspring a nation submissive to You. Show us our rites of worship, and accept our repentance. Surely, You are the Accepter of repentance, the Merciful
2|129|Our Lord! Send amongst them a Messenger of their own, who shall recite to them Your Verses and teach them the book and the wisdom, and purify them. Surely! You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
2|130|And who turns away from the religion of Abraham except the one who is foolish? Surely, We chose him in this world and surely, in the Hereafter he will be among the righteous
2|131|When his Lord asked him: "Submit (be a Muslim)!" He said: "I have submitted myself (as a Muslim) to the Lord of the worlds
2|132|And this submission to Allah was enjoined by Abraham upon his sons and by Jacob, (saying): "O my sons! Surely Allah has chosen for you the true religion, then don’t die unless you are Muslims
2|133|Or were you witnesses when the death approached to Jacob? When he said to his sons: "What will you worship after me?" They said: "We will worship your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers, Abraham and Ishmael, and Isaac, one Lord, and to Him we submit as Muslims
2|134|That was a nation which has passed away. For them what they earned and for you what you earn. You will not be asked what they used to do
2|135|And they said: "Be Jews or Christians, then you will be guided." Say (O Muhammad): "Nay, (we follow) the religion of Abraham, the upright one, and he was not of the polytheists
2|136|Say (O Muslims): "We believe in Allah and what has been sent down to us; and what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and their descendents, and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and what was given to the prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them and to Him we have submitted (in Islam)
2|137|So, if they believe (accept Islam) like what you have believed, then they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, then they are only in opposition. So Allah will be sufficient for you against them. Allah is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
2|138|(Our religion is) the religion of Allah, and which religion can be better than Allah’s? And we are His worshippers
2|139|Say (O Muhammad): "Do you dispute with us about Allah while He is our Lord and your Lord? And we are accountable for our deeds and you for your deeds. We are sincere to Him
2|140|Or do you say that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and their descendants were all Jews or Christians? Say: Do you know better or Allah? Who is more unjust than the one who conceals testimony from Allah? Allah is not unaware of what you do.”
2|141|That was a nation which has passed away. For them what they earned (rewarded) and for you what you earn. You will not be asked what they used to do
2|142|The fools among the people will say: "What has turned those (Muslims) from their Qiblah (prayer direction) which they used to face in prayer?" Say (O Muhammad): "To Allah belongs the east and the west. He guides whom He wills to the Right Way
2|143|Thus We have made you a just nation so that you are witnesses over mankind and the Messenger be witness over you. And We have made the Qiblah (towards Jerusalem) which you used to face, only to test those who followed the Messenger (Muhammad) from those who would turn on their heels (disobey). Indeed it was hard test except for those whom Allah guided. And Allah does not let your faith (prayers) be lost. Truly, Allah is full of Kindness, the Merciful to mankind
2|144|Surely! We have seen the turning of your (Muhammad’s) face towards the heaven. Surely, We shall turn you to a Qiblah that shall please you. So turn your face towards the Sacred Masjid (at Makkah). Wherever you people are, turn your faces in prayer towards it. Certainly, those who were given the Scriptures know well that the truth is from their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do
2|145|And even if you were to bring all proofs to those who were given the Scripture, they would neither follow your Qiblah, nor would you follow their Qiblah. And they will not follow each other’s Qiblah. Surely, if you follow their desires after that which you received of the knowledge (from Allah), then indeed you will be of the wrongdoers
2|146|Those whom Allah has given the Scripture recognize it as they recognize their children. But surely, a group of them conceal the truth while they know it
2|147|(This is) the truth from your Lord. So don’t be of those who doubt
2|148|For every nation there is a direction to which they turn (for prayers). So try to excel (one another) in good deeds. Wherever you may be, Allah will bring you all together (on the Day of Resurrection). Truly, Allah has power over every thing
2|149|From wherever you come forth, turn your face (in prayer) towards the Sacred Masjid (at Makkah), and indeed this is the truth from your Lord. Allah is not unaware of what you do
2|150|From wherever you come forth (for prayers), turn your face towards the Sacred Masjid (at Makkah). Wherever you may be, turn your faces towards it so that people may not have an argument against you except those of them who are wrongdoers. Don’t fear them but fear Me, so that I may complete My Favors upon you and that you may be guided
2|151|as We have sent among you a Messenger (Muhammad) from among you who recites to you Our Verses (the Qur’an), purify you, teaches you the book (the Qur’an) and wisdom, and teaches you what you did not know
2|152|Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, be grateful to Me, and never be ungrateful to Me
2|153|O you who believe! Seek help (from Allah) with patience and prayer. Surely! Allah is with the patient ones
2|154|And don’t say of those who are killed (martyrs) in the way of Allah: "They are dead." Nay, they are alive, but you don’t perceive it
2|155|Surely, We will test you with something of fear, hunger, loss of wealth, lives, and fruits. But give glad tidings to the patient ones
2|156|who when afflicted with calamity, say: "Truly! We belong to Allah and indeed to Him we shall return
2|157|They are those on whom are the blessings and Mercy from their Lord, and they are those who are the guided ones
2|158|Surely! Safa and Marwah (2 hills in Makkah) are the symbols of Allah. So whoever performs Hajj (obligatory pilgrimage to Makkah) of the House (the Ka’bah at Makkah) or performs Umrah (optional visit to Makkah), there is no sin if one walks between the 2. And whoever does good voluntarily, then surely, Allah is All-Recognizer, the All-Knower
2|159|Surely, those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance which We have sent down, after We have made it clear for the mankind in the book; such are those Allah curses them and the cursers curse them
2|160|except those who repent, reform (their ways), and declare (the truth). For those, I will accept repentance for them, and I am the Receiver of repentance, the Merciful
2|161|Surely, those who disbelieve, die while they are disbelievers; it is they on them is the curse of Allah, of the angels, and of mankind combined
2|162|they will abide in it (hell), neither the punishment will be lightened, nor will they be reprieved
2|163|And your deity is One (Allah); there is no one worthy of worship but Him, the Beneficent, the Merciful
2|164|Surely! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of the night and the day, and in the ships which sail through the sea which benefit the mankind, and in the rain which Allah sends down from the sky and makes the earth alive after its death, and in the moving (living) creatures of all kinds that He scatters in it, and in the turning of winds and the clouds which are held between the sky and the earth; are indeed proofs for people of understanding
2|165|Yet, there are some people who take (for worship) others besides Allah as rivals (to Allah). They love them like the love of Allah. But those who believe are strong in their love for Allah. If only those who do wrong could see (the Day of Judgment), when they will see the punishment, that all power belongs to Allah and that Allah is Severe in punishment
2|166|(On that Day) those (leaders) who were followed will disown (declare innocent of) those who followed them when they will see the punishment, and then all relations will be cut off between them
2|167|And those who followed will say: "If we could have a (chance to) return (to the worldly life again), then we would disown (declare innocent from) them (leaders) as they have disowned (declare innocent from) us (today)." Thus Allah will show them their deeds as regrets for them. They will never get out of the hellfire
2|168|O mankind! Eat of that which is lawful and good in the earth, and don’t follow the footsteps of Satan. Surely, Satan is for you an open enemy
2|169|Only he (Satan) commands you of the evil, the obscenity, and that you say against Allah what you don’t know
2|170|When it is said to them: "Follow what Allah has sent down." They say: "Nay! We will follow what we found our fathers on it (practiced)." (Would they follow) even if their fathers did not understand anything nor were they guided
2|171|And the example of those who disbelieve is like the one who shouts to a group of sheep that does not hear except shouts and cries. (They are) deaf, dumb, and blind. So they don’t understand
2|172|O you who believe! Eat of the lawful things that We have provided you with, and be grateful to Allah, if you worship Him only
2|173|Surely! Allah has forbidden on you the dead (flesh), blood, flesh of swine, and that which is slaughtered in any other name than Allah. But if one is forced by necessity without willful disobedience or transgression, then there is no sin on him. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
2|174|Surely, those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the book (the Qur’an), and purchase therewith a small gain (worldly), they eat into their bellies nothing but fire. Allah will neither speak to them on the Day of Resurrection nor purify them, for them will be a painful punishment
2|175|Those are they who have purchased error at the price of guidance, and punishment at the price of forgiveness. So how bold are they to face the hellfire
2|176|That is because Allah has sent down the book (the Qur’an) with the truth. And surely, those who differed in the book (the Qur’an) are far away in opposition
2|177|It is not piety that you turn your faces towards the east and (or) the west (in prayers); but piety is to believe in Allah, the Last Day, the angels, the books, the prophets; give wealth in spite of love for it to relatives, orphans, poor, travelers, and to those who ask (for help); in ransom (to set free) of captives; establish prayer, pay obligatory charity, fulfill their promises when they make it, remain patient in adversity, affliction (disease), and at the time of fighting (war). Such are they who are truthful and they are pious
2|178|O you who believe! Retribution is prescribed for you in cases of murder: the free for the free, and the captive for the captive, and the female for the female. But if the killer is forgiven by (victim’s) brother (or relatives), then something (of blood money for killing should be decided) according to usage (with fairness) and payment be made to the heir (of the victim) in a good manner. This is less painful and a Mercy from your Lord. Whoever transgresses after this shall have a painful punishment
2|179|And there is (a saving of) life for you in retribution, O people of understanding, so that you may become pious
2|180|It is prescribed for you when death approaches any of you, if you leave wealth, that you make a bequest (the will) for parents and next of kin according to reasonable manners. It is an obligation on the pious
2|181|Whoever changes it (the will) after hearing it, then its sin shall be on those who change it. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
2|182|But he who fears from a testator (who legally make will valid before death) some unjust act or wrongdoing, and then makes peace between the parties, there is no sin. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
2|183|O you who believe! The fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you, so that you may become pious
2|184|Fasting days are numbered, but if any of you are sick or on a journey, the same number of days (should be made up) from other days. And for those who can fast with difficulty (such as old man), (can either fast or) feed a poor (for every missed day). But whoever does good voluntarily, it is better. Your fasting is better for you if only you know
2|185|It is the month of Ramadan in which the Qur’an was revealed, a guidance for mankind with clear proofs, and the criterion (between right and wrong). So whoever of you witnesses the crescent on the first night of the month, should fast therein, and whoever is sick or on a journey, fast the same number of days (make up from) other (later) days. Allah wants for you ease, and does not want hardship for you so that you complete the (same) number (of days), and that you should glorify Allah for guiding you so that you may be grateful to Him
2|186|And when My servants ask you (Muhammad) about Me, then (answer them), indeed I am near (to them). I respond to the call of the caller when calls on Me (without any mediator). So let them respond to Me and believe in Me so that they may be rightly guided
2|187|It is made lawful for you on the night of the fasts to approach your wives; they are garments for you, and you are garment for them. Allah knows that you were deceiving yourselves, so He accepted your repentance and forgave you. So now you can approach your wives and seek what Allah has ordained for you (offspring). Eat and drink until the white thread (light of dawn) becomes distinct to you from the black thread (darkness of night), then complete fasts till the nightfall. And don’t approach them (your wives) while you are confining yourselves in the Masjids (I’tikaf during the last 10 days of Ramadan). These are the limits of Allah, so don’t approach them. Allah makes clear His Verses to mankind so that they may become pious
2|188|Don’t seize one another’s property unjustly, nor bribe the rulers so that you may seize a portion of the property of others sinfully and knowingly
2|189|They ask you (Muhammad) of the new moons. Say: They are (to determine) the periods for mankind and for pilgrimage. It is not piety that you enter the houses from the back doors, but the pious is the one who fears Allah. So enter the houses through their (proper) doors and fear Allah so that you may be successful
2|190|And fight in the way of Allah (against) those who fight you, but don’t exceed (limit). Surely, Allah does not like the transgressors
2|191|And kill them wherever you find them, and turn them out from where they have turned you out. (Though killing is bad) creating mischief is worse than killing. Don’t fight them at the sacred Masjid (at Makkah), unless they (first) fight you there. But if they attack you, then kill them. Such is the punishment of the disbelievers
2|192|But if they cease, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
2|193|And fight them until no oppression exists and worship is for Allah (alone). But if they cease, (there should be) no hostility except against the wrongdoers
2|194|The sacred month is for the prohibited month, and for the prohibited things, (that is) the law of equality (subject to retaliation). Whoever transgresses against you, you transgress likewise. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is with the pious
2|195|And spend in the cause of Allah and don’t throw yourselves into destruction (by not spending for Allah), and do good. Surely, Allah loves the righteous
2|196|And complete the Hajj (obligatory pilgrimage to Makkah) and Umrah (optional visit to Makkah) for Allah. But if you are prevented (from completing them), then send sacrifice whatever you can afford, and don’t shave your head until the offering reaches its appointed place. And whoever among you is sick or has an ailment in the scalp (needs shaving), then he must pay ransom either by fasting (for 3 days) or feeding the poor (6 people) or offering a sacrifice (one sheep). If you are safe (during peacetime) and whoever performs Umrah before the Hajj, then sacrifice whatever you can easily afford, but whoever cannot afford, then fast for 3 days during the pilgrimage and 7 days after return (to home), making 10 days in all. That is for those whose family is not present (non-resident) at the Sacred Masjid. Fear Allah and know that Allah is severe in punishment
2|197|The pilgrimage is in the well-known months. Whoever intends to perform Hajj in these months, then (there should be) no obscenity (sexual relations), nor wickedness (obscene language), nor wrangling (dispute unjustly) during the Hajj. Whatever good you do, Allah knows it. Take provision with you for the journey, but surely the best provision is piety. So fear Me, O people of understanding
2|198|There is no sin on you if you seek Bounty of your Lord during pilgrimage. Then when you return from Arafat, remember Allah at the Mash’ar-al-Haram (at Muzdalifah). Remember Him as He has guided you, for before this you were of those who had lost the Right Way
2|199|Then depart from where the people depart and ask forgiveness of Allah. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
2|200|So when you have accomplished your Hajj rites, remember Allah as you used to remember your forefathers or with far more remembrance. But there are people who say: "Our Lord! Give us (Your Bounties) in this world!" Such people will have nothing in the Hereafter
2|201|And of them there are those who say: "Our Lord! Give us good in the world and good in the Hereafter, and save us from the punishment of the fire
2|202|Such people will have a portion from (both worlds) what they earned. And Allah is Swift in reckoning
2|203|And remember Allah during the appointed days. But whoever hastens (to leave Mina) in 2 days, there is no sin and whoever delays, there is no sin, if the aim is to do good and obey Allah. Fear Allah, and know that you will be gathered before Him
2|204|Among the mankind, there is one whose speech fascinates you in the worldly life, and even calls Allah to witness on what is in his heart, yet he is most quarrelsome of the opponents
2|205|And when he turns away (from you O Muhammad); he strives in the land to spread mischief, destroy the crops, and the living being (cattle). Allah does not like the mischief
2|206|And when it is said to him: "Fear Allah", arrogance takes him to sin. So hell is enough for him, and worst indeed is that resting place
2|207|And of mankind there is one who would sell (give away) life seeking the pleasure of Allah. Allah is full of Kindness to (His) devotees
2|208|O you who believe! Enter into Islam completely and don’t follow footsteps of Satan. Indeed he is your open enemy
2|209|Then if you slide back after the clear signs have came to you, then know that Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
2|210|Do they wait for (anything else) except that Allah should come to them in shadows of the clouds along with the angels? (Then) the case would be already judged. To Allah all matters are returned (for decision)
2|211|Ask the children of Israel, how many clear signs We gave them. And whoever changes the Favor (revelations) of Allah after it has come, then indeed Allah is Severe in punishment
2|212|The worldly life is beautified for those who disbelieve, and they mock at those who believe. But those who are pious and keep away from forbidden, will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah grants (Bounty) to whom He wills without limit
2|213|Mankind was one community (with one religion). Allah sent the prophets with glad tidings and warnings, and with them sent the Scripture with the truth to judge between people in which they differed. Only those to whom the book (Scripture) was given differed in it after clear proofs came to them through hatred of one to another. Then Allah guided those who believed to the truth of that wherein they differed. Allah guides whom He wills to Right Way
2|214|Or do you think that you will enter Paradise while trials have not yet come to you like those who passed away before you? Adversity and affliction befall them and were so shaken that even the Messenger and those who believed with the Messenger said: "When will help of Allah come?" (They were told) Yes! Certainly, the help of Allah is near
2|215|They ask you (Muhammad) what they should spend (in charity). Say: “Whatever you spend of good must be for parents, kindred, orphans, the poor, the travelers, and whatever good deeds you do. Indeed Allah is Well-informed of it.”
2|216|Fighting (in Allah’s cause) is ordained for you (Muslims) though you dislike it. It may be that you dislike a thing and it is good for you, and you like a thing and it is bad for you. Allah knows but you don’t know
2|217|They ask you (Muhammad) about fighting in the sacred month (1st, 7th, 11th, and 12th months of Islamic calendar). Say: "Fighting in it is a great (offence). But preventing from the way of Allah, disbelieving in Allah, and expelling its inhabitants from the Sacred Masjid (at Makkah) are greater (offences) in the sight of Allah. Persecution is (more terrible) than killing. They (disbelievers) will not cease fighting you till they turn you back from your religion if they can. And whoever of you turns away from its religion and dies as a disbeliever, their (deeds are) rendered void in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will be the inmates of the fire. They will abide in it forever
2|218|Surely, those who have believed, and those who have emigrated (for Allah) and have striven hard in the way of Allah, all these hope for the Mercy of Allah. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”
2|219|They ask you (Muhammad) about alcoholic drink and gambling. Say: “There is great evil in both and (some) benefits for mankind, but their evil is greater than their benefit.” They ask you how much they should spend. Say: "The surplus (beyond your needs)." Thus Allah makes clear to you His revelations so that you may think
2|220|in this world and the Hereafter. They ask you about orphans. Say: "Seeking good for them is best and if you intermix (your affairs) with theirs, then they are your brothers. Allah knows the mischievous (misuse property) from the well-wisher (protect property). If Allah wished, He could have put you into difficulties. Indeed Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
2|221|And don’t marry idolatresses (women worship idol) until they believe (in Allah alone). Indeed a believing captive woman is better than a free idolatress even though she pleases you. Don’t give (your daughters) in marriage to idolaters (men worship idol) until they believe in (Allah alone) and indeed a believing captive (man) is better than a free idolater even though he pleases you. Those (idolaters) invite you to the fire, and Allah invites you to Paradise and to forgiveness by His Grace. Allah makes His Verses clear to mankind so that they may remember
2|222|They ask you about menstruation. Say: It is a harmful (illness), so keep away from women during menses and don’t approach (sexual intercourse) them till they are cleansed. When they are cleansed, then go to them as Allah has commanded you. Surely, Allah loves those who repent and loves those who purify themselves
2|223|Your wives are a tilth (place of cultivation) for you, so go to your tilth as you wish. Send (good deeds) for yourselves before (leave the world). And fear Allah, and know that you will meet Him (in the Hereafter), and (O Muhammad) give good news to the believers
2|224|And don’t make Allah’s (Name) an excuse in your oaths against your doing good, acting piously, and making peace among people. Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
2|225|Allah will not blame you for your vain utterances (unintentional) in your oaths, but He will call you to account for what your hearts have earned. And Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
2|226|For those who swear for abstinence (sexual relation) from their wives, must wait 4 months. Then if they reconcile, surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
2|227|And if they decide upon divorce, then surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
2|228|And divorced women shall wait concerning themselves for 3 menstrual periods. It is not allowed for them that they conceal what Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the Last Day. Their husbands have better right to take them back in that period, if they wish reconciliation. They (women) have rights similar to those (of men) over them in a just manner, but men have a degree (of responsibility) over them. Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
2|229|(If) the divorce is (pronounced) twice, then either you retain her with honor or release her with kindness (after 3rd pronouncement). It is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from your wives) what you have given them (wives) anything, except that both fear that you will not be able to keep the limits of Allah. Then if you fear that you will not be able to keep the limits of Allah, then there is no sin on both of you if she gives back for her divorce. These are the limits of Allah, so don’t transgress them. And whoever transgresses the limits of Allah, then those are the wrongdoers
2|230|And if he divorces her (after 3rd pronouncement), then she is not lawful for him until she marries a husband other than him. Then, if he (new husband) divorces her, there is no sin on both of them that they reunite (marry again) if both of them think that they will be able to keep the limits of Allah. These are the limits of Allah; He makes them clear to people who know
2|231|When you divorce women and they reach their prescribed (waiting) period, then either take them back with honor or let them go with kindness. But don’t take them back to hurt them, and whoever does that, surely, he wrongs himself. And don’t take the Verses of Allah as a joke. But remember the Favors of Allah upon you, and that which He has sent down upon you of the book (the Qur’an) and of the Wisdom (by which) He instructs you. And Fear Allah, and know that Allah is All-Aware of everything
2|232|When you divorce women and they reach their prescribed (waiting) period, then don’t prevent them from marrying their (former) husbands, if they mutually agree in a just manner. This is enjoyed on every one of you who believes in Allah and the Last Day. That is more virtuous and purer for you. Allah knows and you don’t know
2|233|The mothers shall breast-feed their children for 2 whole years for those (parents) who desire to complete the breast-feeding. But the father of the child shall bear the cost of the mother’s food and clothing in a reasonable manner. No one should be charged more than they can afford. Neither a mother should be made to suffer for her child, nor a father to whom the child is born. On the (father’s) heir is incumbent the like of that (on the father). If both decide on weaning (withhold mother’s milk and use other nourishment) by mutual consent and after due consultation, then there is no sin on them. If you decide to give out to nurse (foster mother) for your children, then there is no sin on you when you pay (the mother) what is due from you in an honorable manner. Fear Allah and know well that Allah is All-Seer of what you do
2|234|Those who die and leave wives behind them, they (wives) shall wait (to marry again) for 4 months and 10 days. When they reach their waiting term, then there is no sin on you what they (wives) do concerning themselves in a just manner. Allah is Well-acquainted with what you do
2|235|There is no sin on you if you offer marriage proposal to (such) woman (during their waiting period) or you conceal it in yourselves. Allah knows that you will remember them (in your hearts), but don’t make a promise with them secretly except that you say (if you wish to marry) in an honorable manner. Don’t confirm on the tie of marriage till the prescribed term reaches its end. Know that Allah knows what is in your minds, so beware of Him. Know that Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
2|236|There is no sin on you, if you divorce women while you have not yet touched (sexual relation) them, or fixed for them a settled portion (dower). Provide for them, the wealth according to his (person’s) means and the poor according to his means, a reasonable provision, and a duty upon the righteous people
2|237|And if you divorce them before you touch (sexual relation with) them, and indeed you have fixed for them a settled portion (dower), then pay ½ of what you have fixed unless they (women) agree to give up, or he (the husband) agrees to give up (pay full dowry) in whose hand is the knot of marriage. If you agree to give up (full dowry) that is closer to piety. You don’t forget to show kindness among yourselves. Surely, Allah is All-Seer of what you do
2|238|Guard your (obligatory) prayers especially the middle prayer. Stand before Allah with true devotion
2|239|And if you fear (an enemy), then pray on foot or riding. And when you are safe, offer prayer in the manner He has taught you, which you did not know (before)
2|240|Those of you who die and leave behind wives (should make) a bequest (will) for their wives a year’s maintenance and residence without turning them out. But if they leave, then there is no sin on you if they do themselves in an honorable manner. Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
2|241|For divorced women, a reasonable provision is a duty on the pious
2|242|Thus Allah makes clear for you His Verse so that you may understand
2|243|Have you (O Muhammad) not looked at those (people of Israel) who went from their homes in thousands for fear of death? Allah said to them: "Die". And then He revived them (to life). Surely, Allah is Bountiful to mankind, but most people don’t give thanks
2|244|Fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
2|245|Who will lend Allah a beautiful loan so that He will multiply it to him many times? Allah decreases or increases (your provisions), and to Him you shall return
2|246|Have you not thought about the group of the children of Israel after Moses? When they said to a prophet of theirs: "Appoint for us a king and we will fight in the way of Allah." He said: "Would you then refrain from fighting, if fighting is prescribed for you?” They said: "Why should we not fight in the way of Allah while we along with our children have been driven out from our homes?" But when fighting was prescribed for them, they turned back except a few of them. Allah is All-Aware of the wrongdoers
2|247|Their Prophet (Samuel) said to them: "Indeed Allah has appointed Saul as a king over you." They said: "How can he be a king over us when we are more deserving for the kingdom than he, and he has not been given plenty of wealth?" He said: "Surely, Allah has chosen him over you and has increased him abundantly in knowledge and stature. And Allah grants kingdom to whom He wills. Allah is All-Sufficient for His creature’s needs, All-Knower
2|248|And their Prophet (Samuel) said to them: “Surely, the sign of his kingdom is that there shall come to you the ark (a wooden box), in which there is peace from your Lord and a remnant of what is left by the family of Moses and family of Aaron, it will be carried by the angels. Surely, in that is a sign for you if you are indeed believers.”
2|249|Then when Saul set out with the army, he said: "Surely! Allah will test you with a river. Whoever drinks from it, he is not of me, and whoever not taste it, indeed he is of me, except him who takes in the hollow of his hand." Yet, they all drank from it, except a few of them. So when he had crossed the river and those who believed with him, they said: "There is no strength (left) for us today against Goliath and his forces." But those who knew that they were to meet Allah, said: "How often a small group overcame a large group by the Grace of Allah? Allah is with the patient ones.”
2|250|And when they went forth for Goliath and his forces, they said: "Our Lord! Pour on us patience, make our steps firm, and grant us victory over the disbelievers
2|251|They routed those (disbelievers) by the Permission of Allah, David killed Goliath, Allah gave David the kingdom and wisdom, and taught him what He willed. And if Allah had not been repelling some people by some others, the earth surely would be filled with mischief. But Allah is Gracious to the worlds
2|252|These are the Verses of Allah; We recite them to you (O Muhammad) with truth. Surely, you are one of the Messengers (of Allah)
2|253|Those Messengers! We preferred some of them over others. To some of them, Allah spoke (directly), and He raised some of them in degrees (of honor). We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, clear signs and supported him with Holy Spirit (angel Gabriel). If Allah willed, the people who received the clear Verses (of Allah) would not have fought against each other. But they differed, some of them believed, and some of them disbelieved. If Allah willed, they would not have fought one another, but Allah does what He wills
2|254|O you who believe! Spend of that which We have provided for you before a Day comes when there will be no bargaining, no friendship, and no intercession. It is the disbelievers who are the wrongdoers
2|255|Allah! There is no one worthy of worship except He, the Ever-Living, the Sustainer and Protector. Neither slumber, nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Who can intercede with Him except with His permission? He knows what happens to them (creations) in this world, and what will happen to them in the Hereafter. And they cannot gain access to anything out of His knowledge except what He wills. His Chair (Throne) extends over the heavens and the earth, and He does not feel fatigue in guarding them. He is the Exalted, the Great
2|256|There is no compulsion in religion. Surely, the Right Way has become distinct from the wrong (way). Whoever disbelieves in false deities and believes in Allah, indeed has grasped the firm handle that will never break. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
2|257|Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out from darkness into light. Those who disbelieve, their supporters are false deities; they bring them out from light to darkness. They are the inmates of the fire; they will abide in it forever
2|258|Have you not looked at him (Namrud) who disputed with Abraham about his Lord, because Allah had given him the kingdom? When Abraham said to him: "My Lord gives life and causes death." He said: "I give life and cause death." Abraham said, "Surely! Allah brings out the sun from the east; then you bring it from the west." So he who disbelieved was completely defeated. Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
2|259|Or like the one (Ezra) who passed by a town and it had tumbled upon its roofs. He said: "How will Allah ever bring life to this town after its death?" So Allah caused him to die for 100 years, and then raised him to life (again). He asked: "How long did you remain (dead)?" Ezra said: "I remained dead for a day or part of a day." He said: "Nay, you have remained dead for 100 years: look at your food and your drink, they did not show change (not rotten); and look at your donkey (even its bones decayed)! And thus We have made you a sign for mankind. Look at the bones (of the donkey), how We put them together and then clothe them with flesh (and bring back to life)?" When it was clearly shown to him, he said, "I know (now) that Allah has power over every thing
2|260|And (remember) when Abraham said: "My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead." He (Allah) said: "Do you not believe?" He (Abraham) said: "Yes! But to satisfy my heart (faith)." He (Allah) said: "Take 4 birds, and tame them to incline to yourself (slaughter them, cut them into pieces), and then put a portion of them on every hill, then call them, they will come to you in haste (flying). And know that Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
2|261|The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is like that of a grain, it sprouts into 7 ears, and each ear has 100 grains. Allah multiplies for whom He wills. And Allah is All-Sufficient, All-Knower
2|262|Those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah, and they don’t follow up what they spent with reminder of generosity or injure them (feeling of the recipients), their reward is with their Lord. There is no fear on them, nor shall they grieve
2|263|Kind words and forgiving (of faults) are better than charity which is followed by injury. And Allah is Rich (free from all needs), Forbearing
2|264|O you who believe! Don’t render in vain your charity by reminder of generosity or by injury (feelings of recipients), like those who spend their wealth to be seen by people, and don’t believe in Allah, nor the Last Day. Their example is like a smooth rock with dust over it; and when heavy rain falls on it, leaves it bare. They have no control over anything (reward) which they have earned. Allah does not guide the disbelievers
2|265|The example of those who spend their wealth seeking the pleasure of Allah while they in their souls are sure that Allah will reward them, is like the example of a garden on a height. When heavy rain falls on it and it yields double its harvest. If heavy rain does not fall on it, then even light rain is sufficient. Allah is All-Seer of what you do
2|266|Would any of you wish to have a garden of date-palms and grapes with rivers flowing underneath it, and all kinds of fruits are in it for him; while old age has taken over him, and he has weak children (can not look after themselves); then it is struck and burnt down by a fiery whirlwind? Thus Allah makes clear His Verses to you that you may give thought
2|267|O you who believe! Spend good things which you have (legally) earned, and that which We have produced for you from the earth, and don’t aim at bad (or worthless) things to spend (in charity though) you would not take it for yourself except you overlook (defects) in it. Know that Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy
2|268|Satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit indecency; whereas Allah promises you forgiveness from Him and Bounty. Allah is Self-Sufficient, All-Knower
2|269|He grants wisdom to whom He wills, and whoever is granted wisdom, is indeed granted good abundantly. But none remembers except people of understanding
2|270|And whatever you spend for spending (charity) or whatever vow you make, indeed Allah knows it all. The wrongdoers shall have no helpers
2|271|If you disclose your charity, it is well, and if you conceal it and give it to the poor, that is better for you. (Allah) will remove some of your bad deeds. Allah is All-Aware of what you do
2|272|Not upon you (O Muhammad) is their guidance, but Allah guides whom He wills. Whatever good you spend, it is for yourselves, you don’t spend except seeking the pleasure of Allah. Whatever good you spend, it will be repaid back to you in full, and you will not be wronged
2|273|Charity is for the poor who are restricted (from travel) for the cause of Allah, they are not able to move about to work in the earth. The ignorant people think them as wealthy because of their modesty. You may know them by their mark; they don’t beg people with repeated demands. Whatever good you spend, surely Allah knows about that well
2|274|Those who spend their wealth (in Allah’s cause) by night, by day, secretly, and openly, their rewards are with their Lord. There is no fear on them, nor shall they grieve
2|275|Those who eat interest (usury), they will not stand (before Allah) except like those who are confused (insane) by the touch of Satan. That is because they say: "Indeed trade is like usury,” while Allah has made the trade lawful and the usury unlawful. So those who receive admonition from their Lord and they refrain, stop eating usury, shall not be punished for the past. Their case is left to Allah (to judge). But those who repeats (to usury), they are inmates of the fire; they will abide in it forever
2|276|The usury deprives the blessings of Allah and increases by the charity. Allah does not like all ungrateful sinners
2|277|Indeed those who believe, do righteous deeds, establish prayer, and give obligatory charity; for them their rewards are with their Lord. There is no fear on them, nor shall they grieve
2|278|O you who believe! Fear Allah and give up what remains (due to you) from usury if you are believers
2|279|But if you don’t do it, then be warned of war from Allah and His Messenger. If you repent, you may retain your capital sums. You don’t wrong (by asking more than your capital), you will not be wronged (by receiving less than your capital)
2|280|And if the debtor is in difficulty to pay (has no money), then delay until it is easy to repay. But if you remit it by way of charity that is better for you if you know
2|281|And fear the Day when you shall be brought back to Allah. Then everyone will be paid what he earned and none shall be dealt unjustly
2|282|O you who believe! When you contract a debt from one another for a fixed period, write it down. Let a scribe write it down between you in justice. A scribe shall not refuse to write it down as Allah has taught, so let the scribe write. Let him (debtor) dictate on whom is the liability fearing Allah, the Lord, and not diminish anything of what he owes. But if the debtor is of poor understanding, or weak, or is not capable to dictate for itself, then let its guardian dictate in justice. Call for 2 witnesses out of your own men. If 2 men are not available, then a man and 2 women, such as you agree as witnesses, so that if one of the 2 women errs, one of them (2 women) reminds other. The witnesses should not refuse when they are called (for evidence). Don’t become weary to write down your contract, small or large for its period. That is more just with Allah, more reliable for evidence, and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves, except when it is a present trade which you carry out among yourselves, and then there is no sin on you if you don’t write it down. But take witnesses when you trade with one another. Let neither scribe nor witness suffer any harm, and if you do (such harm), then it is wickedness on your part. So fear Allah and Allah teaches you. Allah is All-Knower of every thing
2|283|If you are on a journey and you cannot find a scribe, then take a pledge in hand. But if any of you trusts another, then let one who is trusted fulfill its trust (faithfully), and let him fear Allah, his Lord. You don’t conceal the evidence, and whoever conceals it, surely its heart is sinful. Allah is All-Knower of what you do
2|284|To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. If you declare what is in your own selves or you conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it. He will forgive whom He wills and will punish whom He wills. Allah has power over everything
2|285|The Messenger (Muhammad) believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord and (so do) the believers. All believe in Allah, His angels, His books, and His Messengers. (They say): "We don’t make distinction between any one of His Messengers." (They say): "We hear, and we obey. We seek Your forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is the return (of all)
2|286|Allah does not burden any one but beyond his capacity. He will get reward for what he has earned (good) and be punished against what he earned (evil). (The believers say): "Our Lord! Punish us not if we forget or fall into error. Our Lord! Don’t lay on us a burden like that which You laid on those who were before us. Our Lord! Don’t lay on us burdens of which we don’t have power (to bear). Pardon us, forgive us, have mercy on us. You are our Protector, so grant us victory over the disbelievers
3|1|Alif-Lam-Mim
3|2|Allah! There is no one worthy of worship but He (Allah), the Living, the Sustainer
3|3|He has sent down to you (Muhammad) the book (the Qur’an) with truth confirming what came before it. He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
3|4|before as a guidance for mankind. And He sent down Al-Furqan (the criterion to judge between right and wrong (this Qur’an)). Surely, those who disbelieve in the Verses of Allah, for them there is a severe punishment; and Allah is All-Mighty, All-Able of retribution
3|5|Surely, nothing is hidden from Allah, in the earth or in the heaven
3|6|It is He who shapes you in the wombs as He wills. There is no one worthy of worship but He (Allah), the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
3|7|It is He who has sent down to you (Muhammad) the book (this Qur’an). In it are Verses absolutely clear, they are the basis of the book; and others are not entirely clear. As for those in whose hearts there is deviation (from the truth), they follow what is unclear thereof, seeking mischief, and seeking for its hidden meanings, but no one knows its hidden meanings except Allah. And those who are firmly rooted in knowledge say: “We believe in it, all from our Lord." None will heed except the people of understanding
3|8|(They say): "Our Lord! Don’t deviate our hearts (from the truth) after You has guided us, and grant us Mercy from You. Surely You are the Bestower (of bounties)
3|9|Our Lord! Surely, You will gather mankind together on the Day, there is no doubt in it. Surely, Allah does not break His Promise.”
3|10|Surely, those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their offspring will avail them anything from Allah and it is they who will be fuel of the fire
3|11|(This will be) like the behavior of people of Pharaoh and those before them. They misrepresented Our Verses, so Allah destroyed them for their sins. Allah is Severe in punishment
3|12|Say (O Muhammad) to those who disbelieve: “You will be defeated and gathered together to hell, and that is an evil resting place.”
3|13|Indeed there was a sign for you in 2 groups which met in combat (in the battle of Badr): One group was fighting in the cause of Allah and the other was disbelievers. They (the believers) saw them (the disbelievers) twice (in number) of them with their own eyes. Allah supports with His victory whom He wills. Surely, in this is a lesson for those who have sight
3|14|Beautified is for men with love of things they desire from women, children, store up heaps of gold and silver, branded (beautiful) horses and cattle, and land. These are the pleasure of the life of this world; but Allah has the excellent return (Paradise) with Him
3|15|Say (O Muhammad): “Shall I inform you of far better things than those? For those who fear, there are gardens with their Lord in Paradise beneath which rivers flow. They will abide forever in it, with pure spouses. And Allah will be pleased with them. Allah is All-Seer of (His) servants.”
3|16|Those who say: “Our Lord! We have indeed believed, so forgive us our sins and save us from punishment of the fire;”
3|17|who are patient, truthful, and obedient with sincere devotion in worship to Allah, who spend, pray and beg Allah’s forgiveness in the last Hours of the night
3|18|Allah bears witness that there is no one worthy of worship but He (Allah), and the angels and those having knowledge, standing firm on justice. There is no one worthy of worship but He (Allah), the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
3|19|Surely, the religion with Allah is Islam. Those who were given the Scripture did not differ except after what the knowledge had come to them through transgression among themselves. Those who disbelieve in the Verses of Allah, then surely, Allah is Swift in reckoning
3|20|If they argue with you (Muhammad) say: “I have submitted myself to Allah (in Islam), and (so are) those who follow me.” Say to those who were given the Scripture and the illiterates (Arab pagans): “Do you submit yourselves (to Allah)?” If they submit, then indeed they are rightly guided. But if they turn away, then (don’t worry) your duly is to convey the message. Allah is All-Seer of (His) servants
3|21|Surely! Those who disbelieve in the Verses of Allah, kill the prophets without right, and kill those people who command with justice; then give them tidings of a painful punishment
3|22|They are those whose works will be lost in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers
3|23|Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of the Scripture? When they are invited to the book of Allah to settle their disputes, a party from them turns away, and they are averse
3|24|This is because they say: “The fire shall not touch us but for few days." And they deceive them in their religion by what they used to invent
3|25|What (will it be) when We will gather them together on a Day (there is) no doubt in it, every one will be paid (for) what they have earned, and none will be dealt unjustly
3|26|Say (O Muhammad): “O Allah! Lord of the kingdom, You give the kingdom to whom You please, You take away the kingdom from whom You please; You give honor whom You please, You humiliate whom You please; all the good is in Your authority. Surely, You have power over every thing
3|27|You make the night into the day and You make the day into the night. You bring out the living from the dead and You bring out the dead from the living. You give sustenance to whom You please without limit.”
3|28|Let not the believers take the disbelievers as allies instead of the believers. Whoever does that, there will not (be help) from Allah in anything, except that you fear of them for protection. And Allah warns you of His punishment and to Allah is the final return
3|29|Say (O Muhammad): “Whether you conceal what is in your hearts or you reveal it, Allah knows it. He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah has power over every thing.”
3|30|On the Day when every one will be confronted with what they have done of good and what they have done of evil. (Wrongdoers) will wish if (there were) indeed a great distance between them and their evil deeds. Allah warns you of His punishment and Allah is very kind to (His) devotees
3|31|Say (O Muhammad): “If you love Allah then follow me (the Qur’an and your way of life), Allah will love you and forgive your sins. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”
3|32|Say (O Muhammad): “Obey Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad).” If they turn away, then indeed Allah does not like the disbelievers
3|33|Surely Allah chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and the family of Imran above mankind
3|34|They were offspring of one another. Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
3|35|(Remember) when the wife of Imran said: “O my Lord! I have vowed to You what is in my womb to be dedicated for Your services. So accept this from me. Surely, You are All-Hearer, All-Knower.”
3|36|When she delivered her (Mary), she said: “My Lord! I have delivered a female (instead of male).” Allah knew better what she delivered: “The male is not like the female, and I have named her Mary, and I seek refuge for her with You and her offspring from Satan, the rejected.”
3|37|So her Lord accepted her with right acceptance. He made her grow in good manner and put her in the care of Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah entered to see her at her praying place, he found her with food. He said: “O Mary! From where you got this?” She said: “This is from Allah. Surely, Allah provides sustenance to whom He wills, without limit.”
3|38|Thereupon, Zachariah invoked his Lord, saying: “My Lord! Grant me a good offspring. You are indeed the All-Hearer of invocation.”
3|39|Then the angels called him while he was standing in prayer in the prayer place saying that: “Allah gives you glad tidings of John, (he will) confirm the Word from Allah, noble, chaste, and a prophet from among the righteous.”
3|40|He said: “My Lord! How can I have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren?” (Allah) said: “Allah does what He wills.”
3|41|He said: “My Lord! Make for me a sign.” (Allah) said: “Your sign is that you will not speak to people for 3 days except by gesture. And remember your Lord much, and glorify Him in the evening and in the morning.”
3|42|(Remember) when the angels said: “O Mary! Surely, Allah has chosen you and purified you, and chosen you above all the women of the world
3|43|O Mary! Remain obedient to your Lord and prostrate, and bow down with those who bow down.”
3|44|This is from the news of unseen which We inspire to you (O Muhammad). You were not with them when they (priests of the temple) threw their pens as to which of them should take care of Mary; nor you were not with them when they disputed
3|45|(Remember) when the angels said: “O Mary! Surely, Allah gives you the glad tidings of a word (that you will have a son) from Him; his name will be Messiah Isa (Jesus Christ), the son of Mary. He will be honored in this world and the Hereafter, and will be one of those who are near to Allah
3|46|He will speak to the people in the cradle, in maturity, and he will be of the righteous.”
3|47|She said: “My Lord! How shall I have a son when no man has touched me?” He said: “Even so, Allah creates whatever He wills. When He decided a thing, He just says to it: ‘Be!’ and it is
3|48|And He (Allah) will teach him (Jesus) the book and the wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel
3|49|and (will make Jesus) a Messenger to the children of Israel (saying) that: ‘I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. I will make for you from clay like a figure of a bird, breathe into it, and it will become a bird by the permission of Allah. I will heal the born blind, leper, and will bring life to the dead by the permission of Allah. I will inform you of what you eat, and what you store in your houses. Surely, in these are signs for you, if you believe
3|50|And (I have come) to confirm that which was before me of the Torah, and to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. So fear Allah and obey me
3|51|Surely! Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is the Right Way.’”
3|52|Then when Jesus came to know of their disbelief, he said: “Who will be my helpers in the cause of Allah?” The disciples said: “We are the helpers of Allah; we believe in Allah, and bear witness that we are Muslims.”
3|53|(Then they said): “Our Lord! We believe in what You have sent down, and we follow the Messenger (Jesus); so write us down with those who bear witness.”
3|54|And they (disbelievers) plotted (to kill Jesus) and Allah also planned, and Allah is the Best of planners
3|55|And (remember) when Allah said: “O Jesus! I will take you, will raise you to Me, will purify you (of the statement that Jesus is Allah’s son) of those who disbelieve, and I will make those who follow you superior to those who disbelieve till the Day of Resurrection. Then you will return to Me and I will judge between you in which you used to dispute
3|56|As to those who disbelieve, I will punish them with severe punishment in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers
3|57|And as for those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah) and do righteous deeds, Allah will grant them their reward in full. And Allah does not like the wrongdoers.”
3|58|This is what We recite to you (O Muhammad) of the Verses and the wise reminder (the Qur’an)
3|59|Surely, the example of Jesus (born without father) to Allah is like the example of Adam (born without father and mother). He created him from dust, then (He) said to him: "Be!" and he was
3|60|(This is) the truth from your Lord, so don’t be of those who doubt
3|61|Then whoever disputes with you in it (concerning birth of Jesus) after what has come to you of knowledge, say (O Muhammad): “Come, let us call our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves: then we pray humbly and we invoke the Curse of Allah upon the liars.”
3|62|Surely! This is the true story (about Jesus), and there is no one worthy of worship but Allah. And indeed, Allah is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
3|63|If they turn away (don’t accept these proofs), then surely, Allah is All-Aware of those who do mischief
3|64|Say (O Muhammad): “O people of the Scripture! Come to a word common between us and you: that we worship none but Allah, and that we don’t associate anything with Him, and that we shall not take others as Lord besides Allah.” Then if they turn away, then tell them: “Bear witness that we are Muslims.”
3|65|O people of the Scripture! Why do you dispute about Abraham (whether he was a Jew or Christian?), while the Torah and the Gospel were sent down long after him? Don’t you understand
3|66|You are those who have disputed about which you have knowledge. Why then you dispute about which you don’t have any knowledge? Allah knows, and you don’t know
3|67|Abraham was neither a Jew and nor a Christian, but was a true Muslim and he was not of the polytheists
3|68|Surely, best people (to claim near relationship) with Abraham are those who followed him, this prophet (Muhammad), and those who have believed in him. And Allah is the Guardian of the believers
3|69|A party of people of the Scripture wishes to lead you astray, but they shall not lead astray anyone but themselves, and they don’t realize it
3|70|O people of the Scripture! Why do you reject the Verse of Allah while you bear witness (to the truth)
3|71|O people of the Scripture! Why do you mix truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know
3|72|A party of people of the Scripture says: “Believe in what is sent down on those who believe (Muslims) in early part of the day, and reject it at the end of the day, so that they (Muslims) may turn back (abandon truth)
3|73|And you don’t believe anyone but the one who follows your religion.” Say (O Muhammad): “Surely! The true Guidance is the Guidance of Allah.” (These people of the book don’t believe) that someone (besides them) could be given revelation like what you have been given, or they will argue with you before your Lord. Say (O Muhammad): “Surely! All the Bounty is in the Hand of Allah; Allah gives it to whom He wills. And Allah is Generous, All-knower.”
3|74|He selects Mercy for whom He wills and Allah is the Owner of Great Bounty
3|75|Among the people of the Scripture (there are some) who, if you entrust them with a heap of wealth, will pay it back to you; and among them there are others who, if you entrust them with a single silver coin, will not pay it back to you unless you keep on demanding, because they say: “There is no blame on us (to betray and take the properties of) the unlettered people (who are not Jews or Christians).” But they tell a lie against Allah while they know it
3|76|Yes, those who fulfill their promise and fear Allah much; surely Allah loves those who are pious
3|77|Surely, those who sell the covenants of Allah and their oaths for a small price (gain); they shall have no share in the Hereafter. Neither Allah will speak to them, nor look at them on the Day of Resurrection, nor He will purify them, and they shall have a painful punishment
3|78|And surely, there is a party among them, they twist their tongues (distort) in reciting the book, so that you think it is from the book, but it is not from the book. They say: “It is from Allah,” but it is not from Allah. They speak lie against Allah while they know it
3|79|It is not possible for a person whom Allah has given the Book, the Wisdom, and the Prophethood; then he will say to the people: “Worship me instead of Allah.” But (he would say): “Be people of Allah according to the Book you have been teaching and studying.”
3|80|Nor he will command you to take the angels and the prophets as your deity. Would he command you to disbelieve after when you have become Muslims
3|81|And (remember) when Allah took the Covenant of the prophets, saying: “Whatever I gave you of the Book and Wisdom, there will come to you a Messenger (Muhammad) confirming what is with you; you must then believe in him and you must help him.” Allah said: “Do you agree and do you take on My Covenant?” They said: “We agree.” He said: “Then bear witness; and I am with you among the witnesses.”
3|82|Then whoever turns away after this, they will be the transgressors
3|83|Do they seek other than the religion of Allah, while all submitted to Allah who are in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly? To Allah they will be returned
3|84|Say (O Muhammad): “We believe in Allah, what has been sent down to us, what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and their descendents, and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord. We don’t make distinction between any one of them and to Him we submit (in Islam).”
3|85|And whoever is seeking a religion other than Islam, it will never be accepted from him, and will be among the losers in the Hereafter
3|86|How shall Allah guide those people who disbelieved after their belief, bore witness that the Messenger (Muhammad) is true, and after clear proofs had come to them? Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
3|87|They are those whose recompense is that on them is the curse of Allah, of the angels, and of all mankind
3|88|They will abide forever in it (hell). Neither the punishment for them will be lightened, nor will they be reprieved
3|89|except those who repent after that and mend their ways (do righteous deeds). Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
3|90|Surely, those who disbelieve after their belief, then grow in disbelief, their repentance will never be accepted. They are those who are astray
3|91|Surely, those who disbelieve, and die while they are disbelievers, will not be accepted from any one of them even if they offer earth of gold as ransom. For them (will be) a painful punishment and will have no helpers
3|92|You never attain piety unless you spend (in Allah’s Cause) of what you love; and whatever good you spend, surely, Allah knows it well
3|93|All food (lawful in Islam) was also lawful to the Children of Israel, except what Israel (Yaqoob) made unlawful for himself before the Torah was revealed (to Moses). Say (O Muhammad): “Bring the Torah and recite it, if you are truthful.”
3|94|Then after that, whoever invents a lie against Allah, indeed they are wrongdoers
3|95|Say (O Muhammad): “Allah has spoken the truth; so follow the Creed of Abraham upright, and he was not of the polytheists.”
3|96|Surely, the first House (of worship) was set up for mankind which is at Bakkah (Makkah), full of blessing, and guidance for all the worlds
3|97|In it are clear signs like station of Abraham (where he used to pray). Whoever enters it becomes secure. And performance of Hajj (pilgrimage to the House of Ka’bah) is a duty that mankind owes to Allah, those who can afford the expenses; and whoever denies (the Hajj), then surely Allah is not in need of the worlds
3|98|Say: “O people of the Scripture! Why do you reject the Verses of Allah when Allah is Witness to what you do?”
3|99|Say: “O people of the Scripture! Why do you stop those who have believed from the way of Allah, seek to make (the way) crooked, when you are witnesses? Allah is not unaware of what you do.”
3|100|O you who believe! If you obey a group of those who were given the Scripture, they would make you disbelievers after your belief
3|101|And how would you disbelieve, when the Verses of Allah are recited to you, and among you is Allah’s Messenger (Muhammad)? Whoever holds fast to Allah, will indeed be guided to a Right Way
3|102|O you who believe! Fear Allah as He should be feared, and don’t die except when you are Muslims
3|103|And hold fast the Rope of Allah (Islam) all together, and not be divided. Remember the Favor of Allah on you when you were enemies, He made friendship between your hearts, you became brothers by His Grace, you were on the brink of pit of the fire, and He saved you from it. Thus Allah makes clear to you His Verses, so that you may be guided
3|104|There must be a group of people among you who invite to the good, command the right, and forbid evil. It is they who shall be successful
3|105|You don’t be like those who are divided and disputed after the clear signs have come to them. For them is a terrible punishment
3|106|On the Day (of Resurrection) some faces will be brightened and some faces will be blackened. As for those with blackened faces (it will be said): “Did you disbelieve after your faith? Then taste the punishment (in hell) for your disbelief.”
3|107|As for those with brightened faces, they will be in the Mercy of Allah (Paradise); they will abide in it forever
3|108|These are the Verses of Allah, We recite them to you (O Muhammad) in truth, and Allah does not desire injustice to the worlds
3|109|And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and all the matters go back (for decision) to Allah
3|110|You are the best people raised for mankind. You command the good, forbid the evil, and you believe in Allah. And had people of the Scripture believed, it would have been better for them; some of them are believers, but most of them are transgressors
3|111|They can never harm you except a little (annoyance); if they fight you, they will turn to you the backs, and they will not be helped
3|112|Disgrace will be stamped upon them wherever they are found, except with a covenant (protection) from Allah, a covenant from people; and they have incurred wrath from Allah. The humiliation is stamped upon them because they used to reject the Verses of Allah and kill the prophets without right. That is because they disobeyed and used to transgress
3|113|Not all of them are alike: a group of people of the Scripture stand upright, they recite the Verses of Allah during Hours of the night, and they prostrate (in prayers)
3|114|They believe in Allah and the Last Day, they command the good and forbid evil, and they hasten to do good deeds, and they are among the righteous
3|115|And whatever good they do, they will never be denied (its rewards) of good; and Allah knows the pious well
3|116|Surely, those who disbelieved, neither their wealth will avail them nor their offspring from (the Wrath of) Allah anything. They are companions of the fire; they will abide in it forever
3|117|The example of what they spend in this worldly life is like the example of a wind with severe cold; it strikes harvest of people who have wronged themselves and destroy it. Allah has not wronged them, but they have wronged themselves
3|118|O you who believe! Don’t take as friends except from you (your religion); they (disbelievers) don’t spare any effort to make you corrupt. They desire whatever distresses you most. Indeed their hatred is apparent from their (sayings), and what their hearts conceal is far worse. Surely, We have made plain to you the Verses if you understand
3|119|You are those who love them but they don’t love you, and you believe in all the Scripture (Torah, Gospel, while they disbelieve in Qur’an). And when they meet you, they say: “We believe.” But when they are alone, they bite (tips of their) fingers at you in rage. Say (to them): “Perish in your rage.” Certainly, Allah knows all what are in their hearts
3|120|If a good befalls you, it grieves them; and if a misfortune overtakes you, they rejoice at it. But if you remain steadfast and become pious, their design would not harm you. Surely, Allah encompasses all that they do
3|121|And (remember) when you (Muhammad) left your household early morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle (of Uhud); Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
3|122|When 2 groups of you were about to lose heart, Allah was their protector (by strengthening hearts). In Allah the believers put their trust
3|123|Certainly Allah helped you at Badr when you were completely weak. So fear Allah much so that you may be grateful
3|124|(Remember) when you (Muhammad) said to the believers: “Is it not enough for you that your Lord helps you by sending down 3,000 angels?”
3|125|Yes, if you are steadfast and fear Allah, when they (enemy) come to you rushing; your Lord will help you with 5,000 of marked angels
3|126|Allah has not but made glad tidings for you and assures your hearts with it. There is no help except from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
3|127|(Allah might) cut off a group of those who disbelieve, or subdue them, so that they (withdraw) frustrated
3|128|The decision is not for you (Muhammad) whether He turns in Mercy to them or punishes them; surely, they are wrongdoers
3|129|To Allah belong all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
3|130|O you who believe! Don’t eat usury which is doubled and multiplied, but fear Allah so that you may be successful
3|131|Fear the fire, which is prepared for the disbelievers
3|132|And obey Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad) so that you may be shown mercy
3|133|And rush to forgiveness from your Lord, and for Paradise whose width (is like that of) the heavens and the earth, prepared for the pious
3|134|those who spend (in the way of Allah) in prosperity and in adversity, who control their anger, who forgive the people; Allah loves such righteous people
3|135|and those who, when they do indecent or wrong themselves, they remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their sins. No one can forgive the sins but Allah. They don’t persist on what wrong they have done, while they know
3|136|For such people, their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, gardens with the rivers flow underneath (Paradise), and they will abide forever in it. How excellent is this reward for those who do (good deeds)
3|137|Passed before you (many such nations) situations. So travel in the earth and see how the ending of the deniers (of truth) was
3|138|This (the Qur’an) is a declaration for mankind, a guidance and admonition for the pious
3|139|Don’t be weak (against your enemy), nor be sad, and you will be upper handed if you are true believers
3|140|If a wound has touched you, so have (disbelieving) people touched a wound similar to that. These days, We turn them among people so that Allah knows those who believe, and He may take martyrs from among you. And Allah does not like the wrongdoers
3|141|so that Allah may test those who believed and destroy the disbelievers
3|142|Do you think that you will enter Paradise before Allah tests those of you who strive hard (in Allah’s cause) and tests those who are the patient
3|143|Indeed you used to wish death before you met it. Now you have seen it openly with your own eyes
3|144|Muhammad is not but a Messenger; indeed Messengers have passed away before him. Then if he dies or is killed, will you turn back on your heels (become disbelievers)? Whoever turns back on his heels, will not harm Allah at all, and Allah will give reward to the grateful
3|145|No one can die without the permission of Allah at an appointed term. And whoever desires a reward of the world, We shall give it here; and whoever desires a reward of the Hereafter, We shall give it there. And We shall reward the grateful
3|146|(In the past) many prophets have fought with large religious people. Neither had they lost heart for what they suffered in the way of Allah, nor did they weaken, nor did they degrade themselves. And Allah loves the patient
3|147|And they said nothing but: “Our Lord! Forgive our sins and our excesses, set our feet firmly, and help us against the disbelievers.”
3|148|So Allah gave them reward of this world, and the excellent reward will be given in the Hereafter. Allah loves the righteous people
3|149|O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will drive you back on your heels, and you will turn back (from faith to disbelief) as losers
3|150|But Allah is your Protector, and Allah is the Best of the helpers
3|151|We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve, because they associated (others in worship) with Allah, whom He has not sent any authority. Their abode is the fire and evil is the abode of the wrongdoers
3|152|Indeed Allah was truthful in His Promise to you when you were destroying them (your enemy in the battle of Uhud) with His permission, until when you showed weakness and fell into dispute about the order, and disobeyed (the prophet) after what He showed you (the booty) which you loved. There were some among you who desire this world and some of you who desire the Hereafter. Then He made you flee from them (your enemy) so that He may test you. Surely, He forgave you, and Allah is Gracious to the believers
3|153|(Remember) when you were running away (flee to hills) without even looking a glace at anyone, and the Messenger (Muhammad) was calling you back in your rear. Allah gave you grief for grief (to teach lesson) so that you may neither grief over what you escaped, nor on (misfortune) which had befallen you. Allah is Well-Aware of what you do
3|154|Then after this grief, He sent upon you an inner peace. Slumber overtook a group of you. Another group was concerned about themselves (on how to save themselves, ignoring the others and the prophet) and thought wrongly of Allah, thought of the (days of) ignorance. They said: “Is there anything for us in the affair?” Say (O Muhammad): “Indeed all the affairs are for Allah.” They hide within themselves (in mind) what they did not reveal to you, saying: “If there was anything for us in the affair, none of us would have been killed here.” Say (to them): “Even if you had remained in your houses, those for whom death were destined would have gone forth to the place of their death. But it was the test of Allah what was in your hearts, and to purify what was in your hearts (sins). Allah is All-Knower of what is in the hearts.”
3|155|Surely, those of you who turned their backs on the day when the 2 armies met (the battle of Uhud); only Satan made them slip (run away from the battle) for some sins which they had earned. But indeed, Allah has forgiven them. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
3|156|O you who believe! Don’t be like those disbelievers and who say to their brethren when they travel through the earth or are fighting: “If they had stayed with us, neither they would have died nor be killed.” Allah may make it a cause of regret in their hearts. Allah gives life and causes death. Allah is All-Seer of what you do
3|157|And if you are killed in the Way of Allah or die, surely forgiveness and Mercy from Allah are far better than what you could gather (of worldly wealth)
3|158|And if you die, or are killed; surely to Allah you shall be gathered
3|159|By the Mercy of Allah, you (Muhammad) deal with them gently. Had you been rough and hard-hearted, surely they would have broken away from you. So pardon them, ask (Allah’s) forgiveness for them; and consult them in the affairs. But when you have taken a decision, then put your trust in Allah. Surely, Allah loves those who put their trust in Allah
3|160|If Allah helps you, none can overcome you. If He forsakes you, who is there after Him who can help? In Allah alone the believers put their trust
3|161|It is not (conceivable) for a prophet that he defrauds (take booty illegally) and he who defrauds will bring forth what he has defrauded on the Day of Resurrection. Then every person shall be fully compensated what he has earned, and they shall not be dealt unjustly
3|162|Can a person who follows the good pleasure of Allah, be like the one who is laden with the Wrath of Allah (by taking booty illegally)? Its abode is hell and the worst destination
3|163|They have different grades with Allah, and Allah is All-Seer of what they do
3|164|Indeed Allah has done a great Favor on the believers when He has sent to them a Messenger (Muhammad) from among themselves, who recites to them His Verses (the Qur’an), purifies them, teaches them the book (the Qur’an) and the wisdom, and indeed they were before in clear error
3|165|When a calamity falls on you, you have already inflicted (enemies at the battle of Badr) twice as great, you say: “From where does this come to us?” Say: “It is from yourselves (for your evil deeds).” Indeed Allah has power over every thing
3|166|What befalls you on the day (the battle of Uhud) when 2 armies met, was by the permission of Allah in order that He might test the believers
3|167|and that He might know those who were tainted with hypocrisy. It was said to them: “Come, fight in the way of Allah or at least defend (yourselves).” They said: “Had we known that fighting will take place, we would have certainly followed you.” On that day, they were nearer to disbelief than to faith. They said with their mouths what was not in their hearts. Allah has full knowledge of what they conceal
3|168|Those who said about their killed brethren while they sat at home: “If they had listened to us, they would not have been killed.” Say: “Avert the death from your own selves, if you are truthful.”
3|169|Think not of those who are killed in the way of Allah as dead. But they are alive with their Lord, they are well-provided
3|170|They are pleased for what Allah has bestowed upon them out of His Bounty, rejoice for those who have not yet joined them but are left behind (not yet martyred) so that no fear shall come on them and they shall not grieve
3|171|They rejoice at the Favor of Allah’s Bounty, and that Allah does not waste reward of the believers
3|172|Those who responded (the call) Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad) after their injury (in the battle of Uhud); there is great reward for such as those who do good and fear Allah
3|173|those believers to them the people (hypocrites) said: “Surely, the people (pagans) have gathered against you a great army, so fear them.” But it (only) increased their faith, and they said: “Allah alone is sufficient for us, and He is the excellent Guardian.”
3|174|So they returned (home) with Favor and Bounty of Allah, and no harm touched them. They followed the good Pleasure of Allah. And Allah is the Owner of Great Bounty
3|175|It is only Satan that suggests to you the fear of its supporters. So don’t fear them, but fear Me, if you are true believers
3|176|(O Muhammad) let not those who rush towards disbelief grieve you. Surely, they can never harm Allah the least. It is Allah’s Will to give them no portion in the Hereafter. For them there is a great punishment
3|177|Surely, those who purchase disbelief at the price of faith, they will never harm Allah the least. For them, there is a painful punishment
3|178|Let not those who disbelieve think that We give respite to them (by postponing punishment) are good for them. We give respite to them so that they may add more sins. For them is a humiliating punishment
3|179|Allah will not leave the believers on what they are now, until He separates the evil from the good. Allah will not inform you about the unseen, but Allah chooses Messengers whom He wills. So believe in Allah and His Messengers. If you believe and fear Allah, then for you there is a great reward
3|180|Don’t think those who greedily withhold (charity) which Allah has granted them of His Bounty (wealth), it is good for them, but it is bad for them. They will be hung around their necks what they greedily withheld from their wealth on the Day of Resurrection. For Allah is the heritage of the heavens and the earth. Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do
3|181|Indeed, Allah has heard the saying of those who say: “Truly, Allah is poor and we are rich!” We shall record what they have said, their killing of the prophets unjustly, and We shall say: “Taste the punishment of the burning fire
3|182|That is for that (evil) which your hands have sent before you. Allah is never unjust to (His) servants.”
3|183|They (disbelievers) say: “Surely, Allah has taken our promise not to believe in any Messenger until he brings to us an offering which will consume the fire (from heaven).” Say: “Surely, Messengers have come to you before me with clear signs and even with what you are asking of. Then why did you kill them if you are truthful?”
3|184|If they reject you (O Muhammad), so were Messengers rejected before you, who came with clear signs and the Scripture, and the book of Enlightenment
3|185|Everyone shall taste death. Only you shall be paid your reward on the Day of Resurrection. Whoever is removed away from the fire and is admitted to Paradise, will indeed be successful. The life of this world is nothing except enjoyment of deception
3|186|You shall certainly be put to test in your wealth and your lives. You shall certainly hear from those who have been given the book before you, and from those who practiced polytheism with many hurtful things. If you remain patient and become pious, then surely, that will be a proof of your firm determination
3|187|(And remember) when Allah took a Covenant from those who were given the Scripture to explain it to people and not hide it. But they threw it away behind their backs, and bought with it a little gain. And indeed worst is what they buy
3|188|Those who rejoice for what they have done, and love that they are praised for what they have not done, should not think that they will escape from the punishment, but for them there is a painful punishment
3|189|to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and Allah has power over every thing
3|190|Surely! In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, surely there are signs for people of understanding
3|191|Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting, and lying on their sides, and they think deeply on the creation of the heavens and the earth, (say): “Our Lord! You have not created all this without purpose. Glory is to you (Allah)! Save us from the punishment of the fire
3|192|Our Lord! Surely, those whom You admit to the fire, indeed You have disgraced them, and there will be no helpers for the wrongdoers
3|193|Our Lord! Surely, we have heard the call of one (Muhammad) calling to faith (saying): ‘Believe in your Lord,’ so we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, remove from us our evil deeds, and make us die with the truly righteous
3|194|Our Lord! Grant us what You promised us through Your Messengers and don’t disgrace us on the Day of Resurrection. Indeed You never break Promise
3|195|Their Lord answered to them: “I don’t let the good deed of any among you go to waste, whether male or female. Each of you is from the other (offspring). So those who emigrated, or were driven out from their homes, and those who were persecuted in My cause, and who fought, and were killed (in My cause); surely, I will remit from them their evil deeds and will certainly admit them to gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise), a reward from Allah. Allah holds best of rewards.”
3|196|Don’t be deceived by free movement and wealth of those who disbelieve in the land
3|197|Their enjoyment is brief. Their destination is hell; the worst resting place
3|198|But those who fear their Lord, for them are gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise). They will reside in it forever, hospitality from Allah. With Allah is best for the truly righteous
3|199|Certainly, among people of the Scripture, there are those who believe in Allah and what has been revealed to you (Muhammad) and what has been revealed to them (before you). They bow in humility to Allah; they don’t sell the Verses of Allah for a little price. For them, their reward is with their Lord. Surely, Allah is Swift to take account
3|200|O you who believe! Be steadfast, be more patient (than enemy), firmly guards against enemy, and fear Allah; so that you may be successful
4|1|O mankind! Fear your Lord, Who created you from a single person (Adam), created from him his mate (Eve), and spread from both of them many men and women. Fear Allah through Whom you demand (your rights), and (don’t cut relations of) the wombs (kinship). Surely, Allah is All-Watcher over you
4|2|And give orphans their wealth (when they are able to handle), don’t exchange your bad things for their good ones, and don’t devour their wealth by adding it to your wealth. Surely, this is a great sin
4|3|And if you fear that you shall not be able to do justice with the orphans, then marry women (without orphan child) of your choice: 2, 3, or 4. But if you fear that you will not be able to do justice (between wives), then marry only one or what your right hands possess (your captives). That is nearer to prevent you from doing injustice
4|4|And give women (whom you marry) their dower (as obligation) willingly. But if they willingly give up to you any part of it on their own, then you may enjoy it without fear of any harm
4|5|And don’t give your wealth (for business) to foolish people which Allah has made a means of support for you (your family); but feed them from it, clothe them, and speak to them with good words
4|6|And test the orphans (their abilities) until they reach the age of marriage. Then if you perceive them mature minded, then deliver to them their wealth. You don’t eat it wastefully and hastily (fearing) that they would grow up (and demand it). Whoever (amongst guardians) is rich, should abstain entirely (from taking wages for taking care of their wealth), and whoever is poor, let him take what is just and reasonable. When you deliver their wealth to them, take witness in their presence. Allah is All-Sufficient in taking account
4|7|There is a share for men from what is left by parents and near relatives and a share for women from what is left by parents and near relatives: whether the property is small or large, a legal share
4|8|And if the relatives, orphans, and the poor come (at the time of) division of an inheritance, then give them something out of it, and speak to them kind words
4|9|And let those (executors and guardians) have the same fear in their minds as they would have for their own if they were to leave weak offspring behind. So fear Allah and speak right and fair words
4|10|Surely, those who eat up (misuse) wealth of orphans wrongfully, they eat up only fire in their bellies, and they will soon be burnt in the blazing fire
4|11|Allah commands you regarding your children (inheritance): share of one male (son) shall be equal to share of 2 females (daughters). If there are more than 2 daughters, then for them is 2/3rd of what was left (inheritance); and if there is only one daughter, then her share is ½. For parents, each one of them will get 1/6th of what was left if the deceased left children behind, and if the deceased left no children and the parents are only heirs, then the mother shall get 1/3rd and if the deceased left brothers or (sisters), then the mother will get 1/6th. (This distribution in all cases shall be) after fulfilling the terms of the (last) will and the payment of debts. With respect to parents and children, you don’t know who is more beneficial to you; therefore Allah has issued this ordnance. Indeed Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|12|For you is ½ of what left of your wives if they did not leave a child. If they had a child, then for you a 1/4th of what they left after fulfilling the term of their (last) will and the payment of debt. For your wives a 1/4th of what you have left if you did not leave a child. If you leave a child, then for them is 1/8th of what you have left behind, after fulfilling the terms of your (last) will and the payment of debt. If man or woman is testator having no parents and children or women but has a brother or a sister, then for each one of the 2 is a 1/6th. But if they are more than 2, then they shall share in a 1/3rd after fulfilling the terms of the (last) will and the payment of debt, without being harmful (no loss to anyone). This is the commandment from Allah. Allah is All-Knowing, Forbearing
4|13|These are limits (set by) Allah and whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), will be admitted to gardens under them the rivers flow (Paradise) to abide therein, and that will be the great success
4|14|And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), and transgresses His limits, He will admit them to fire, they will abide in it forever; and they will have a disgraceful punishment
4|15|And those of your women who commit lewdness (illegal sexual intercourse), call to witness against them 4 of you; and if they bear witness, then confine them (i.e. women) in their houses until the death comes to them or Allah makes for them a way
4|16|And those 2 (man and woman) who commit (illegal sexual intercourse) among you (married or unmarried), punish them both. And if they repent and mend their ways (do good deeds), then leave them alone. Surely, Allah is Acceptor of the repentance, Merciful
4|17|Surely, (acceptance of) repentance by Allah is for those who do evil in ignorance, then they repent soon; and for those Allah accepts their repentance. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|18|And the repentance is not for those who do evil deeds until when one of them faces death and says: “Surely I repent now;” or those who die while they are disbelievers. We have prepared for them a painful punishment
4|19|O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women by force and you don’t put constrains upon them, that you take away a part of (dowry) you have given them, unless they commit open lewdness (illegal sexual intercourse), and live with them honorably. If you dislike them, it may be that you dislike a thing and Allah has placed in it much good
4|20|But if you intend to replace your wife by another and you have given one of them a heap of gold (as dowry), don’t take away anything from her. Would you take it by slander and with clear sin (accuse her unjustly)
4|21|And how you could take it back when one of you has gone in to another (with happiness), and they have taken from you a firm pledge (of marriage)
4|22|And don’t marry woman whom your fathers married, except what has happened before. Indeed it was lewdness and admonition, and an evil way
4|23|Forbidden to you (for marriage) are: your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your father’s sisters, your mother’s sisters, your brother’s daughters, your sister’s daughters, your (foster) mothers who gave you suck, your (foster) milk suckling sisters, your wife’s mothers, your step daughters who are under your guardianship; born from your wives you had conjugal relations with them, but if you did not have conjugal relations with them then there is no sin on you (to marry their daughters), the wives of your sons who are from your own side, and 2 sisters in wedlock at the same time, except what happened before. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|24|(Also forbidden are) married women, except those (captives) whom your right hands possess. This is a decree of Allah upon you. Allah has made lawful for you those who are beyond these limits that you seek (them in marriage) by your wealth (with bridal gift) desiring chastity, not sin (commit illegal sexual intercourse). You benefit from them (enjoy sexual relations), give them their bridal-due as a duty; and there is no sin on you for what you mutually agree after its prescription. Surely, Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|25|And whoever of you is not able to afford that he marries free believing women, (they may wed) believing girls from among those (captives) whom your right hands possess, and Allah knows all about your faith, you are one from another. Then marry them with permission of their guardians and give them their bridal-due in a fair manner; they (the above said captive girls) should be chaste (in wedlock), not adulterous, nor give secret love affairs. When they are married, if they commit lewdness (illegal sexual intercourse), then upon them (punishment is) ½ of what is upon the free (unmarried) women. This is for those who fear (falling into) sin but it is better for you that you practice self-restraint. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|26|Allah wishes to make clear to you, and guide you to ways of those who were before you, and to accept repentance of you, and Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|27|Allah wishes to accept your repentance, wishes those who follow their lusts that you (believers) should deviate far away (from the Right Way)
4|28|Allah wishes to lighten (burden) for you; and human was created weak (by nature)
4|29|O you who believe! Don’t eat up your wealth between you unjustly except that it is trading by mutual consent among you. You don’t kill yourselves. Surely, Allah is Merciful to you
4|30|And whoever commits that through aggression and injustice, We shall burn him in fire, and that is easy for Allah
4|31|If you avoid major sins that you are forbidden to do, We shall forgive your (minor) sins, and admit you to a noble entrance (Paradise)
4|32|And don’t envy what Allah has conferred abundantly to some of you over (others). For men there is reward for what they earned, (and likewise) for women there is reward for what they earned. Ask Allah of His Bounty. Surely, Allah is All-Knower of everything
4|33|And to everyone, We have appointed heirs of that (wealth) left by parents and relatives. To those with whom your right hands made covenant, give them their (by wills) due share. Truly, Allah is a Witness over everything
4|34|Men are the protectors and maintainers of women because Allah has conferred abundantly one of them over others, and because they spend (to support) from their wealth. Therefore the righteous women are devoutly obedient (to Allah and to their husbands) who guard in husband’s absence what Allah has ordered them to guard (their chastity, their husband’s property). But those women whom you fear their rebellion, admonish them (first), and (then) leave them (alone) in the beds, (and last) beat them (lightly, if it is useful), then if they obey you, then don’t seek against them a way (excuse to punish). Surely, Allah is High, Great
4|35|If you fear a breach between the 2 (man and his wife), then appoint an arbitrator from his family and an arbitrator from her family; if they both wish to set things right, Allah will bring reconciliation between them. Indeed Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware (of every thing)
4|36|Worship Allah and don’t associate with Him anything (in worship), and do good to parents, relatives, orphans, the needy, the neighbor (who is) relative, the neighbor (who is) a stranger, to the companion by your side, the wayfarer (you meet), and those captives possessed by your right hands. Surely, Allah does not love one who is proud and boastful
4|37|those who are stingy and command others with stinginess and who hide the bounties which Allah has given them. And We have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment
4|38|And (also) those who spend their wealth to be seen by people, and don’t believe in Allah and the Last Day, and those who take Satan as a companion; then what a bad companion (they have)
4|39|And what loss they would have if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day, and spend out what Allah has given them for sustenance? Allah is All-Knower of them
4|40|Surely! Allah does not do wrong (not even) weight of an atom. If there is a good (done), He doubles it, and gives (extra) with a great reward from Him
4|41|How (will it be) then when We bring from each community a witness and We bring you (O Muhammad) a witness against these people
4|42|On that Day (of Judgment) those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger (Muhammad) will wish if they were leveled (buried) with the earth, for they will not (be able to) hide any matter from Allah
4|43|O you who believe! Don’t offer the prayer while you are intoxicated until you know (the meaning) of what you utter, nor when you are defiled (or in a state of sexual impurity) except when passing on way (traveling) until you wash yourselves. If you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you came from a toilet, or you had a sexual contact with women but did not find water, then do Tayammum with clean earth and rub with it your faces and your hands. Truly, Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving
4|44|Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book? They purchased error (wrong way), and they wish that you (believers) lose the Right Way
4|45|Allah knows well your enemies. Sufficient is Allah as a Protector, and sufficient is Allah as a Helper
4|46|Among those who are Jews (some of them) change words from their right places and they say: “We hear and we disobey,” and “Hear us and (let you O Muhammad) hear nothing.” And ‘Raina’ (an evil word used in Arabic in those days) with a twist of their tongues and a mockery of the religion (Islam). If they had only said: “We hear and we obey”, and “Hear us and look at us (to make us understand),” it would have been better for them, and more proper. But Allah has cursed them due to their disbelief, so they don’t believe except a few
4|47|O you who have been given the Scripture! Believe in what We have revealed (to Muhammad) confirming what is (already) with you, before We wipe out your faces and turns them to their backs, or curse them as We cursed the people of Sabbath-breakers. The Commandment of Allah is executed
4|48|Surely, Allah does not forgive that a partner is ascribed to Him, and He forgives other than that to whom He wills. Whoever associates anyone with Allah, indeed has devised a tremendous sin
4|49|Have you not seen those who claim purity (though they believe in sharing partners with Allah) for themselves? Although it is Allah who purifies whom He pleases, and they will not be wronged the least even equal to the thread of a date-stone
4|50|See how they invent a lie against Allah, and it is enough to be a clear sin
4|51|Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book? They believe in baseless superstitions and false deities (forces of Satan) and they say to those who disbelieved that they are better guided than those who believed to the Right Way
4|52|They are those whom Allah has cursed, he whom Allah curses can find no helper
4|53|or do they have a share in the dominion? Then they would not give people even a speck on the back of a date-stone
4|54|Or do they envy people (Muhammad and his followers) on whom Allah has given from His Bounty? Indeed We had already given family of Abraham the book, the wisdom, and gave them a great kingdom
4|55|Of them who believed in him (Muhammad), and of them were some who turned away their faces from him. Hell is sufficient for a blaze
4|56|Surely! Those who rejected Our Verses, We shall burn them in fire. As often as their skins are burnt out, We shall change them for other skins so that they may taste the punishment. Truly, Allah is Mighty, All-Wise
4|57|Those who believe and do good deeds, We shall admit them to gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), abide in it forever. For them will have purified spouses, We shall admit them to shades wide and ever deepening
4|58|Surely! Allah commands you that you should deliver the trusts back to (those who are) worthy of them (rightful owners), and when you judge between people, you judge with justice. Surely, He excellently teaches you. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer
4|59|O you who believe! You obey Allah and you obey the Messenger (Muhammad), and those among you having authority. Then if you dispute among yourselves in anything, refer it to Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is better and more suitable (for final) determination
4|60|Have you not seen those (hypocrites) who claim that they believe in what has been sent down to you (O Muhammad), and what was sent down before you? They wish that they go for judgment (in their disputes) to fake judges though they were ordered that they reject it. But Satan wishes to mislead them far astray
4|61|When it is said to them: “Come to what Allah has sent down and to the Messenger (Muhammad),” you (Muhammad) see the hypocrites turn away from you with dislike
4|62|How then (they behave) when a calamity befalls them for what their hands have sent forth? They come to you (Muhammad) swearing by Allah: “Surely, we want only goodwill and reconciliation.”
4|63|They (hypocrites) are those of whom Allah knows what is in their hearts; so turn away from them, admonish them, and speak to them about themselves with penetrating (effective) words
4|64|We never sent a Messenger, but who obeyed by Permission of Allah. If they (hypocrites), when they wronged themselves, they could have come to you (Muhammad) and asked forgiveness of Allah, and the Messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Forgiving, Merciful
4|65|But no (O Muhammad), by your Lord, they will not believe until they accept you as a judge in their disputes between them, and they don’t find in themselves any resistance on what you have decided, and accept with full submission
4|66|And if We had enjoined upon them (saying): “You kill yourselves (the innocent ones kill the guilty ones) or leave from your homes,” they would not have done it except very few of them. If they had done what they were commanded of it, it would have been better for them, and would have added (to their faith) firmness
4|67|and then We would have given them a great reward from Ourselves
4|68|and We would have guided them to the Right Way
4|69|And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad), they will be with those upon whom Allah has bestowed (Allah’s) blessings - the prophets, the truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous. How excellent these companions will be
4|70|That is the Bounty from Allah, and Allah is sufficient as All-Knower
4|71|O you who believe! You take your precautions, and advance in groups or advance all together
4|72|Indeed among you is one who lags behind (from fighting in Allah’s cause). Then if a calamity befalls you, he says: “Indeed Allah has bestowed (Allah’s) blessings upon me that I was not present with them.”
4|73|But if a Bounty from Allah befalls you, he would say as if there had not been affection between you and him: “(I wish) I had been with them; then I would have achieved a great success.”
4|74|Let those (believers) who fight in the way of Allah only be (those) who sell life of this world in exchange of the Hereafter. Whoever fights in the way of Allah and is killed or gets victory; We shall grant a great reward
4|75|And what (is wrong) with you that you don’t fight in the Way of Allah (to help) the weak (and oppressed) among men, women, and children, who say: “Our Lord! Bring us out of this town whose people are oppressors; and appoint for us from You a protector, and appoint for us from You a helper?”
4|76|Those who believe, fight in the way of Allah. Those who disbelieve, fight in the way of Satan. So you (believers) fight against the friends of Satan. Surely strategy of Satan is weak
4|77|Have you not seen those when it was said to them to hold back their hands (from fighting) and establish the prayer, and pay obligatory charity? Now, when the fighting is enjoined upon them, then a group of them fear people as they should have feared Allah or even greater fear, and say: “Our Lord! Why have You ordained on us the fighting? Why did not You defer it for us for another (short) period?" Say (to them): “Enjoyment of this world is short.” The Hereafter is better for whoever fears Allah, and you shall not be (treated unjustly) in the least (even equal to the thread of a date-stone)
4|78|Wherever you may be, death will overtake you even if you are in fortified towers. If a good happens to them, they say: “This is from Allah,” but if an evil befalls them, they say: “This is from you (O Muhammad).” Say: "All are from Allah," so what (is wrong with) these people that they don’t seem to understand any word
4|79|Whatever reaches to you of good, is from Allah, but whatever befalls you of evil, is from yourself. And We have sent you (Muhammad) for mankind as a Messenger, and Allah is Sufficient as a Witness
4|80|Whoever obeys the Messenger (Muhammad) has indeed obeys Allah, and whoever turns away, then We have not sent you (O Muhammad) over them as a watcher
4|81|They say: “We are obedient,” but when they leave your (Muhammad’s) presence, some of them spend night (planning) other than what you have said. But Allah records what they spend night (planning). So turn from them, and put your trust in Allah. Allah is All-Sufficient as a Trustee
4|82|Do they not ponder over the Qur’an? Had it been from other than Allah, surely they would have found many contradictions in it
4|83|Whenever there comes to them a matter of peace, or fear, they spread it; but if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those having authority among them, it would have been known by those who may infer (right conclusions) from them. If there had not been the Bounty of Allah on you and Allah’s Mercy, surely you would have followed Satan, except a few
4|84|Then fight (O Muhammad) in the way of Allah, you are not accountable except for yourself. Urge the believers (to fight), may be that Allah will restrain evil of those who disbelieved. And Allah is Stronger in might and Stronger in punishment
4|85|Whoever intercedes for a good cause, will have a share of it, and whoever intercedes for an evil cause will have a burden of it. And Allah has control over everything
4|86|When you are greeted with a greeting, you greet better than that, or return it equally. Indeed, Allah keeps account over everything
4|87|Allah! There is no one worthy of worship but Allah. Surely He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection; there is no doubt in it. Who is more truthful than Allah in statement
4|88|Then what is the matter with you regarding the hypocrites (that you have become) 2 parties? Allah has cast them back (to disbelief) for what they have earned. Do you want that you guide whom Allah lets go astray? Whoever Allah lets go astray, you will not find any way for them
4|89|They wish that if you disbelieve, as they disbelieve, you become alike. So you should not take friends from them, till they emigrate in the Way of Allah. But if they turn back (from Islam), seize them, kill them wherever you find them, and neither you take from them a friend nor a helper
4|90|except those who join a group, between you and between them there is a treaty of peace, or those who come to you restraining their hearts that they fight you or they fight their own people. Had Allah willed, He would have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. So if they withdraw from you, don’t fight against you, and offer you peace, then Allah has not made for you a way (to fight) against them
4|91|You will find others (hypocrites) who wish that they be secure from you and they be secure from their people. Whenever they return to a mischief, they plunge into it. So if they don’t withdraw from you, nor offer you peace, nor they restrain their hands, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them. Those people, We have made for you against them a clear sanction
4|92|It is not (appropriate) for a believer to kill a believer except by mistake. Whoever kills a believer by mistake, then it is commanded to free a believing captive and blood-money (compensation) be paid to his (deceased’s) family, except that they remit it as a charity. If he is from enemy people to you and is a believer; then freedom of a believing captive (is sufficient). If he is from people between you and between them is a covenant, then blood-money is paid to the family, and freedom of a believing captive. But whoever does not find it (means to free a captive and or blood-money), then fast for 2 consecutive months seeking repentance from Allah. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|93|And whoever kills a believer intentionally, the punishment is to abide in the hell forever. He will incur the wrath of Allah, Allah will lay curse on him, and prepared a great punishment
4|94|O you who believe! When you go forth (to fight) in the way of Allah, don’t distinguish and say to whoever offers to you greetings of peace: “You are not a believer” seeking advantage of life of this world. Allah has abundant booties like this for you. (Remember what) you were before but then Allah graced upon you. So distinguish (carefully before considering anyone disbeliever). Surely Allah is Well-Aware of what you do
4|95|Not equal are those of the believers who sit (at home), except those who are handicapped (disabled), and those who strive in the way of Allah with their wealth and their lives. Allah has exalted those who strive with their wealth and their lives over those who sit in rank (at home). To each, Allah has promised good (Paradise), and Allah has graced those who strive above those who sit (at home) with a great reward
4|96|(higher) ranks from Him, and forgiveness and Mercy. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|97|Surely! Those whom the angels caused death while they have wronged themselves, they (angels) say to them: “In what (condition) were you?” They reply: “We were oppressed in the earth.” They (angels) say: “Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough (for you) to emigrate in it?” Those people will find their abode in hell, an evil destination
4|98|Except the oppressed ones from men, women and children who cannot devise a plan, and they cannot direct their way
4|99|these people may be that Allah will pardon them. Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving
4|100|Whoever emigrates in the way of Allah, will find in the earth many places of refuge and abundant resources. Whoever leaves from home as an emigrant of Allah and His Messenger and then death overtakes him; surely reward is incumbent upon Allah. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|101|When you travel in the earth, there is no sin on you to shorten your prayer if you fear that those who have disbelieved will harm you. Surely, the disbelievers are for you open enemies
4|102|When you (O Muhammad) are among them, and you lead them in prayer (during war), let a group of them stand (in prayer) with you and let them take their arms (with them). When they finish prostrations, then let them (take positions) in your rear and let other group come up who has not yet prayed to pray with you, and let them take their precaution and their arms. Those who disbelieve wish, if you neglect your arms and your baggage, then they could jump upon you in a single rush. But there is no blame on you if you lay aside your arms due to inconvenience with you of rain or that you are sick, but take precaution for yourselves. Surely, Allah has prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers
4|103|When you have finished the prayer, remember Allah standing, sitting, and on lying your sides, but when you are secure (from danger), establish prayer. Surely, the prayer is enjoined on the believers at fixed time
4|104|Don’t be weak in pursuit of these people (enemy); if you are suffering hardships, they too are suffering hardships as you are suffering; while you hope from Allah the reward what they don’t hope, Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|105|Surely, We have sent down to you (O Muhammad) the book (this Qur’an) with the truth so that you may judge between the people with what Allah has shown you, and you don’t be an advocate for those who are treacherous
4|106|And seek forgiveness of Allah, indeed Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|107|And don’t argue for those who deceive themselves. Indeed, Allah does not like anyone who is treacherous and sinful
4|108|They may hide (their crimes) from people, but they cannot hide from Allah. As He is with them even when they plot by night in words what He does not approve. And Allah encompasses of what they do
4|109|You may have argued for them in the life of this world, but who will argue with Allah for them on the Day of Resurrection, or who will be over them their defender
4|110|Whoever does evil or wrongs against own soul then seeks forgiveness of Allah, will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful
4|111|Whoever commits a sin, only earns against own soul. And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|112|Whoever commits a fault or a sin and then throws it on an innocent one, indeed burdens own soul with false charge and flagrant sin
4|113|Had it not been the grace of Allah upon you (O Muhammad) and His Mercy, even if a group of them had decided that they would mislead you, but in fact they did not mislead except themselves, and they did not harm you in the least. Allah has sent down to you the book (the Qur’an), the wisdom, and taught you what you did not know. The Grace of Allah upon you (Muhammad) is great
4|114|There is no good in most of their secret talks except one who commands in charity, or good deeds, or conciliation between people, and who does this, seeking the pleasure of Allah, We shall then give a great reward
4|115|Whoever opposes the Messenger (Muhammad) after what has become clear, and follows the guidance other than the way of the believers, We shall keep him to where he has chosen; burn him in hell - what an evil destination
4|116|Surely! Allah will never forgive the one who associates with Him. But other than that, He forgives whom He wills. Whoever associates others with Allah, has indeed misled misleading far away
4|117|They (Pagan Arabs worship others than Allah) don’t invoke besides Him but female deities, and they don’t invoke but rebellious Satan
4|118|Allah cursed Satan, who said: “I will take an appointed portion of your (Your) servants
4|119|I will mislead them, I will arouse in them false desires, I will order them, and they will cut off ears of the cattle. I will order them and they will change the creation of Allah.” Whoever takes Satan as a guardian besides Allah, certainly has suffered a clear suffering
4|120|He (Satan) makes promises to them, arouses in them false desires, and Satan does not promise them but deception
4|121|These people will have their abode is hell, and they will not find from it an escape
4|122|But those who believe (in the oneness of Allah) and do good deeds, We shall admit them to the gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), they will abide in it forever. Promise of Allah is true, and whose word is truer than Allah
4|123|(The final results will be) neither your desires nor desires of people of the Scripture. Whoever does evil, will be required to pay for it, and will not find besides Allah any protector or any helper
4|124|And whoever does good deeds, whether male or female, and is a believer, these people will enter Paradise and they will not be wronged even a speck on the back of a date-stone
4|125|And who can be better in religion than the one who submits face to Allah, is righteous, follows religion of Abraham the upright, and Allah did take Abraham as a friend
4|126|And to Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah is encompassing of everything
4|127|They ask you about women. Say: Allah instructs you about them, and what is recited to you in the book about orphan girls whom you don’t give them what was ordained for them (marriage-gift and inheritance) and yet you desire that you marry them. (Allah reminds you concerning) weak (and helpless) children among you that you stand for orphans with justice. Whatever good you do, indeed Allah is All-Aware of it
4|128|And if a woman fears cruelty or desertion of her husband, then there is no blame on both of them that they reconcile themselves between reconciliation; and reconciliation is better. The souls are swayed by greed. But if you do good and fear from evil, then surely, Allah is Well- Acquainted with what you do
4|129|You will never be able to do justice between wives even if you passionately desire, so don’t incline the whole inclination (to one of them with more time and provision), and leave others as hanging. But if you act rightly and fear Allah, then indeed Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|130|But if they separate (by divorce), Allah will make all independent (of each other and provide abundance) from His Bounty. And Allah is All-Sufficient, All-Wise
4|131|And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. Surely, We have advised those who were given the Scripture before you, and to you (O Muslims) that you fear Allah. But if you disbelieve (do at your own risk), then surely belongs to Allah what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and Allah is Rich (free of all wants), Praise-Worthy
4|132|And belongs to Allah what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah is All-Sufficient as a Defender of affairs
4|133|If He wills, He can take you away, O mankind, and bring others. And Allah is All-Potent over that
4|134|Whoever desires reward of this world, then (you should know that) with Allah alone is the reward of this world and the Hereafter. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer
4|135|O you who believe! You stand firm for justice as witnesses for Allah, though it is against yourselves, or parents, and relatives whether the party is rich or poor; Allah has more right than both of them. So you don’t follow your desires to do injustice. If you distort (facts) or you refrain, then (you should know that) Allah is Well-Aware of what you do
4|136|O you who believe! Believe in Allah, and His Messenger (Muhammad), and the book (the Qur’an) which He has sent down to His Messenger, and the Scripture which He has sent down before. Whoever disbelieves in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Last Day, then indeed is mislead a misleading far away
4|137|Surely, those who believe, then disbelieve, then believe again, and again disbelieve, then increase in their disbelief; Allah will neither forgive them, nor will guide them on the Right Way
4|138|Give tidings to the hypocrites that for them there is painful punishment
4|139|those who take the disbelievers as allies instead of believers. Do they seek honor for them? Surely, the honor is for Allah all together
4|140|And indeed He has sent down to you in the Scripture (this Qur’an) that when you hear the Verses of Allah being rejected and being mocked at, then you don’t sit with them, until they engage in a talk other than that; otherwise indeed you are like them. Surely, Allah will collect the hypocrites and disbelievers in hell all together
4|141|Those (hypocrites) are watching closely to you. If there is a victory for you from Allah, they say: “Were we not with you?” But if there is a chance (of success) for disbelievers, they say: “Did we not have mastery over you and did we not protect you from the believers (Muslims)?” Allah will judge between you and them on the Day of Resurrection. And Allah will never make for the disbelievers over the believers a way (to triumph)
4|142|Surely, the hypocrites (try to) deceive Allah, but it is He Who deceives them. And when they stand up to the prayer, they stand with laziness to be seen by the people, and they don’t remember Allah but little
4|143|(they are) swaying between this and that, neither to these nor to those. Whom Allah sends astray, you can never find for them a way (to Islam)
4|144|O you who believe! You don’t take the disbelievers as allies instead of believers. Do you wish that you give Allah against yourselves a clear proof
4|145|Surely, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire; and you will not find for them any helper
4|146|Except those who repent (from hypocrisy), mend their ways, hold fast to Allah, and purify their religion for Allah, they will be with the believers. And Allah will grant to the believers a great reward
4|147|Why should Allah punish you if you have thanked (Him) and you have believed (in Him)? Allah is All-Appreciative (of good), All-Knower
4|148|Allah does not like that words of evil should be uttered publicly except (by someone) who has wronged. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
4|149|If you disclose a good, or keep it secret, or pardon an evil; then surely, Allah is Forgiving, All-Powerful
4|150|Surely, those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and they wish that they differentiate between Allah and His Messengers, they say: “We believe in some and we disbelieve in others,” and they wish that they take between (belief and disbelief) a way
4|151|they are those disbelievers in truth. We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment
4|152|Those who believe in Allah and His Messengers, and they don’t differentiate between any one of them (Messengers), We shall give them their rewards. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
4|153|The people of the Scripture ask you that you cause to descend upon them a book from heaven. Surely they have asked Moses greater than that, they said: “Show us Allah in public.” So they were struck with a thunderbolt for their wickedness. Then they took (to worship) the calf even after what came to them with clear signs. (Even so) We forgave them and We gave Moses a clear authority
4|154|And We raised over them the mount (Tur) for their covenant, and We said to them: “Enter the gate prostrating with humility.” We also said to them: “You don’t violate (by doing worldly works in the) Sabbath (Saturday)." And We took from them a firm covenant
4|155|(Even then) they broke the covenant, rejected the Verses of Allah, and killed the prophets unjustly. They say: "Our hearts are wrapped (don’t understand what the Messengers say).” But Allah has set a seal upon them (hearts) due to their disbelief. So they don’t believe but a few
4|156|And they (went so far) in their disbelief that they uttered against Mary a mighty slander
4|157|And they say that: “We have killed Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, Messenger of Allah.” Neither did they kill him, nor did they crucify him, but (it was made) to resemble for them. Surely those who differed in it (they were) in doubt about it. They did not have any knowledge about it except following the guess and surely they did not kill him (Jesus)
4|158|Allah raised him (Jesus) up (with body and soul) to Himself (in the heavens). Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise
4|159|There is none of the people of the Scripture who will believe in this fact before their death. On the Day of Resurrection, he (Jesus) will be a witness against them
4|160|Due to the wrong-doing of those who call themselves Jews, and for their hindering many people from the way of Allah; We made unlawful to them certain foods (which had been) lawful for them
4|161|for their taking of usury though they were forbidden from taking it, and for their devouring of wealth of people wrongfully. And We have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment
4|162|But those among them who are firmly rooted in knowledge, and those believers who believe in what has been sent down to you (Muhammad) and what was sent down before you, and those who perform prayer, and who pay obligatory charity, and who believe in Allah and in the Last Day; it is they to whom We shall give a great reward
4|163|Surely, We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) just as We had revealed to Noah and the prophets after him. We also revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and (his) offspring, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, Solomon, and to David We gave the Psalms
4|164|And Messengers We have mentioned to you before, and Messengers We have not mentioned them to you, and Allah spoke to Moses (directly)
4|165|The Messengers are bearers of glad tidings and warners so that there is not any plea for people against Allah after the Messengers. Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise
4|166|Allah bears witness to that which He has sent down (the Qur’an) to you (Muhammad). He has sent it down with His knowledge, and the angels bear witness too. Allah is All-Sufficient as a Witness
4|167|Surely, those who disbelieve and prevent people from the way of Allah, surely they have strayed far away
4|168|Surely, those who disbelieve and do wrong, Allah will neither forgive them, nor He will guide them to any way
4|169|except way of hell, they will abide in it forever, and that is easy for Allah
4|170|O mankind! Surely, the Messenger (Muhammad) has come to you with the truth from your Lord. So believe in him, it is better for you. But if you disbelieve, then indeed to Allah belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
4|171|O people of the Scripture! Don’t exceed the limits in your religion. Don’t say of Allah but the truth only. The Messiah Jesus, son of Mary (no more than) a Messenger of Allah and His Word “Be” which He conveyed to Mary and a soul from Him (was created by Him in her womb). So believe in Allah and His Messengers, you don’t say: “3 (trinity)!” Give up, it is better for you. Only Allah is one worthy of worship. Glory is to Him far above that He should have a son. To Him belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah is All-Sufficient as a Guardian
4|172|The Messiah will never disregard that he be a servant to Allah, nor the angels near (to Allah). Whoever rejects from His worship and shows arrogance, He will certainly gather them all together before Himself
4|173|As for those who believe and do good deeds, He will give their due rewards, and give them more out of His Bounty. But as for those who refuse and show arrogance, He will punish them with a painful punishment. They will not find for them besides Allah any guardian or any helper
4|174|O mankind! Surely, there has come to you proof (Muhammad) from your Lord, and We have sent down to you a clear light (this Qur’an)
4|175|As for those who believed in Allah and held fast to Him, He will admit them to His Mercy and Grace (Paradise), and guide them to a Right Way
4|176|They ask you to pronounce a ruling. Say: “Allah pronounces for you a ruling about Al-Kalala (who leaves behind no heirs). If a man dies, he does not have a child and a sister, then for her is ½ (inheritance) of what he has left. He (brother) will inherit her (sister) if she does not have a child. If there are 2 (sisters), then for them are 2/3rd of what he left, and if they were (many) brothers (and sisters) male and female, then the male will have the 2 shares (twice) of females. (Thus) Allah makes clear to you lest you go astray. Allah is All-Knower of everything
5|1|O you who believe! Fulfill your obligations. Lawful to you (for food) are beasts of cattle except what is hereby recited to you. You are not allowed to hunt while you are in state of Ihram (Pilgrimage). Surely, Allah commands what He wills
5|2|O you who believe! Don’t violate (the sanctity of the) symbols of Allah, nor of the sacred month, nor of the animals (brought for sacrifice), nor of the garlanded (animals marked for security), nor the people coming to the Sacred House (Makkah) seeking the Bounty of their Lord and good pleasure. When you finish the Ihram (Pilgrimage), you may hunt. Let not the hatred of some people, who once stopped you from the Sacred Masjid (at Makkah), lead you to transgress. You help one another in righteousness and piety; and don’t help one another in sin and transgression. Fear Allah. Surely, Allah is Severe in punishment
5|3|Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead animal’s meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and what has been slaughtered as a sacrifice to other than Allah, (killed by) strangling and by a violent blow, and by a headlong fall, and by the goring of horns, and that devoured (partly eaten) by a beast except that slaughtered by you (before its death), and what slaughtered on altars (elevated places for sacrifice), and that you seek knowledge of your fate by dividing arrows. All these are sins (disobedience of Allah). This Day, those who have given up all hope, disbelieved of your religion. So you don’t fear them, but fear Me. This Day, I have perfected for you your religion, completed upon you My Favor, and has approved for you Islam as your religion. Whoever is forced by hunger, not inclined to sin (not eaten forbidden food), then surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
5|4|They ask you (Muhammad) what is lawful for them (as food). Say: “Lawful are made to you pure good things. What you have taught to hunting animals (beasts and birds of prey) train them for hunting; you teach them what (knowledge) Allah has taught you. So you may eat what they catch for you, but invoke the name of Allah on it, and fear Allah. Surely, Allah is Swift in reckoning.”
5|5|This Day made lawful to you are pure good things. Food of those who have been given the Scripture is lawful to you and your food is lawful to them. (Lawful to marry) chaste women from the believing women and chaste women from those who were given the Scripture before you, when you have given them their bridal due (given by husband to his wife at the time of marriage) desiring chastity not lewdness (illegal sex), nor taking them as secret companions (girl friends). Whosoever disbelieves in faith, their work will go to waste, and they will be in the Hereafter among the losers
5|6|O you who believe! When you stand up for the prayer, then wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, you wipe your heads, and wash your feet up to the ankles. If you are (in state of) Janaba (had sexual discharge), then purify yourself (take full bath). If you are ill or on a journey or one has come out from the toilet, or you have been in sexual contact (with wives), make Tayammum if you don’t find water, then look for clean earth and you wipe your faces and hands with it. Allah does not want to lay upon you any hardship, but He wants to purify you, and to complete His Favor upon you so that you may be thankful
5|7|You remember the Favor of Allah upon you and His covenant that He bound you with it when you said: “We hear and we obey.” You fear Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Knower of what is in your hearts
5|8|O you who believe! Be steadfast for Allah as witnesses in equity and let not enmity of people drive you to avoid justice, deal justly. That is nearer to piety, and fear Allah. Surely, Allah is Well-Aware of what you do
5|9|Allah has promised to those who believe and do good deeds, for them is forgiveness and great reward
5|10|Those who disbelieve and deny Our Verses, they will be companions of hellfire
5|11|O you who believe! Remember the Favor of Allah upon you when some people decided (made a plan) that they stretch (harm) you with their hands, but (Allah) held back their hands from you. So fear Allah. In Allah let the believers put their trust
5|12|Surely Allah took a covenant from the children of Israel, and We appointed among them 12 leaders. And Allah said: “Certainly I am with you if you establish the prayer, you pay obligatory charity, you believe in My Messengers, you assist them, and you lend to Allah a good loan (spend in charity). Surely, I will wipe out from you your evil deeds, and will surely admit you to gardens under them the rivers flow (in Paradise). But whoever disbelieved after this among you, indeed he has gone astray from Right Way.”
5|13|Then for their breach of their covenant, We cursed them, and made their hearts hard. They changed the words from their right context and they forgot a part of message what they were cautioned of it. You will not cease to discover treachery from them, except a few of them. But forgive them, and overlook (their misdeeds). Surely, Allah loves those who do good deeds
5|14|And from those who said we are Christians, We took their covenant, but they forgot a good part of that message they were cautioned of it. So We aroused among them enmity and hatred till Day of Resurrection, and Allah will inform them of what they used to do
5|15|O people of the Scripture! Indeed Our Messenger (Muhammad) has come to you, he makes clear to you much of that you used to conceal from the Scripture and passes over much. Surely, there has come to you from Allah a light (Muhammad) and a clear book (the Qur’an)
5|16|Allah guides with it those who seek His good pleasure ways of peace, and He brings them out from the darkness to the light by His will and guides them to the Right Way
5|17|Surely, those who disbelief say: “Surely Allah is the Messiah, son of Mary.” Say (O Muhammad): “Who then has power against Allah, if He decides that Allah will destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, his mother, and those who are all on the earth? To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and what is between them. He creates what He wills. And Allah is Powerful over everything.”
5|18|The Jews and the Christians say: “We are the children of Allah and His loved ones.” Say: “Why then He punishes you for your sins? But you are human being from those He created, He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills. To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, and to Him is the return.”
5|19|O people of the Scripture! Surely, has come to you Our Messenger (Muhammad), he makes things clear to you, after an interval of the Messengers, lest you say: “There has not come to us a bearer of glad tidings and not a Warner.” But surely now has come to you a bearer of glad tidings and a Warner. Allah is Powerful over everything
5|20|And (remember) when Moses said to his people: “O my people! You remember the Favor of Allah upon you. When He raised prophets among you, and made you kings, and gave you what He had not given to any one of the worlds
5|21|O my people! Enter the holy land which Allah has ordained for you, and you don’t turn on your backs, then you will turn as losers.”
5|22|They said: “O Moses! Surely, in the holy land are people of great strength, and we shall never enter it until they depart from it. If they depart from it, then we will enter it.”
5|23|frightened men on whom (Joshua and Caleb) Allah had favored (His Grace) said: “Enter (assault) upon them through the gate, and if you enter it, then indeed you will be victorious, and put your trust in Allah if you are believers.”
5|24|They said: "O Moses! We shall not even enter it as long as they are in it. So both you and your Lord go and you 2 fight, and we are sitting right here.”
5|25|He (Moses) said: “O my Lord! I don’t have control except on myself and my brother. So distinguish between us and between the disobedient people!”
5|26|(Allah) said: “Indeed it (the holy land) is forbidden to them for 40 years; they will wander (in disruption) in the earth. So you don’t grieve over the disobedient people.”
5|27|(O Muhammad) recite to them the story of 2 sons of Adam (Abel and Cain) in truth; when both offered a sacrifice (to Allah), and it was accepted from one of them but was not accepted from the other. He (latter) said (to the former): “Surely I will kill you.” He (former) said: “Surely, Allah accepts only from the pious
5|28|If you stretch your hand against me so that you kill me, I shall not stretch my hand against you so that I kill you, for I fear Allah; the Lord of the worlds
5|29|Surely, I desire that you be laden with my sin and your sin, and you become inmate of the fire, and that is the reward of the wrongdoers.”
5|30|Then his evil soul prompted him killing of his brother; and he killed him and became one of the losers
5|31|Then Allah sent a crow scratching in the earth so that it shows him how he may hide dead body of his brother. He (the murderer) said: “Woe to me! Am I not even able that I could be like this crow and could hide dead body of my brother?” Then he became from those who regretted
5|32|Because of that We ordained for children of Israel that whoever kills a person, except (as a punishment) for killing a person or for mischief in the earth, (it will be written) as if killed all mankind. Whoever saves a life, as if saves life of all mankind. Surely, Our Messengers came to them with clear signs, yet indeed many of them after that are those who committed excesses in the earth
5|33|The only recompense of those who wage war against Allah, His Messenger, and spread mischief in the earth is that they are killed or they are crucified or their hands and their feet are cut off from opposite sides, or be exiled from the land. That is disgrace for them in this world, and a great punishment in the Hereafter
5|34|except those who repent before you have power over them; so you should know that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
5|35|O you who believe! You fear Allah, you seek (the means of) approach to Him, and you strive hard in His Way so that you may succeed
5|36|Surely, those who disbelieve, if they have all that is in the earth, and as much as like therewith to ransom themselves from punishment on the Day of Resurrection, it will not be accepted from them, and for them is a painful punishment
5|37|They will wish that they come out of the fire, but they will not come out of it, and for them is a lasting punishment
5|38|You cut off their hands of male and female thief, as a recompense for what they have earned, an exemplary punishment from Allah. And Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise
5|39|But whoever repents after him (with forgiveness). Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
5|40|Do you not know that to Allah alone belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He wills and He forgives whom He wills. And Allah is All-Powerful over every thing
5|41|O Messenger (Muhammad)! Let not grieve you those who race each other into disbelief, of those who say: “We believe” with their mouths but their hearts don’t believe. Of those who have become Jews are listeners to falsehood, listeners to other people who have not come to you. They change the words from their context; they say: “If you are given this, you take it, but if you are not given this, then beware!” Whom Allah wills, falls into error, and you will never be able to do anything for him against Allah. Those are the ones whom Allah does not want to purify their hearts; for them there is disgrace in this world, and for them there is a great punishment in the Hereafter
5|42|They are listeners to falsehood, devourers of forbidden earnings. If they come to you (O Muhammad), then either judge between them, or turn away from them. If you turn away from them, then they will never harm you anything. If you judge, then judge between them with justice. Surely, Allah loves the just
5|43|But how they appoint you a judge while they have with them the Torah, in which there is the decision of Allah? Even after that, they turn away. Those are not believers
5|44|Surely, We have sent down the Torah (to Moses), wherein was guidance and light. The Prophets used to judge with it, whoever had submitted (to Allah) from those became Jews, so did scholars and Rabbis. They were entrusted the protection of the Book of Allah, and they were witnesses to it. So you don’t fear the people but fear Me, and you don’t sell My Verses for a little price. Whoever does not judge by what Allah has sent down; those are indeed the disbelievers
5|45|And Allah ordained for them in it (Torah) that: “Life for life, eye for eye, nose for nose, ear for ear, tooth for tooth, and wounds for retribution.” So whoever gives it up, it will be a compensation for him. And whoever does not judge by what Allah has sent down; those are they who are the wrongdoers
5|46|And We sent in their foot steps, Jesus, son of Mary, confirming what had come before him from the Torah, and We gave him the Gospel in which was guidance and light, and confirming what has come before him from the Torah, guidance, and an admonition for the pious
5|47|Let people of the Gospel judge by what Allah has sent down in it. Whoever does not judge by what Allah has sent down; those are they who are the transgressors
5|48|And We have sent down to you (Muhammad) the book (this Qur’an) in truth, confirming what came before it from the book and a watcher over it which has come to you from the truth. We have prescribed for each of you a law and a clear way. If Allah willed, He could have made you one nation, but to test you in what He has given you; so strive one with another in good deeds. To Allah is all of your return; then He will inform you about what you used to differ in it
5|49|And you (Muhammad) judge between them by what Allah has revealed and you don’t follow their desires, and beware of them lest they seduce you away from some of what Allah has revealed to you. If they turn away, then you know that only the wish of Allah is to punish them for some of their sins. Truly, many of the people are transgressors
5|50|Do they seek the judgment of ignorance? Who is better than Allah in judgment for a people who have firm faith
5|51|O you who believe! You don’t take the Jews and the Christians as allies, some of them are allies of others. Anyone of you takes them as allies, then he will be counted as one of them. Surely, Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
5|52|And you see those in whose hearts there is a disease (of hypocrisy), they hurry to them, saying: “We fear that a misfortune may befall us.” Perhaps that Allah brings a victory or a decision from His will, then they will become regretful on what they have concealed in themselves
5|53|Those who believe will say: “Are these the ones (hypocrites) who swore by Allah of their strongest oaths that they are with you (Muslims)?” Their deeds have gone to waste (because of hypocrisy), and they have become the losers
5|54|O you who believe! Whoever among you turns back from religion (Islam), Allah will bring a people whom He will love and they will love Him; humble towards the believers, strict towards the disbelievers, strive in the Way of Allah, and will not fear blame of a critic. That is the Grace of Allah, He grants whom He wills. Allah is All-Sufficient in resources, All-Knower
5|55|Your only friend is Allah, His Messenger, and those who believe - those who establish the prayer, give obligatory charity, and they are those who bow down
5|56|Whoever takes as friends: Allah, His Messenger, and those who have believe, then the party of Allah will be victorious
5|57|O you who believe! You don’t take as allies, those from among the people who were given the Scripture before you and the disbelievers, who have take your religion for mockery and fun. Fear Allah if you are true believers
5|58|When you call for prayer, they take it for a mockery and fun; because they are a people who don’t understand
5|59|Say: “O people of the Scripture! Are you opposing us except that we believe in Allah, and what has been sent to us and what was sent before us? Indeed most of you are transgressors.”
5|60|Say (O Muhammad): “Shall I inform you of those worse than that regarding recompense from Allah? They are those whom Allah has cursed, who have incurred His Wrath, and He had transformed some of them to monkeys and swine; who worshipped false deities; those are worse in rank (on the Day of Resurrection), and more astray from the Right Way
5|61|When they come to you, they say: “We believe.” But in fact they enter with disbelief and surely they go out with it. Allah knows what they are hiding
5|62|You see many of them hurrying in sin and transgression, and eating the forbidden earnings. Evil indeed is what they do
5|63|Why don’t the Rabbis and the scholars forbid them from their uttering sinful words and from their eating forbidden things? Evil indeed is what they have been performing
5|64|The Jews say: “Hands of Allah is tied up.” Their own hands are tied up and they are cursed for what they have said. But His hands are outspread. He spends Bounty as He wills. Surely, the revelation that has come to you from your Lord increases their rebellion and disbelief. We have cast among them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they kindled fire of war, Allah extinguished it; and they always strive on earth to spread mischief. And Allah does not like the mischief-makers
5|65|And if the people of the Scripture had believed and become pious, We would surely have wiped out from them their sins and would have surely admitted them to gardens of bliss (Paradise)
5|66|And if they had observed the Torah and the Gospel, and what has been sent to them from their Lord (the Qur’an), they would surely have gotten provision from above them and from beneath their feet. Among them are moderate people (on right course), and many of them are evil what they are doing
5|67|O Messenger (Muhammad)! Convey what has been sent down to you from your Lord. If you don’t do it, then you have not conveyed His Message. Allah will protect you from the people. Surely, Allah does not guide the disbelievers
5|68|Say (O Muhammad): “O people of the Scripture! You are not on anything (guided) till you observe the Torah and the Gospel, and what has been sent down to you from your Lord (the Qur’an).” Certainly this revelation (the Qur’an) which has come to you from your Lord will increase in many of them in rebellion and disbelief. So don’t grieve over the disbelievers
5|69|Surely, those who believe (Muslims) and those who became Jews and the Sabians and the Christians - whoever believed in Allah and the Last Day, and did good deeds, no fear shall be on them, nor they shall grieve
5|70|Surely, We took covenant of children of Israel and sent to them Messengers. Whenever a Messenger came to them with what not liked by them, some of them denied him, and some of them killed him
5|71|They thought that there will be no trial, so they became blind and deaf; then Allah turned to them (with forgiveness); but again many of them became blind and deaf. And Allah is All-Seer of what they do
5|72|Surely, those who disbelieved, say: “Indeed Allah is the Messiah (Jesus), son of Mary.” But the Messiah (Jesus) said: “O children of Israel! You worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.” Surely, whoever sets partners with Allah, then indeed Allah has forbidden Paradise, and its abode will be the fire. There are no helpers for the wrongdoers
5|73|Surely, those who disbelieved said: “Indeed Allah is 3rd of 3 (in Trinity).” But there is no one worthy of worship except One (Allah). If they don’t cease from what they say, surely a painful punishment will befall those who disbelieve among them
5|74|Will not then they turn (in repentance) to Allah and ask for His forgiveness? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
5|75|The Messiah (Jesus), son of Mary, is not except a Messenger. Certainly the Messengers have passed away before him. His mother (Mary) was a woman of truth. They both used to eat the food (as any other human). See how We make the Verses clear to them and see how they are deceived away (from the truth)
5|76|Say (O Muhammad): “Do you worship besides Allah something which has neither power for your harm nor for your benefit? Indeed, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.”
5|77|Say (O Muhammad): “O people of the Scripture! You don’t exceed limits in your religion other than the truth, you don’t follow desires of people who certainly went astray before, they misled many, and strayed from the Right Way.”
5|78|Those who disbelieved from the children of Israel were cursed by tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That was because they disobeyed and they were transgressing
5|79|They did not forbid each another from wrong deeds they committed. Evil indeed was what they used to do
5|80|You see many of them; they make friends with those who disbelieved. Evil indeed is that they themselves have sent forth for them. For that reason, they have incurred the Wrath of Allah, and they will abide forever in punishment
5|81|If they believed in Allah and the prophet (Muhammad), and what has been revealed to him (the Qur’an), they would not have taken disbelievers as friends, but many of them are disobedient (to Allah)
5|82|Surely, you will find most hostile among people in enmity to those who have believed (Muslims) are the Jews, and those who set partners with Allah. Surely you will find nearest of them in love to those who have believed (Muslims) are those who say: “We are Christians.” That is because amongst them are priests and monks, who don’t take pride
5|83|When they (monks and priests) hear what has been sent down to the Messenger (Muhammad), you see their eyes overflow with tears because they have recognized the truth. They say: “Our Lord! We believe; so write us down with the witnesses
5|84|Why should we not believe in Allah and in that which has come to us of the truth? We wish that our Lord will admit us (in Paradise) with the righteous people.”
5|85|So Allah rewarded them for what they said with gardens under them the flowing rivers (in Paradise), they will abide forever in it. Such is the reward of righteous people
5|86|But those who disbelieved and denied Our Verses, they shall be the inmates of the fire
5|87|O you who believe! Don’t make good things unlawful what Allah has made lawful to you, and you don’t transgress. Surely, Allah does not like the transgressors
5|88|And eat of what sustenance provided to you by Allah, lawful and good things. You fear Allah, in Whom you believe
5|89|Allah will not call you to account for unintentional things in your oaths. But He will call you to account for earnestly sworn in oaths. The penalty (for a broken oath) is feeding 10 needy people of average of what you feed your families; or clothing them; or freeing a captive. But whoever can not afford, then fasting for 3 days. That is expiation of your oaths when you have sworn. But keep your oaths. Thus Allah makes clear to you His Verses so that you may give thanks
5|90|O you who believe! Only intoxicants and game of chance (gambling) and sacrifices at altars (tribute to idols) and dividing arrows (lottery) are an abomination of handiworks of Satan. So avoid them so that you may attain success
5|91|Satan only wants to excite enmity and hatred between you with intoxicants and gambling, and hinder you from the remembrance of Allah and from the prayer. So, will you be of those who abstain
5|92|And obey Allah and obey the Messenger (Muhammad), and be aware. But if you turn away, then you should know that it is the duty only upon our Messenger to convey clearly
5|93|Those who believe and do righteous deeds, there is no sin for what they ate (in the past), if they fear Allah, believe, and do righteous deeds, then again they fear Allah and believe, and then (once again) they fear Allah and do good deeds (with perfection). Allah loves the righteous people
5|94|O you who believe! Allah will surely try you with something of the game which can be taken by your hands and your lances, so that Allah knows who fears Him unseen. Then whoever transgresses after that, there is a painful punishment
5|95|O you who believe! You don’t kill game when you are in a state of Ihram (for Pilgrimage). Whoever of you kills it intentionally, then penalty is like what was killed of cattle judged by 2 just men among you, an offering brought to the Ka’bah; or for expiation, feeding of needy or to that equivalent fasting so as to taste and grieve (punishment) of the deed. Allah has pardoned what is passed. But whoever repeats it, Allah will take retribution on him. Allah is All-Mighty, Lord of retribution
5|96|Lawful to you is game of water and its eating as provision for you and for travelers, but is forbidden to you hunting on land while you are in (a state of Ihram). And fear Allah to Whom you shall be gathered
5|97|Allah has made the Ka’bah, the Sacred House, an establishment for mankind, and the sacred month, animals of offerings, and their collars (garlanded). All this is so that you may know that Allah knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and that Allah knows everything
5|98|Know that Allah is severe in punishment and that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
5|99|It is not on the Messenger but to convey (the message). And Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal
5|100|Say (O Muhammad): “Are not equal bad thing and good thing, even though abundance of bad things may fascinate you.” So fear Allah, O people of understanding so that you may succeed
5|101|O you who believe! You don’t ask (questions) about things if they are made clear to you, they may trouble you. If you ask (questions) about these when the Qur’an is being revealed, they will be made clear to you. Allah has forgiven that and Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing
5|102|Indeed, people asked such questions before you, then on that account they became disbelievers
5|103|Allah has not instituted things like Bahira (a she-camel whose milk was spared for idols and nobody was allowed to milk it), or Saibah (a she-camel let loose for grazing for idols, and nothing was allowed to be carried on it), or a Wasilah (a she-camel set free for idols as it gave birth to a she-camel at its first delivery and then again at its second delivery) or Ham (a stallion camel freed from work for idols after it had finished a number of copulations assigned to it) (all these animals were liberated in honor of idols as practiced by pagan Arabs). But those who disbelieve invent a lie against Allah, but most of them don’t understand
5|104|And when it is said to them: “Come to what Allah has revealed and to the Messenger (Muhammad),” they say: “Sufficient for us what we found upon our forefathers,” even though their forefathers did not know anything nor they had guidance
5|105|O you who believe! Take care of your own selves. Whoever goes astray will not harm you when you are guided. To Allah all of you return, and then He will inform you of what you used to do
5|106|O you who believe! Take witness between you when any of you approaches the death while making a will with 2 just men among you, or 2 others from among other than you if you are traveling through the land and calamity of the death befalls you. You detain them both after the prayer, they swear by Allah if you doubt them saying: “We will not sell it for a price even if he is a near relative. We shall not conceal the Testimony of Allah, then indeed we will be among the sinners.”
5|107|Then if it is discovered that the 2 are guilty of sin, let 2 others stand forth in their places, nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right. Let the 2 swear by Allah saying: “Our testimony is truer than testimony of the other 2, and we have not transgressed, then indeed we will be among the wrongdoers.”
5|108|That is closer that they give evidence in its true nature or they fear that their oaths will be disproved after others’ oaths. So fear Allah and listen. And Allah does not guide those who are disobedient transgressors
5|109|On the Day when Allah will gather the Messengers and will say: “What answer you were given?” They will say: “We have no knowledge, surely, only You (Allah) are All-Knower of hidden things.”
5|110|(Remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): “O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My Favor to you and to your mother when I strengthened you with spirit of the holy (Gabriel), you spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity; and when I taught you the book and the wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel; and when you made from clay like the figure of a bird by My permission, and you breathed into it, and it became a bird by My permission, you healed the born-blind, and the lepers by My permission, when you raised the dead by My permission, when I restrained children of Israel from you when you came to them with clear proofs; and those who disbelieved among them said: This is nothing but clear magic.”
5|111|When I (Allah) revealed to the disciples (of Jesus) to believe in Me and My Messenger, they said: “We believe and bear witness that we are Muslims.”
5|112|(Remember) when the disciples said: “O Jesus, son of Mary! Does your Lord has power to send down to us table spread with food from the heaven?” Jesus said: “Fear Allah, if you are believers.”
5|113|They said: “We wish that we eat of it, our hearts be satisfied, we know that you have indeed told us the truth, and we be witnesses on that.”
5|114|Jesus, son of Mary, said: “O Allah, our Lord! Send down upon us a table from the heaven which will be a festival for us - for first and the last of us and a sign from You; and provide us sustenance, and You are best of sustainers.”
5|115|Allah said: “Surely I will send it down to you, but whoever disbelieves after that among you, then I will punish with a punishment such that I have not punished (like that) anyone of the worlds.”
5|116|And (remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): “O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you say to people: ‘Take me and my mother as 2 who are worthy of worship besides Allah?”’ Jesus will say: “Glory is to You! It was not for me that I say what I had no right to say. Had I said it, then surely You would have known it. You know what is in my soul and I don’t know what is in Your; truly, You know all of the hidden things
5|117|I did not say to them except what You commanded me of it that (say): ‘You worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord. I was over them a witness till I remained among them, but when You recalled me, You were the watcher over them, and You are a witness over everything
5|118|If You punish them, surely they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, surely You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.”’
5|119|Allah will say: “This is the Day the truthful will profit their truthfulness: for them are gardens with the rivers flowing under them (in Paradise) - they shall abide in it forever. Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. That is the great success.”
5|120|To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, what is in them, and He has power over everything
6|1|The praise is for Allah, Who has created the heavens and the earth, and made the darkness and the light; yet those who disbelieve in their Lord, they hold others as equal
6|2|It is He, Who has created you from clay, then decreed a term (you to die) and a determined term (you to be resurrected) with Him, yet you doubt
6|3|And it is the same Allah in the heavens and in the earth, He knows your secret and your open deeds, and He knows what you earn
6|4|Yet never comes to them a sign from Verses of their Lord, but they are turning away from it
6|5|Indeed, they have rejected the truth (the Qur’an and Muhammad) when it came to them. But soon news will come to them of that (the punishment) they used to mock at it
6|6|Have they not seen how many generations We have destroyed before them? We had established them (more powerful) on the earth such as We have not established for you. And We sent rain on them abundantly, and made the rivers flow under them. Then We destroyed them for their sins, and We raised after them other generations
6|7|And if We had sent down to you (O Muhammad) a book written on paper and they could have touched it with their hands, those who disbelieve still would have said: “This is not but obvious magic!”
6|8|And they say: “Why has not an angel been sent down to him?” If We had sent down an angel, the matter would have been decided then, and no respite would have been granted to them
6|9|and had We appointed him an angel, We would have made him in a human form, and We would have certainly caused confusion to them in what they are already confused
6|10|Indeed Messengers were mocked before you (O Muhammad), but those who ridiculed were surrounded by them the very thing what they were mocking at it
6|11|Say (O Muhammad): “Travel in the land and see what the end of the rejecters was.”
6|12|Say (O Muhammad): “To whom belongs what is in the heavens and the earth?” Say: “To Allah.” He has prescribed the Mercy for Himself. He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection, there is no doubt in it. Those who have ruined themselves, they will not believe
6|13|And to Him belongs all that exist in the night and the day, and He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
6|14|Say (O Muhammad): “Shall I take a guardian other than Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth? It is He who feeds and He is not fed.” Say: “Surely, I am commanded that I should be first who submit to Allah and should not be among the polytheists.”
6|15|Say: “I surely fear, if I disobey my Lord, the punishment of a mighty Day.”
6|16|Whoever is averted from it (punishment) that Day, surely (Allah) has Mercy on him. That is the obvious success
6|17|And if Allah touches you with affliction, then none can relieve it but He, and if He touches you with good, then He has power over every thing
6|18|And He is Omnipotent (Supreme Authority) over His servants, and He is the All-Wise, Well-Aware of everything
6|19|Say (O Muhammad): “What thing is greatest in evidence?” Say: “Allah is a witness between me and between you; and this Qur’an is revealed to me so that I may warn you with it and whoever it may reach. Do you surely bear witness that besides Allah there are others worthy of worship?” Say: “I don’t bear such a witness!” Say: “Allah is only the one worthy of worship. Indeed I am innocent of what you associate (with Allah).”
6|20|Those whom We have given the Scripture recognize him (Muhammad) as they recognize their sons. But those who lost their own selves will not believe
6|21|And who is greater wrongdoer than he who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His Verses? Surely, the wrongdoers will not attain success
6|22|On the Day when We shall gather them all together, We shall say to those who associated others (with Allah): “Where are your associates (false deities) to whom you used to assert?”
6|23|They will not have arguments but will say: “By Allah, our Lord, we were not polytheists.”
6|24|Look! How they lie against themselves! The lie will leave them what they invented
6|25|Among them there are those who (pretend that they) listen to you; but We have cast veils over their hearts, and deafness in their ears, so they can not understand it. Even if they see every sign, they will not believe in it. So much so that when they come to you, they argue with you. The disbelievers say: “This is not but tales of the ancients.”
6|26|And they forbid others from him (Muhammad) and they themselves keep away from him. They destroy not but their own selves and they don’t perceive it
6|27|If you could see when they will be held over the fire! They will say: “We wish we were sent back (to the world), then we would not deny the Verse of our Lord, and we would be among the believers!”
6|28|But it has become clear to them what they used to conceal before. Even if they were sent back (to the world), they would have reverted to what they were forbidden. Indeed they are the liars
6|29|And (today) they say: “There is no other life but our life of the world, and we will not be resurrected (on the Day of Resurrection).”
6|30|If you could see when they will be held to stand before their Lord! He will say: “Is this not the truth?” They will say: “Yes, our Lord!” He will say: “Then taste the punishment for what you used to disbelieve.”
6|31|Indeed they will suffer loss who denied meeting with Allah. When the Hour (doomsday) will come to them suddenly, they will say: “Alas for us over what we neglected in it.” They will carry the burden of their sins on their backs. Indeed evil is what they will bear
6|32|The life of this world is nothing but a play and a pastime. Abode of the Hereafter is better for those who fear Allah. Will you not then understand
6|33|Indeed We know that it grieves you (Muhammad) what they say: surely they don’t reject you, but the wrongdoers deny in the Verses (the Qur’an) of Allah
6|34|Indeed, many Messengers were rejected before you (O Muhammad), but they endured with patience that they were rejected, and they were hurt; till Our help reached them, and there is none who can alter the words of Allah. Surely, there has come to you news of those Messengers
6|35|If their dislike is hard on you, then see if you can seek a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the sky, so that you can bring them a sign. (You know) if Allah willed, He could have gathered them all on the guidance. So don’t be like the ignorant
6|36|It is only those who listen (to Muhammad), will respond. For the dead (disbelievers), Allah will raise them (on the Day of Resurrection), and then to Him they will be returned (for their recompense)
6|37|And they say: “Why not a sign has been sent down to him from his Lord?” Say: “Indeed Allah has power to send down a sign, but most of them don’t know (the wisdom behind it).”
6|38|There is no animal on earth and no bird that flies with its 2 wings, but are communities like you (who see the signs of Allah). We have not neglected anything in the book. Then to their Lord they shall be gathered
6|39|Those who reject Our Verses are deaf and dumb in the darkness. Whom Allah wills lets go astray and whom He wills guides on the Right Way
6|40|Say (O Muhammad): “What do you think if the punishment of Allah comes to you, or the last Hour comes to you, do you call anyone other than Allah? Answer if you are truthful!”
6|41|But to Him alone you will call, and He will remove the distress for which you have called upon Him if He wills. You will forget whoever you have associated (with Allah)
6|42|Surely, We did send Messengers to nations before you (O Muhammad). We seized them with misfortune and hardship, so that they might humble themselves
6|43|Why did they not humble themselves when Our punishment came to them? Because their hearts became hardened, and Satan made seem fair to them what they used to do
6|44|When they forgot the warning what they had been reminded therewith, We opened to them the gates of every pleasant thing, until when they were rejoicing in what they were granted, We seized them suddenly, and then they were plunged into despair
6|45|So last remnant of the people who did wrong were cut off. All praises are for Allah, Lord of the worlds
6|46|Say (to the disbelievers): “What do you think if Allah takes away your hearing and your sight, and seals up your hearts; who is there worthy of worship other than Allah who could restore them to you?” See how We present the Verses in various ways, yet they turn away
6|47|Say: “What do you think if the punishment of Allah comes to you suddenly or openly, will anyone be destroyed except the wrongdoers?”
6|48|And We have not sent the Messengers but bearers of glad tidings and warners. So those who believe and mend their life, then no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve
6|49|But those who reject Our Verses, the punishment will touch them for what they used to transgress
6|50|Say (O Muhammad): “I don’t say to you that I have the treasures of Allah, nor that I know the unseen; nor I say to you that I am an angel. I follow not but what is revealed to me.” Say: “Is it equal the blind and the seeing? Why do you not think?”
6|51|And (O Muhammad) warn with it (the Qur’an) those who fear that they will be gathered before their Lord, when there will be neither a protector nor an intercessor for them besides Him; so that they may fear Allah and keep their duty to Him
6|52|And don’t turn away those who invoke their Lord in the morning and the evening seeking His Favor. You are not accountable for their deeds and they are not accountable for yours. So if you turn them away, you shall be of the wrongdoers
6|53|Thus We have tested some of them (poor believers) with others (chiefs of Quraish) so that they might say: “Are these (poor) people whom Allah has favored from amongst us?” Does not Allah know better the thankful ones
6|54|When those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say: “Peace be upon you.” Your Lord has made the Mercy incumbent upon Himself. If any one of you does evil in ignorance, then repents after that, and mends ways; then surely, He is Forgiving, Merciful
6|55|And thus We explain in detail the Verses, so that way of the sinners becomes clear
6|56|Say (O Muhammad): “I am forbidden that I worship those whom you call upon besides Allah.” Say: “I will not follow your desires, then I will go astray, and I will not be of the guided.”
6|57|Say (O Muhammad): “I am on a clear proof from my Lord, but you have rejected it. I don’t have (the punishment) which you are demanding hastily. The decision is not but for Allah: He declares the truth, and He is the best of the judges.”
6|58|Say: “If I had that power which you are asking for impatiently (the punishment), the matter would have been settled at once between me and you, but Allah knows the best the wrongdoers
6|59|And He has the keys of the unseen, none knows them but He. And He knows what is in the earth and the sea. There is not a leaf that falls but He knows it. There is neither a grain in darkness of the earth nor anything wet or dry, but is written in a clear book
6|60|It is He, Who recalls your souls by night (during sleep), and knows what you have done during the day, then He raises you again in it (next day) so that the appointed term (your life) is completed. To Him will be your return, then He will inform you of what you used to do.”
6|61|He is the Omnipotent (Supreme Authority) above His servants, and He sends over you guardians (angels), until when death approaches one of you. Our Messengers (angels) cause you to die (take soul), and they don’t neglect their duty
6|62|Then they (souls) are returned to Allah, their Lord, and the Just. Surely, He is the judge and He is the Swiftest in taking accounts
6|63|Say (O Muhammad): “Who saves you from the darkness of the land and the sea? When you call upon Him humbly and secretly (saying): ‘If He (Allah) saves us from this (danger), we shall be among the thankful.”’
6|64|Say (O Muhammad): “Allah saves you from this and from every distress, yet you associate partners with Allah.”
6|65|Say: “He has power to sends upon you punishment from above you or from under your feet, or covers you with mutual discord, and lets some of you taste violence of one another. See how We explain Verses in various ways, so that they may understand
6|66|But your people have denied it (the Qur’an) and the truth.” Say: “I am not a supervisor over you
6|67|For every prophecy there is a fixed time and soon you will know it.”
6|68|And when you (Muhammad) see those who engage in (argument with) Our revelations, turn away from them until they engage in a talk other than that (topic). If Satan causes you to forget (the commandment), then after the remembrance, you don’t sit with the wrongdoers
6|69|Those who fear Allah are not responsible from their (wrongdoers’) actions anything, but remind them so that they (wrongdoers) may fear Allah
6|70|And leave alone those who take their religion as a play and amusement, and are deceived by the life of this world. But remind them with it (the Qur’an) lest their souls are caught for what they have earned. Neither will be for them besides Allah a protector nor an intercessor, and even if they offer ransom for every ransom, it will not be accepted from them. They are those who are caught for what they earned. For them will be a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment because they used to disbelieve
6|71|Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): “Shall we invoke others besides Allah that can neither benefit us nor can harm us? Shall we turn on our heels after when Allah has guided us? Like those whom the Satan has misled in the earth confused, their companions call them to the guidance (saying): ‘Come to us.’” Say: “Surely, the Guidance of Allah is the only guidance, and we are commanded that we submit (become Muslims) to the Lord of the worlds
6|72|to offer prayer, fear Allah, and it is He to Whom you shall be gathered.”
6|73|It is He who has created the heavens and the earth in truth and on the Day (of Resurrection) He will say: “Be!” and it shall become. His word is the truth. The dominion will be His on the Day when the trumpet will be blown. He knows all the invisible and the visible. He is the Wise, aware of everything
6|74|And (remember) when Abraham said to his father Azar: “Do you take idols as deities? Surely, I see you and your people in clear error.”
6|75|Thus We showed Abraham kingdom of the heavens and the earth so that he becomes one of the firm believers
6|76|When the night outspread over him, he saw a star. He said: “This is my Lord.” But when it set, he said: “I don’t love those who set.”
6|77|When he saw the moon rising, he said: “This is my Lord.” But when it set, he said: “If my Lord don’t guide me, surely I shall be among the people who go astray.”
6|78|When he saw the sun rising, he said: “This is my Lord. This is the largest.” But when it set, he said: “O my people! Surely I am free from what you associate (with Allah)
6|79|Surely, I have turned my face to Him who has created the heavens and the earth, and exclusively I am not of the polytheists.”
6|80|His people disputed with him. He said: “Do you dispute with me about Allah, whereas He has guided me? I don’t fear what you associate with Him except that whatever my Lord wills; my Lord comprehends every thing (in His) knowledge. Then don’t you remember
6|81|Why should I fear what you associate with Allah, when you don’t fear what you associate with Allah, for which He has not sent down any authority to you? Which of the 2 parties has more right to security? (Tell me) if you know
6|82|Those who believe and don’t confuse their belief with wrong-doings, for them there is the security and they are the guided.”
6|83|That was Our argument which We gave to Abraham against his people. We raise in ranks whom We will. Surely your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knower of everything
6|84|We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob, We guided each of them, and before that, We guided Noah, and among his progeny David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. Thus We reward the righteous people
6|85|(Others include) Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias; all were of the righteous
6|86|and Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, Lot, and all We favored over the worlds
6|87|and from their forefathers, their progeny, and their brethren. We chose them and guided them to the Right Way
6|88|This is the guidance of Allah with it He guides whom He wills of His servants. If they had associated others with Allah, rendered vain from them what they used to do (deeds)
6|89|They were those whom We gave the book, sound judgment, and Prophethood. But if they disbelieve in it, then indeed We would entrust it to the people who are not disbelievers in it
6|90|(O Muhammad) they are those whom Allah had guided. So you follow their guidance. Say: “I ask you no reward for it (delivery of the message). This is not but a reminder for the worlds.”
6|91|They have not valued (the attributes of) Allah with a value due to Him when they said: “Allah did not send down to any human being any thing.” Ask (O Muhammad): “Who sent down the book (Torah) which Moses brought it, a light and guidance for mankind? You have put into sheets for people, you disclose some of it and you conceal most of it. Though you were taught (through the Qur’an) what neither you know nor your forefathers knew.” (If they don’t answer) say: “Allah (sent it).” Then leave them in their arguments they play
6|92|And this (the Qur’an) is a blessed book which We have sent down confirming (the revelations) which came before it, so that you may warn people of Mother of Towns (Makkah) and those around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter, will believe in it (the Qur’an), and they will guard over their prayers
6|93|Who is more unjust than the one who invents a lie against Allah, or says: “Revelation was sent down to me,” while no revelation has come to him? Or the one who says: “I will reveal like what Allah has revealed.” If you could see when the wrongdoers are in agonies of the death and the angels are stretching out their hands (saying): “Deliver your souls! This Day you shall be recompensed with the punishment of humiliation for what you used to utter against Allah other than the truth. You used to be arrogant concerning His Verses
6|94|And surely you have come back to Us all alone as We created you the first time. You have left behind what We had bestowed on you. We don’t see with you your those intercessors whom you claimed that they share with Allah (as partners) in your matters. Indeed (bonds) have been severed between you and have forsaken you what you used to claim.”
6|95|Surely! It is Allah who causes to split the grain and the fruit-stone. He brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living. Such is Allah, then how are you being misled (from truth)
6|96|(He) is the Cleaver (chopper) of the daybreak. He has made the night for resting, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. Such are the arrangements of the All-Mighty, the All-Knower
6|97|It is He Who has made for you the stars, so that you may guide yourselves by them in darkness of the land and the sea. Indeed We have made clear the revelations for people who know
6|98|It is He Who has created you from a single person (Adam), so there is a time-limit (on the earth) and a resting place (in the Hereafter). Indeed, We have made clear the Verses for people who understand
6|99|It is He Who sends down rain from the heaven, We bring thereby vegetation of every kind, We bring forth thereby green stalks, We bring forth from it thick-clustered grain and from date-palm and from its sprout clusters of dates hanging low, and gardens of grapes, olives and pomegranates resembling (in kind), and yet different. Look at its fruit when it bears fruit, and its ripeness. Surely! In all these are signs for people who believe
6|100|Yet, they make the jinns associates with Allah, though He has created them, and they falsely attribute to Him as sons and daughters without knowledge. He is glorified and exalted (far above) from what they attribute
6|101|He is the Originator of the heavens and the earth. How He can have a son when He did not have a mate? He has created every thing and He is the All-Knower of everything
6|102|Such is Allah, your Lord! There is no one worthy of worship but He, the Creator of every thing. So worship Him (alone) and He is the Guardian over every thing
6|103|No vision can grasp Him, but He grasps all visions. He is the Subtle, Well-Aware of everything
6|104|Surely, proofs have come to you from your Lord. So those who see will do so for their own self, and those who are blind, will do so against themselves. I (Muhammad) am not over you a keeper
6|105|Thus We explain the Verses in various ways, and they (the disbelievers) may say: “You have learned (from the Scriptures of the people and brought this Qur’an)” and that We may make it clear for the people who have knowledge
6|106|Follow what is revealed to you (O Muhammad) from your Lord, there is no one worthy of worship but He and turn away from the polytheists
6|107|If Allah willed, they would not have associated others with Him. He has not made you a watcher over them nor you are a guardian over them
6|108|And don’t insult those who (disbelievers) invoke other than Allah, lest they insult Allah wrongfully without knowledge. Thus We have made their deeds seem fair to each nation. Then to their Lord is their return and then He shall inform them of what they used to do
6|109|They swear by Allah their strongest oaths, that if a Verse came to them, they would surely believe in it. Say: “Only the Verses are with Allah.” What will make you realize that when those Verses come, they will still not believe
6|110|And We shall turn their hearts and their eyes (away from guidance), as they did not believe in it for the first time, and We shall leave them in their tyranny to wander blindly
6|111|Even if We had sent down the angels to them, the dead had spoken to them, and We had gathered before them every thing open (before their eyes), they would not have believed, unless that Allah willed, but most of them are ignorant
6|112|And so We have made for every Prophet an enemy - devils of humans and jinns, inspiring some of them to others with adorned speech as a deception. If your Lord had willed, they would not have done it, so leave them alone with what they fabricate
6|113|so that the hearts of those who don’t believe in the Hereafter may incline (to such deception), and they may be pleased with it; so that they may commit what they wish to commit (sins and evil deeds)
6|114|(Say O Muhammad): “Shall I seek a judge other than Allah who has sent down to you the book (The Qur’an) in details?” Those whom We gave (previously) the Scripture; they know that it is revealed from your Lord in truth. So you should not be of those who doubts
6|115|The Word of your Lord has been perfected in truth and justice. No one can change His Words. And He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
6|116|If you obey most of those on the earth, they will mislead you from the Way of Allah. They don’t follow but guess, and they don’t but lie
6|117|Surely, your Lord! It is He Who knows best who strays from His Way, and He knows best the rightly guided ones
6|118|So eat of that meat on which the name of Allah has been pronounced (during slaughter) if you are believers in His revelations
6|119|What happened to you that you don’t eat of that (meat) on which the name of Allah has been pronounced (during slaughter) when indeed He has explained to you what is forbidden to you, unless that you are constrained to it? Surely many lead people astray by their desires for lack of knowledge. Certainly your Lord knows best the transgressors
6|120|Abandon (all kinds of) sin, open and secret. Surely, those who earn sin, they will be recompensed for what they have committed
6|121|You don’t eat of that (meat) on which the name of Allah has not been pronounced (during slaughter), it is indeed a transgression. Indeed, the devils do inspire their friends (from mankind) so that they dispute with you, and if you obey them, then you would surely be polytheists
6|122|Can he who was dead (by ignorance and disbelief), whom We gave life (by knowledge and belief), and whom We gave a light (belief) of likeness by it (can walk) among people, be like the one who is in the darkness (disbelief) from which can never come out? Thus it is made seem fair to the disbelievers what they used to do
6|123|and thus We have set up in every town leaders of its wicked ones to plot in it. But they don’t plot except against themselves though they don’t perceive
6|124|When a sign (Verse of the Qur’an) comes to them, they say: “We shall not believe until we are given like what was given to the Messengers of Allah.” Allah knows best where to place His message. Humiliation from Allah and a severe punishment will soon overtake the criminals for what they used to plot
6|125|Whomever Allah wills to guide, He opens heart to Islam, and whomever He wills to let go astray, He makes heart closed, constricted, as if the soul is climbing to the sky. Thus Allah sets the wrath over those who don’t believe
6|126|whereas, this is the Right Way (Islam) of your Lord. Surely, We have detailed Our Verses for a people who take heed
6|127|For them there will be home of peace (Paradise) with their Lord. And He will be their protector for what they used to do
6|128|And on the Day when He will gather them all together (and say): “O you assembly of jinns! Surely, you have misled a lot from humans.” Their friends among the humans (will say): “Our Lord! Some of us benefited from some, and now we have reached our term which You had appointed for us.” He will say: “The fire is your residing place to reside in it forever, except what Allah wills.” Surely your Lord is All-Wise, the All-knower of everything
6|129|And thus We make some of the wrongdoers friends of some for what they used to earn (in the world)
6|130|(Allah will ask): “O assembly of jinns and mankind! Did not there come to you Messengers from among you, reciting to you My Verses and warning you of your meeting of this Day?” They will say: “We bear witness against ourselves.” It was this worldly life that deceived them. They will bear witness against themselves that they were disbelievers
6|131|This is because your Lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were unaware
6|132|For every one there will be ranks for what they did. Your Lord is not unaware of what they do
6|133|And your Lord is Self-Sufficient, full of Mercy. If He wills, He can destroy you away, and replace you with others as He wills, just as He raised you from the offspring of other people
6|134|Surely, what you are promised is bound to pass and you can not escape (the punishment of Allah)
6|135|Say (O Muhammad): “O people! Work in your place, surely, I too am at work (in my way), soon you will know who will be happy for the reward of the house (Paradise). Surely, the wrongdoers will not succeed.”
6|136|And they assign to Allah a share of the tilth (produce) and the cattle which He has created, and they say: “This is for Allah,” so they presume, and “this is for our partners (of Allah).” But what is for their partners (of Allah) does not reach Allah, while what is for Allah reaches to their partners (of Allah)! Evil is what they judge
6|137|Likewise to many of the polytheists, killing of their children for their partners (of Allah) have made seem fair so that they ruin them and so that they confuse them in their religion. If Allah had willed, they would not have done it. So leave them alone with what they fabricate
6|138|They say that these (certain types of) cattle and crops are forbidden, none should eat them except those whom we allow. They presume (certain types of) cattle are forbidden to use their backs (for loads or any work), and they did not pronounce the name of Allah on cattle (during slaughter); made false fabrication against Him (Allah). He will recompense them for what they used to fabricate
6|139|They say: “What is in bellies of these cattle (milk or fetus) is exclusively for our males, and forbidden to our females, but if it is born dead, then they all have shares in it.” He will punish them for their attribution (superstitions). Surely, He is All-Wise, All-knower of everything
6|140|Indeed those who have killed their children foolishly without knowledge suffered loss, and they have made unlawful what sustenance Allah has provided them, inventing a lie against Allah. Surely they have gone astray and they are not guided ones
6|141|And it is He who has created gardens trellised and not trellised, the date-palms, the crops of different tastes, the olives, and pomegranates, are similar (in kind) but not similar (in taste). Eat of its fruit when ripen, but pay its due (obligatory charity) on the day of its harvest. Don’t exceed the limits. Surely, He does not like those who exceed limits
6|142|And of the cattle some are for loads (like camel) and some are to be laid on ground (for slaughter like sheep, goats etc). Eat that what Allah has provided you, and you don’t follow footsteps of Satan. Surely he is to you open enemy
6|143|in pairs: of the sheep 2 (male and female), and of the goats 2 (male and female). Ask: “Has He forbidden you the 2 males or the 2 females, or contain (fetuses) which the wombs of the 2 females (enclose)? Tell me with knowledge, if you are truthful.”
6|144|Of the camels 2 (male and female), and of the cows 2 (male and female). Ask: “Has He forbidden you the 2 males or the 2 females or contain fetuses which the wombs of the 2 females (enclose)? Or were you present when Allah ordered you of this? Then who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against Allah so as to mislead the people without knowledge? Surely, Allah does not guide the wrongdoers.”
6|145|Say (O Muhammad): “I don’t find in what has been revealed to me anything prohibited to be eaten by one who intends to eat it, except that it be dead animal or blood poured out, or flesh of pork: for that is surely unclean or impious (unlawful meat slaughtered) by invoking name of other than Allah. But whoever is forced (by necessity) neither craving nor transgressing, then certainly your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.”
6|146|And to those who are Jews, We forbade every animal with claws (undivided hoof), and We prohibited them the fat of the cows and the sheep, except what is carried to their backs or intestines, or what is mixed with bone. Thus We punished them for their rebellion. Surely, We are Truthful
6|147|If they deny you (Muhammad) say: “Your Lord is owner of vast Mercy, but His punishment can not be averted from the guilty people.”
6|148|Those who made partners with Allah will say: “If Allah had willed, we would have made neither partner with Him, nor would our forefathers, nor we would have prohibited anything (against Him).” Likewise those who were before them rejected until they tasted Our punishment. Say: “Is there any knowledge (evidence) with you which you can provide to us? You follow nothing but guess and you are not but guessing.”
6|149|Say: “Allah has conclusive argument, and had He willed, He would have guided you all.”
6|150|Say: “Bring your witnesses, who can testify that Allah has prohibited this.” Even if they testify, you (O Muhammad) don’t testify with them. You don’t follow desires of those who have rejected Our Verses, those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, and they set up others as equals with their Lord
6|151|Say (O Muhammad): “Come, I will recite what your Lord has prohibited to you that you don’t associate anything with Him, do good with parents, don’t kill your children (for fear) of poverty - We provide sustenance for you and for them; don’t draw near those shameful deeds that are committed openly or secretly, don’t kill a life which Allah has forbidden, except in a just cause. He has commanded you these so that you may understand
6|152|Don’t draw near the wealth of the orphan, except that which is better (to improve), until the orphan reaches maturity, and give full measure and weight with justice. We don’t burden anyone, but to its capacity. When you speak, be just even if it affects your own relative, and you fulfill the covenant of Allah. He commands you these so that you may take heed
6|153|Surely, this is My Right Way, so follow it, and you don’t follow other ways, lest they will scatter you from His way. He has commanded you this so that you may become pious
6|154|Then, We gave Moses the book (the Torah) to complete (Our Favor) on those who would do good, it explained every thing, and was guidance and a Mercy, so that they might believe in meeting with their Lord.”
6|155|This is a blessed book (the Qur’an) which We have sent down, so follow it and fear Allah so that you may be shown Mercy
6|156|Lest you (pagan Arabs) say: “The book was sent down only to 2 groups before us, and surely, we were unaware from their study,”
6|157|or lest you (pagan Arabs) say: “Surely if the book had been sent down to us, we would have been better guided than them.” Surely clear proof (the Qur’an) has come to you from your Lord, guidance and a Mercy. Who is then more unjust than the one who rejects the Verses of Allah and turns away from them? We shall requite those who turn away from Our Verses with severe punishment for what they used to turn away
6|158|Are they waiting except that the angels should come to them, or your Lord should come, or some Verses of your Lord should come! The day when some Verses of your Lord do come, a soul will not benefit its belief if it had not believed before, or earned good through its faith. Say: “You wait! We (too) are waiting.”
6|159|Surely, those who divide their religion and break up into factions, you (O Muhammad) have no concern with them in the least. Surely, their case is with Allah, Who will tell them what they used to do
6|160|Whoever does a good deed, shall have 10 times like thereof, and whoever does an evil deed, shall be punished only like thereof, and they will not be wronged
6|161|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, my Lord has guided me to a Right Way, a right religion, way of Abraham, the upright and he was not of the polytheists.”
6|162|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, my prayer, my sacrifice, my living, and my dying are for Allah, the Lord of the worlds
6|163|He has no partner. Thus I am commanded, and I am the first of those who surrender (Muslims).”
6|164|Say: “Should I seek a Lord other than Allah, and He is the Lord of every thing? Every soul will earn fruits of its own deeds; no bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return and He will tell you that you have been differing
6|165|And it is He who has made you inheritors of the earth, and exalted some of you over others in ranks so that He may try you in what He has given you. Surely your Lord is swift in retribution, and certainly He is Forgiving, Merciful.”
7|1|Alif-Lam-Mim-Sad
7|2|This is a book (the Qur’an) sent down to you (O Muhammad), let not there be a hesitation from it in your heart, so that you may warn with it, and it is a reminder to the believers
7|3|(Say O Muhammad): “You follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and you don’t follow any protectors besides Him.” Little that you remember
7|4|And how many towns We destroyed? Our punishment came to them suddenly by night or when they were sleeping at noon
7|5|their plea was not uttered when Our punishment came to them but they said: “Surely, we were wrongdoers.”
7|6|Surely, We shall question those to whom (the Book) was sent down, and surely, We shall question the Messengers
7|7|Then We shall narrate to them with knowledge, and indeed We have not absent (from anywhere, anytime)
7|8|The weighing on that Day (of Resurrection) will be the true (weighing). So those who will be heavy with good deeds in the scale, they will be those of the successful (enter Paradise)
7|9|and those who will be light in the scale of good deeds, they will be those who will incur loss upon themselves (enter hell) for they used to be unjust with Our Verses
7|10|And surely, We have established you on the earth and have made a livelihood for you in it. Yet little thanks that you give
7|11|Surely, We created you, then gave you shape, then We said to angels: “Prostrate to Adam,” and they prostrated except Satan, who was not of those who prostrated
7|12|(Allah) said: “What prevented you (O Satan) that you did not prostrate, when I commanded you?” Satan said: “I am better than him (Adam), You created me from fire, and You created him from clay.”
7|13|(Allah) said: “(O Satan) get down from this (Paradise), it is not for you to show arrogance here. Get out; indeed you are of the disgraced ones.”
7|14|(Satan) said: “Allow me respite till the Day (of Resurrection) when they will be raised up.”
7|15|(Allah) said: “Surely, you are granted respite.”
7|16|(Satan) said: “Because You have sent me astray, I will surely sit in ambush for them (human beings) on Your Right Way
7|17|Then I will come to them from front of them and behind them, from their right and from their left, and You will not find most of them as grateful.”
7|18|(Allah) said (to Satan): “Get out from this (Paradise) disgraced and expelled. Whoever of them (mankind) will follow you, surely I will fill hell with you all.”
7|19|(Allah said): “O Adam! Reside with your wife in Paradise, and eat from where you wish, but don’t approach this tree or you both will be of the wrongdoers.”
7|20|But Satan whispered suggestions to them both to expose to them what was concealed to them from their private parts; and he said: “Your Lord has forbidden you from this tree only to prevent you from becoming angels or become of the immortals.”
7|21|And he (Satan) swore to them both (saying): “Surely, I am one of the sincere advisers to you both.”
7|22|So he misled them both with deception. When they both tasted from the tree, both of their private parts (shame) were exposed to them and they began covering (shame) themselves with leaves of Paradise. Their Lord called out to them (saying): “Did I not forbid you from that tree and tell you: surely, Satan is open enemy to you?”
7|23|They said: “Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If You don’t forgive us, and have Mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers.”
7|24|(Allah) said: “Get down; some of you are enemy to others. On the earth will be a residing place for you and a livelihood for a time.”
7|25|(Allah) said: “In it you shall reside, and in it you shall die, and from it you shall be taken out (resurrected).”
7|26|O children of Adam! Surely, We have send down to you clothing which covers your private parts and as an adornment, and the garment of piety that is better. This is a Verse of Allah so that they may remember
7|27|O children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you as he drove out your parents (Adam and Eve) from Paradise, stripping them of their garments to expose (to them) their private parts. Surely, he and his host (tribe) see you from where you don’t see them. Surely, We have made the devils guardians of those who don’t believe
7|28|And when they do some lewdness, they say: “We found our fathers on it, and Allah has commanded us of it.” Say: “Nay, Allah does not command of lewdness. Do you say on Allah what you don’t know?”
7|29|Say (O Muhammad): “My Lord has commanded justice, keep straight your faces (to Him) at every prayer place, and invoke to Him being sincere in faith as He created you so shall you return.”
7|30|He has guided one group while another group deserved to be left in the error; because surely they took devils as guardians instead of Allah, yet they consider that they are guided
7|31|O children of Adam! Take your adornment (wear clean clothes) at every Masjid (for prayer). Eat and drink, but don’t waste by extravagance; indeed He does not like the wasters
7|32|Say (O Muhammad): “Who has forbidden the adornment (to wear decent clothes) given by Allah, which He has produced for His servants, and good things of the sustenance (lawful food)?” Say: “These are for those who believe in the life of this world, but these shall be exclusively for them on Day of Resurrection.” Thus We explain the Verses for people who understand
7|33|Say (O Muhammad): “Indeed my Lord has forbidden shameful deeds which were committed openly, of them which were committed secretly, sins and transgression without the right, associate others with Allah what He has not sent with any authority, and say about Allah of which you do no know
7|34|For every nation there is a fixed term; when their term is reached, neither can they delay for a moment nor they can bring it earlier.”
7|35|O children of Adam! If Messengers come to you from among you, recite to you My Verses, then those who fear (Allah) and mend themselves, there will not be any fear upon them, and they will not grieve
7|36|but those who reject Our Verses, and treat them with arrogance, those are the inmates of the fire; they will abide in it forever
7|37|Who is more unjust than the one who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His Verses? They are those whose share will reach them from the book (of decrees) until when Our Messengers (angels of death) come to them causing them to die, they (angels) will say: “Where are those whom you used to invoke other than Allah?” They will reply: “They have forsaken us.” They will testify against themselves that indeed they were disbelievers
7|38|(Allah) will say: “You enter in the fire and join among nations of jinns and human who have passed away before you.” Every time a group will enter, it will curse its sister (preceding group) until they all will gather in it. The last of them will say to the first of them: “Our Lord! These have misled us, so give them double punishment of the fire.” He will say: “For every one there will be double (punishment), though you may not know.”
7|39|The first of them will say to the last of them: “You were not any better than us, so taste the punishment for what you used to earn.”
7|40|Surely, those who reject Our revelations and show arrogance to it, the gates of heaven will not be opened to them, nor they will enter Paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle (i.e., impossible). Thus Allah will recompense the criminals
7|41|For them there will be bed of hell and above them it is covering (of fire). Thus We will recompense the wrongdoers
7|42|As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We don’t burden any person more than to its capacity; they are the residents of Paradise. They will abide in it forever
7|43|And We shall remove what is in their hearts of any ill-feeling (against one another of the worldly life). Rivers will flow under them, and they will say: “All the praises be to Allah, Who has guided us to this, never could we have found guidance if Allah would not have guided us! Indeed, the Messengers of our Lord did come with the truth.” It will be cried out to them: “This is the Paradise which you have inherited for what you used to do (good).”
7|44|And the residents of Paradise will call out to the inmates of the fire (saying): “Surely, we have found true what our Lord had promised to us; have you also found true, what your Lord promised?” They will say: “Yes.” Then a herald will cry out between them: “The curse of Allah is upon the wrongdoers
7|45|those who hindered from the way of Allah, and sought to make it crooked, and they were disbelievers in the Hereafter.”
7|46|And between the 2, there will be a barrier and on Al-A’raf (heights) there will be people who will recognize every one by their marks (Paradise by white faces and hell by black faces). They will call out to the residents of Paradise: “Peace be on you.” They (people on Al-A’raf) will not have yet entered it (Paradise), but they will hope (to enter)
7|47|And when their eyes will turn towards the inmates of the fire, they will say: “Our Lord! Don’t place us with the wrongdoers.”
7|48|And the people of Al-A’raf (heights) will call out certain residents, whom they would recognize by their marks, saying: “What did benefit to you from your number (wealth) and your show of arrogance?”
7|49|Are they those about whom you swore that Allah will not grant them Mercy? (Today, it has been said to them): “Enter Paradise, no fear shall be on you, nor shall you grieve.”
7|50|The inmates of the fire will cry out to the residents of Paradise: “Pour on us some water or anything Allah has provided you.” They will say: “Allah has forbidden both (water and provision) to the disbelievers
7|51|who took their religion as amusement and play, and the life of the world deceived them.” (Allah will say): “So today We will forget them as they forgot their meeting of this Day, and as they used to reject Our Verses.”
7|52|Surely, We have brought to them a book (the Qur’an) which We have explained with knowledge-guidance and a Mercy to a people who believe
7|53|Are they waiting that its reality be unfolded? When the Day will come, its reality will be unfolded, those who had forgotten it before, will say: “Surely, the Messengers of our Lord did come with the truth. Do we have any intercessors now, who might intercede for us? Or could we be sent back (to world) so that we would do good deeds other than those evil deeds we used to do?” Surely, they have lost themselves and whatever they used to fabricate has forsaken them
7|54|Surely your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in 6 days, and then He ascended the Throne (to suit His Majesty). He makes the night cover the day, which seeks it rapidly (to follow the night). He has created the sun, the moon, the stars, and subjected to His command. Blessed be Allah, Lord of the worlds
7|55|Call upon your Lord humbly and in secret. Surely, He does not like the transgressors
7|56|And don’t do mischief in the earth after its order is set, and call Him with fear and hope. Surely, the Mercy of Allah is close to the righteous people
7|57|And it is He who sends the winds as glad tidings in the presence of His Mercy (rain). When they carry a heavy-laden cloud, We drive it to a dead land, and then We send down water (rain) from it. Then We bring forth in it every kind of fruit. Similarly, We shall raise the dead, so that you may take heed
7|58|Its vegetation of the good land comes forth by the order of its Lord, and that which is bad (land), does not produce but little. Thus We explain the Verses in various ways for people who give thanks
7|59|Indeed, We sent Noah to his people and he said: “O my people! Worship Allah! You don’t have any one worthy of worship but Him. Certainly, I fear for you the punishment of a mighty Day!”
7|60|The leaders of his people said: “Surely, we see you in plain error.”
7|61|(Noah) said: “O my people! There is not an error in me, but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
7|62|I convey to you messages of my Lord and give advice to you. I know from Allah what you don’t know
7|63|Or do you wonder that a reminder from your Lord has come to you as a man among you to warn you, so that you may fear Allah and that you may be shown (His) Mercy?”
7|64|But they denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship, and We drowned those who denied Our Verses. Indeed they were blind people
7|65|To people of Ad (We sent) their brother Hud. He said: “O my people! Worship Allah! You don’t have any one worthy of worship but Him. Will you not then fear (Allah)?”
7|66|The leaders of those who disbelieved from his people said: “Surely, we see you in foolishness, and surely we consider you of the liars.”
7|67|(Hud) said: “O my people! There is no foolishness in me, but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
7|68|I convey messages of my Lord to you, and I am a trustworthy adviser to you
7|69|Or do you wonder that a reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man from among you to warn you? And remember that He made you successors after people of Noah, and increased you in ample stature. So remember the Bounties of Allah, so that you may succeed.”
7|70|They said: “You have come to us that we worship Allah alone and forsake what our forefathers used to worship. So bring to us what you promise (threat) if you are of the truthful!”
7|71|(Hud) said: “Surely punishment and wrath have fallen on you from your Lord. Do you dispute with me about mere names which you and your fathers have named for which Allah has not sent down any sanction? Then wait (for the decision of Allah), surely I am with you of those who wait.”
7|72|Then We saved him and those with him by a Mercy from Us, and We cut the last remnant (wiped out) of those who denied Our Verses, and they were not believers
7|73|To the people of Thamud (We sent) their brother Saleh. He said: “O my people! Worship Allah! You don’t have any one worthy of worship but Him. Surely, a clear proof (coming out of a huge she-camel from the midst of a rock) has come to you from your Lord. This she-camel of Allah is a sign to you, so leave her alone to graze on the earth of Allah, and don’t touch her with harm, lest a painful punishment should seize you
7|74|And remember when He made you successors after Ad and gave you habitation in the land, you build palaces in its plains, and you carved out the mountains as homes. So remember the Bounties of Allah, and don’t go about in the land as mischief-makers.”
7|75|The arrogant leaders from his people asked those who were oppressed among them, who believed: “Do you believe that Saleh is one sent from his Lord?” They said: “Surely, we believe in what he has been sent with.”
7|76|Those who showed arrogance said: “Surely, we disbelieve in that which you believe in.”
7|77|Then they hamstrung (killed) the she-camel, insolently defied the order of their Lord, and they said: “O Saleh! Bring us what you have been promising (threat) us if you are indeed one of the Messengers (of Allah).”
7|78|So the earthquake took them in the morning in their homes lying (dead) on their faces
7|79|Then he (Saleh) turned away from them and said: “O my people! Surely, I have conveyed to you message of my Lord, and have given good advice to you but you don’t like advisers.”
7|80|And (remember) Lot, when he said to his people: “Do you commit lewdness as none has committed (before) you in any one of the worlds
7|81|Surely, you approach men lustfully instead of women. Nay, you are people who have exceeded limits.”
7|82|And the answer of his people was not but that they said: “Drive them out of your town; surely, they are people who want to be pure (from sins)!”
7|83|Then We saved him and his family, except his wife; she was among those who stayed behind
7|84|And We rained on them a rain (of stones). So see how the end of the evil-doers was
7|85|And to people of Midian, (We sent) their brother Shuaib. He said: “O my people! Worship Allah! You don’t have any one worthy of worship but Him. Surely, a clear proof has come to you from your Lord. So give full measure and weight, and don’t diminish (weigh less) to the people in their things, and don’t mischief on the earth after it has been set in order, that is good for you, if you are believers
7|86|Don’t sit by every road, threatening and hindering from the Way of Allah those who believe in Him, seeking to make it crooked. Remember when you were a few, and He multiplied you. See how the ending of the mischief-makers was
7|87|If there is a party of you who believes in the message which I have been sent with and a party who don’t believe, then be patient until Allah judges between us, and He is the best of the judges.”
7|88|The chiefs of those who were arrogant among his people said: “Surely, we shall drive you out, O Shuaib, and those who have believed with you from our town or you all shall return to our religion.” He said: “Even though we hate that (to turn back)
7|89|Surely, we would fabricate a lie against Allah if we return to your religion or your faith, after when Allah has rescued us from it. It is not for us that we return to it except that Allah, our Lord wills. Our Lord comprehends every thing in (His) knowledge. In Allah (alone) we put our trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and between our people in truth and You are the best of the judges.”
7|90|The chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said: “If you follow Shuaib, then surely you will be the losers!”
7|91|So the earthquake seized them and they lay dead, prostrate in their homes
7|92|Those who denied Shuaib were as if they never lived in it (their homes). Those who denied Shuaib, they were the losers
7|93|So he (Shuaib) turned from them and said: “O my people! Indeed I have conveyed to you messages of my Lord and I have given you good advice. Then how can I mourn for disbelieving people?”
7|94|And We have not sent to a town any prophet, but We seized its people with adversity and calamity, so that they may grow humble
7|95|Then We changed in place of the evil with the good, until they increased (in number and in wealth), and said: ‘Surely, our forefathers were touched with calamity and affluence (prosperity).” So We seized them suddenly while they did not perceive it
7|96|If the people of the towns had believed and had feared (Allah), We would have opened to them blessings from the heaven and the earth, but they denied. So We seized them for what they used to earn
7|97|Did the people of the towns feel secure from Our punishment coming to them by night while they were asleep
7|98|Or, did the people of the towns feel secure from Our punishment coming to them by daylight while they play
7|99|Did they then feel secure against the plan of Allah? Don’t feel secure from the plan of Allah except the people who are the losers
7|100|Does it not indicate to those who inherit the land after its people (in succession) that if We will, We can punish them for their sins, and We can seal their hearts so that they would not hear
7|101|Those towns whose stories We have related to you (O Muhammad) (as example). Surely their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they did not believe in what they had denied before. Thus Allah sealed the hearts of the disbelievers
7|102|And We did not find true most of them to any commitment, rather We found most of them transgressors
7|103|Then We sent Moses after them with Our Verses to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they dealt unjustly with them. So see how the end of the mischief-makers was
7|104|Moses said: “O Pharaoh! Surely I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds
7|105|It is incumbent upon me that I don’t say about Allah but the truth. Surely I have come to you with a clear proof from your Lord. So send with me children of Israel.”
7|106|(Pharaoh) said: “If you have come with a sign, then show it if you are of the truthful.”
7|107|Then (Moses) threw his staff and instantly it became a real serpent
7|108|He drew out his hand, and instantly it was white (shining) to the beholders
7|109|The chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said: “Surely this is a skilled sorcerer
7|110|he wants that he drives you out from your land.” (Pharaoh asked): “So what do you recommend?”
7|111|They said: "Keep him in suspense and his brother, and send collectors to cities
7|112|they bring you every skilled sorcerer.”
7|113|The sorcerers came to Pharaoh. They said: “Indeed there will be reward for us if we are the winners.”
7|114|He said: “Yes, and indeed you will be of the nearest (to me).”
7|115|They said: “O Moses! Either you throw (first) or that shall we be the (first) throwers.”
7|116|He (Moses) said: “You throw (first).” So when they threw, they bewitched the eyes of the people, scared them, and they displayed with a great magic
7|117|Allah inspired Moses (saying): “Throw your staff,” and then it swallowed what they had (showed)
7|118|Thus the truth was established, and proved vain what they used to do, so they were defeated
7|119|They were defeated, and were returned low (disgraced)
7|120|and the sorcerers fell down prostrate
7|121|they said: “We believe in the Lord of the worlds
7|122|the Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
7|123|Pharaoh said: “(How dare) you have believed in him (Moses) before I give permission to you? Surely, this is a plot you have plotted in the city that you drive out its people from it, but soon you will know
7|124|Surely, I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and then I will crucify you all.”
7|125|They said: “Surely, we are returning to our Lord
7|126|You don’t take revenge on us because we believed in the Verses of our Lord when they came to us! Our Lord! Pour out on us patience, and cause us to die as Muslims.”
7|127|The chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said: “Will you leave Moses and his people to spread mischief in the land, and forsake you and your deities?” He said: “We will kill their sons, and we will spare their women, and indeed we have dominant powers over them.”
7|128|Moses said to his people: “Seek help in Allah and be patient. Surely, the earth is Allah’s. He gives it as a heritage to whom He wills of His servants, and the blessed end is for the righteous.”
7|129|They said: “We had suffered before you came to us, and after you came to us.” He said: “May be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the earth, so that He will see how you act.”
7|130|And surely We punished people of Pharaoh with years (of drought) and shortness of fruits (crops), so that they might remember
7|131|But when the good came to them, they said: “For us is this.” If evil afflicted them, they ascribed misfortune to Moses and those with him. Behold! Surely, their misfortune is also with Allah but most of them don’t know
7|132|They said (to Moses): “Whatever Verses you bring us herewith to enchant us with it (your sorcery), we shall not believe in you.”
7|133|So We sent on them: the flood, the locusts, the lice, the frogs, and the blood as clear signs, but they showed arrogance, and they were criminal people
7|134|When the punishment fell on them they said: “O Moses! Invoke your Lord for us because of (His) Promise to you. If you remove the punishment from us, we will indeed believe in you, and we shall send with you the children of Israel.”
7|135|But when We removed the punishment from them for a fixed term, which they had to reach, and then they broke the promise
7|136|So We took retribution from them and drowned them in the sea, because they denied Our Verses and they were heedless about them
7|137|And We made the people who were considered weak (oppressed) to inherit the east of the land and its west, which We had blessed. The fair Promise of your Lord was fulfilled for children of Israel because they endured (with patience). And We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people used to manufacture what they used to erect
7|138|And We made the children of Israel across the sea. Then they came upon a people devoted to idols they had. They said: “O Moses! Make for us a deity worthy of worship as they have.” He (Moses) said: “Surely, you are a people who know nothing
7|139|Surely, these people will be destroyed for that which they are engaged in and their deeds are in vain
7|140|Shall I seek for you a deity other than Allah, while He has exalted you above the worlds
7|141|(Remember) when We saved you from people of Pharaoh, who afflicted you with worst punishment, killing your sons, letting your women live, and in that (condition) there was a great trial from your Lord.”
7|142|And We appointed for Moses 30 nights (to mount Tur) and completed them with 10 (more) to complete the set term of 40 nights with his Lord. Moses said to his brother Aaron: “Take my place in my people, do right, and don’t follow way of the mischief-makers.”
7|143|When Moses came at His appointment and his Lord spoke to him, he said: “O my Lord! Show me (power to see Yourself) so that I may look upon You.” Allah said: “You cannot see Me, but look at the mountain if it stands firm in its place then you shall see Me.” When his Lord revealed (His) Glory to the mountain, He made it collapse as dust, and Moses fell down unconscious. Then when he recovered, he said: “Glory be to You, I return to You (in repentance) and I am the first of the believers.”
7|144|(Allah) said: “O Moses, Indeed I have chosen you from among all people to deliver My Messages and by My speaking (to you). So hold what I have given you and be of the grateful.”
7|145|And We ordained for him in the tablets from every thing for admonition and explanation for every thing (and said): “So hold these with firmness, and enjoin your people to follow best of it. I shall show you soon abode of the transgressors
7|146|I shall turn away from My Verses those who behave arrogantly in the earth without any right, and even if they see every Verse, they will not believe in them. If they see way of righteousness, they will not take it as their way, but if they see way of error, they will take it as their way, that is because they have rejected Our Verses and they were heedless to them
7|147|Those who reject Our Verses and the meeting of the Hereafter, their deeds become vain. Should they be rewarded except for what they used to do?”
7|148|And the people of Moses after him (during absence) made the body of a calf (for worship) from their ornaments which had a sound (of mooing). Did they not see that neither it can speak to them nor guide them to the way? Yet, they took it (for worship) and they were the wrongdoers
7|149|And when they regretted and saw that they had gone astray, they (repented and) said: “If our Lord don’t have Mercy on us and forgive us, we shall certainly be among the losers.”
7|150|And when Moses returned to his people, became angry and grieved, he said: “What an evil thing you have done (worship the calf) after me! Did you hasten to decree (for punishment) of your Lord?” He threw down the tablets and seized his brother by his head dragging him to himself. (Aaron) said: “O son of my mother! Indeed the people overpowered me weak and were about to kill me, so let not the enemies rejoice over me, and don’t place me with the wrongdoers.”
7|151|(Moses) said: “O my Lord! Forgive me and my brother, and admit us to Your Mercy, for You are the Merciful of those who show Mercy.”
7|152|Surely, those who took the calf (for worship), wrath from their Lord and humiliation overtook them in the life of this world. Thus We recompense those who fabricate lies
7|153|But those who committed evil deeds, then repented after that and believed, surely your Lord after that is Forgiving, Merciful
7|154|When the anger of Moses was calmed, he took up the tablets in which there was writing of guidance and Mercy for those who fear their Lord
7|155|Moses chose 70 men out of his people to (the place of) Our appointment. (On the way) when a violent earthquake seized them, he said: “O my Lord, had You willed, You could have destroyed them and me before. Would You destroy us for what the fools did among us? It was not but Your trial by which You mislead with it whom You willed, and You guided whom You willed. You are our Guardian, so forgive us and have Mercy on us, and You are the best of those who forgive
7|156|and ordain for us good in this world, and in the Hereafter. Surely we have turned to You.” He said: “I will inflict My punishment upon whom I will; yet, My Mercy embraces every thing. I will ordain (Mercy) for those who do right and pay obligatory charity; and those who believe in My Verses.”
7|157|Those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered prophet (Muhammad - could not read nor write) whom they will find written in the Torah and the Gospel, who commands them to good and forbids them from evil; and makes lawful to them the pure things and prohibits on them the impure things; and removes from them their burdens, and the fetters (bindings) which were upon them. So those who believe in him, support him, help him; follow the light (the Qur’an) which has been sent with him, it is they who will be successful (in this world and Hereafter)
7|158|Say (O Muhammad): “O mankind! Surely, I am the Messenger of Allah to all of you, to Whom belongs dominion of the heavens and the earth. There is no one worthy of worship but Allah. He gives life and causes death. So believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), the unlettered Prophet who believes in Allah and His Words (this Qur’an). Follow him so that you may find guidance.”
7|159|From of the people of Moses, a party guided (others) with truth and thereby established justice
7|160|And We divided them into 12 tribes as communities. When his people asked him for water, We inspired to Moses (saying): “Strike the stone with your stuff,” and there gushed out of it 12 springs, each group knew its drinking place. We provided shades of clouds on them and sent down upon them Manna (sweet dish) and Salva (quail’s meat) (saying): “Eat of the good things which We have provided you.” (They rebelled and) they did not harm Us but they were doing wrong to themselves
7|161|And (remember) when it was said to them: “Reside in this town and eat from there whatever you wish, and say: ‘(O Allah) forgives our sins,’ and enter the gate prostrating (bowing with humility). We shall forgive you your sins. We shall increase (reward for) the righteous people.”
7|162|But those among them who did wrong, changed the Word other (than that) which was said to them. So We sent on them a punishment from the heaven because they used to do wrong
7|163|And ask them (O Muhammad) about the town which was situated by the sea shore, when they transgressed in the Sabbath (Saturday). The fish came to them visibly on their Sabbath day, and they did not come to them on the days they had no Sabbath. Thus We tested them because they used to disobey
7|164|And when a group among them said: “Why do you admonish a people whom Allah is about to destroy them or punish them with a severe punishment?” (The preachers) replied: “To offer an excuse to your Lord and that they may refrain from disobedience.”
7|165|So when they forgot what they had been reminded with, We rescued those who forbade from evil, but We seized those who did wrong with severe punishment because of what they used to transgress
7|166|But when they persistently did what they were forbidden from it, We told them: “You be detested monkeys.”
7|167|And (remember) when your Lord declared that He would send upon them others who would afflict them with a grievous punishment till the Day of Resurrection. Surely, your Lord is swift in persecution and He is Forgiving, Merciful
7|168|And We dispersed them in the land (as separate) groups among them in the earth: some of them are righteous and others among them are away from that. And We tested them with good blessings and evil calamities in order that they might turn (to Allah)
7|169|Then after them evil successors succeeded who inherited the book, but they chose goods of this low life (evil pleasures of the world) saying (as excuse): “We shall be forgiven.” If similar offer (evil pleasures of the world) comes to them, they would again seize them. Was not the covenant of the book taken on them that they would not say about Allah anything but the truth? And they have studied what is in it. Abode of the Hereafter is better for those who are righteous. Then don’t you understand
7|170|And those who hold fast to the book (act on it) and establish the prayer, Allah will not let the reward of the righteous go waste
7|171|And (remember) when We raised the mountain over them as if it was a canopy, and they thought that it was going to fall on them. (We said): “Hold with strength firmly to what We have given you, and remember what is in it so that you may refrain from evil.”
7|172|And (remember) when your Lord brought from the children of Adam, from their loins, their descendents and made them testify as to themselves (saying): “Am I not your Lord?” They said: “Yes! We testify,” lest you (mankind) should say on the Day of Resurrection: “Surely, we were unaware of this.”
7|173|Or you should say: “Only our forefathers associated with Allah before us, and we are their offspring after them. Will you destroy us for what the wrongdoers did?”
7|174|Thus We do explain the Verses so that they may return (to the truth)
7|175|And recite (O Muhammad) to them the story of him whom We gave Our Verses but he turned away from them, so Satan followed him, and he became of those who went astray
7|176|And if We willed, We would have exalted him with these signs but he clung (inclined) to the earth and followed its vain desires. So its parable is like the parable of a dog: if you attack it, it lolls out its tongue, or if you leave it alone, it still lolls out its tongue. Such is the parable of the people who reject Our Verses. So narrate these stories to them, perhaps they may think over
7|177|Evil is the example of the people who reject Our Verses and they used to wrong themselves
7|178|Whoever Allah guides is the guided one, and whoever He lets go astray, they are those losers
7|179|Surely, We have created many jinns and mankind for hell. They have hearts, they don’t understand with them; they have eyes, they don’t see with them; and they have ears, they don’t hear with them. They are like cattle, or even worse than them, they are those who are heedless
7|180|And Allah has the excellent names (over 99 attributes), so call Him by them, and leave (company) of those who distort (in) His names. They will be requited for what they used to do
7|181|And of those whom We have created, there is a party who guides others with the truth and establishes justice with it
7|182|Those who reject Our Verses, We gradually seize them (with punishment) from where they don’t know
7|183|though I grant them respite; but certainly My Plan is strong
7|184|Do they not reflect (think)? There is not any madness in their companion (Muhammad). He is not but a plain Warner
7|185|Have they not looked in the dominion of the heavens and the earth and every thing what Allah has created, and that may be their term of life is drawn near? Then in what message after this will they believe
7|186|Whoever Allah lets go astray, then there is none to guide; and He leaves in their transgressions, they wander blindly
7|187|They ask you (O Muhammad) about the Hour (Day of Resurrection): “When will be its appointed time?” Say: “Its knowledge is only with my Lord (alone). None can disclose its time but He. It will weigh heavy in the heavens and the earth. It shall not come to you but suddenly.” They ask you as if you are very knowledgeable about it. Say: “Only its knowledge is with Allah (alone) but most people don’t know.”
7|188|Say (O Muhammad): “I don’t possess for myself any good nor any harm except as Allah wishes. If I had the knowledge of the unseen, I would have (secured for myself) an abundance of good, and no evil would have touched me. But I am a Warner and a bearer of glad tidings for people who believe.”
7|189|He has created you from a single person (Adam), and He has created from him his mate (Eve), so that he might find comfort with her. When he covers (has sex with) her, she bore a light burden (pregnant) and move about with it. Then when it grows heavy, they both invoke Allah, their Lord (saying): “If You give us a good child, we shall indeed be among the grateful.”
7|190|But when He gave them a good child, they ascribe partners to Him in that which He has given them. But exalted is Allah above that which they associate (as partners with Him)
7|191|Do they associate (partners with Allah) who can not create anything but they are created
7|192|and they can neither give those help, nor can they help themselves
7|193|If you call them to the guidance, they will not follow you. It is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent
7|194|Surely, those whom you call other than Allah are servants like you. So call them and let them answer you if you are truthful
7|195|Have they feet to walk with? Or have they hands to hold with? Or have they eyes to see with? Or have they ears to hear with? Say (O Muhammad): “Call your partners (of Allah) and then plot against me, and don’t give me respite!”
7|196|Surely, my Protector is Allah Who has revealed the book (the Qur’an), and He protects the righteous
7|197|And those whom you call other than Him (Allah), they can neither help you nor can they help themselves
7|198|And if you call them to the guidance, they don’t hear and you see them looking at you, yet they don’t see
7|199|Show forgiveness, enjoin the good, and turn away from the ignorant
7|200|If an evil incites you from Satan, then seek refuge with Allah. Surely, He is All-Hearer, All-Knower
7|201|Surely, those who are pious (fear Allah), when an evil thought touches them from Satan, they remember (Allah), and then they see (aright)
7|202|But for their brothers (of devils), they plunge them deeper in error, and they don’t relax (cease)
7|203|If you (O Muhammad) don’t bring them a miracle, they say: “Why have you not invented one?” Say: “I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This (the Qur’an) insight is from your Lord, and Guidance and Mercy for people who believe.”
7|204|So when the Qur’an is recited, listen to it, and keep silent so that you are shown Mercy
7|205|And remember your Lord by your heart humbly, with fear without loudness of words in the mornings and in the evenings, and don’t be of neglectful
7|206|Surely, those who are with your Lord, don’t turn away in pride from His worship, but they glorify Him and they prostrate before Him
8|1|They ask you (O Muhammad) about the spoils of war. Say: “The spoils are for Allah and the Messenger. So fear Allah and set right things (end differences) among you, and obey Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), if you are believers.”
8|2|Only the believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, their hearts quake and when His Verses (this Qur’an) are recited to them, they increase in faith; and they put their trust in their Lord (alone)
8|3|who establish prayer and they spend out of what We have provided them
8|4|They are these who are the believers in truth. They have high ranks with their Lord; Forgiveness, and a generous sustenance
8|5|As your Lord brought you (O Muhammad) out from your home (to struggle) for the truth, and surely, a party among the believers disliked it
8|6|They disputed with you about the truth after it became clear, as if they were driven to the death while they were looking (at it)
8|7|And (remember) when Allah promised you (Muslims) one of the 2 groups (of the enemy- army or caravan) that it should be for you, and you wished that one without having arms (the caravan) should be for you, but Allah willed to justify the truth by His Words and cut off the roots of the disbelievers (in the battle of Badr)
8|8|so that He causes triumph the truth and proves false the falsehood, even though the evil-doers dislike it
8|9|(Remember) when you sought help of your Lord and He answered to you (saying): “Indeed I will help you with 1,000 angels one after another.”
8|10|Allah made it only as glad tidings, that your hearts be at rest with it. There is no victory except from Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
8|11|(Remember before the battle of Badr) when He covered you with a drowsiness as a security from Him, He sent down rain on you from the sky to clean you thereby and take away from you the evil-thinking of Satan, to strengthen your hearts, and thereby make your feet firm thereby
8|12|(Remember) when your Lord inspired to the angels: “I am with you, so keep firm those who have believed. I will cast the terror in the hearts of those who have disbelieved, so strike above their necks, and strike over all their fingertips.”
8|13|This is because they defied Allah and His Messenger. And whoever defies Allah and His Messenger, then surely, Allah is Severe in punishment
8|14|that is (the punishment), so taste it, and that is for the disbeliever’s punishment of the fire
8|15|O you who believe! When you meet those who disbelieve in a battlefield, don’t turn your backs to them
8|16|and those who turn their back to them that Day, unless as strategy of war, or retreat to a troop (of their own), they indeed have incurred the wrath of Allah. Their abode is hell, and worst indeed is that destination
8|17|You did not kill them, but Allah killed them. You (Muhammad) did not throw sand but Allah threw, so that He might test the believers by a fair trial from Him. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
8|18|Surely this is the fact; Allah weakens evil designs of the disbelievers
8|19|(O disbelievers) if you seek a judgment, then surely the judgment has come to you (with victory for the believers). If you desist, that will be better for you, and if you return (to the attack), We too shall return, and your forces will not avail you anything though it be large in numbers, and that Allah is with the believers
8|20|O you who believe! Obey Allah and His Messenger, and don’t turn away from him (Muhammad) while you hear
8|21|You don’t be like those who say: “We have heard,” but they have not heard
8|22|Surely! Worst of living creatures to Allah are the deaf and the dumb, those who don’t use their reason
8|23|Had Allah known in them of any good, He would indeed have made them listen. Even if He had made them listen, they would have turned away while they were reluctant (to the truth)
8|24|O you who believe! Respond to Allah and to the Messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life, and know that Allah comes in between a person and his heart (to prevent evil). And it is to Him you all shall be gathered
8|25|And fear mischief which don’t affect particularly those of you who do wrong (but may afflict good and bad people), and know that Allah is severe in punishment
8|26|And remember when you were few and reckoned weak in the land, and you were afraid that the people might kidnap you. He provided you with refuge, strengthened you with His help, and provided you with good things so that you may give thanks
8|27|O you who believe! You don’t betray Allah and His Messenger, or betray your trusts while you know
8|28|And know that your possessions and your children are just a trial and that with Allah is a great reward
8|29|O you who believe! If you fear Allah, He will grant you a criterion (to judge between right and wrong), and will expiate for you your sins, and forgive you. Allah is the Lord of the Great Bounty
8|30|And (remember) when those who disbelieved, they plotted against you (O Muhammad) to imprison you, or to kill you, or to drive you away (from your home at Makkah). They planned, Allah also planned, and Allah is the best of the planners
8|31|And when Our Verses (of the Qur’an) are recited to them, they say: “We have heard. If we wished we could say like this. These are nothing but the tales of the ancient people.”
8|32|And (remember) when they said: “O Allah! If this (the Qur’an) is indeed the truth from You, then rain down stones on us from the sky or brings us a painful punishment.”
8|33|And Allah would not punish them while you (Muhammad) are among them. Or He will not punish them while they seek (Allah’s) Forgiveness
8|34|And what is with them that Allah should not punish them while they stop people from the Sacred Masjid (at Makkah), and they are not its guardians? None can be its guardians except the pious, but most of them don’t know
8|35|Their prayer at the House (the Ka’bah at Makkah) is nothing but whistling and hand-clapping. So taste the punishment for what you used to disbelieve
8|36|Surely, those who disbelieve, they spend their wealth to hinder people from the way of Allah. They will keep on spending; and then it will become anguish for them. Then they will be defeated. And those who disbelieve, (in the Hereafter) they will be gathered to hell
8|37|in order that Allah may distinguish the wicked (disbelievers, evil-doers) from the good (believers with righteous deeds). Allah will put the wicked one upon another, will pile them all, and will cast them into hell. Those are they who are the losers
8|38|Say (O Muhammad) to those who have disbelieved, if they desist (from disbelief), their past will be forgiven. But if they revert, then let them precede the examples of the ancients (as a warning)
8|39|And (O believers) fight them until there is no more mischief and the religion (Islam) is established completely for Allah alone. But if they cease (worshipping others besides Allah), then surely, Allah is All-Seer of what they do
8|40|And if they turn away, then know that Allah is your Protector, an excellent Protector, and an Excellent Helper
8|41|And know that whatever war-booty you may gain, surely 1/5th of it (is assigned) to Allah, and to the Messenger, and to the near relatives (of Muhammad), (and also) the orphans, the poor who don’t beg, and the wayfarer, if you do believe in Allah and in that which We have sent down to Our servant (Muhammad) on the day of criterion (between right and wrong), the day when the 2 forces met (the battle of Badr). Allah has power over all things
8|42|(And remember) when you (the Muslim army) were on the near side of the valley, and they were on the further side, and the caravan was on the ground lower than you. If you had made a mutual appointment to meet, you would surly have failed in the appointment; but Allah might accomplish a matter that was already ordained (in His Knowledge), so that those who were destined to perish might die with a clear evidence, and those who were destined to live (believers) might live with a clear evidence. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
8|43|(And remember) when Allah showed them to you (Muhammad) as few in numbers in your dream; if He had shown them to you as many in number, you would surely have been discouraged and you would surely have disputed in making a decision. But Allah saved you. Certainly, He is All-Knower of what is in the hearts
8|44|And (remember) when you met (disbelievers during the battle of Badr), He showed them to you as few in number in your eyes and He made you appear as few in number in their eyes so that Allah might accomplish a matter that was already ordained, and to Allah all matters return (for decision)
8|45|O you who believe! When you meet a force (enemy), take a firm stand against them and remember (the name of) Allah much, so that you may be successful
8|46|And obey Allah and His Messenger, and don’t dispute (with one another) lest you lose courage and weaken your strength, and be patient. Surely, Allah is with those who are patient
8|47|And don’t be like those who come out of their homes boastfully in order to be seen by people, and hinder others from the way of Allah. Allah encompasses all of what they do
8|48|And (remember) when Satan made their evil deeds seem fair to them and said: “No one from mankind can overcome you this day (battle of Badr), and surely, I am your neighbor (to help).” Yet, when the 2 forces came in sight of each other, he ran away on his heels and said: “Surely, I have nothing to do with you. Surely, I can see what you don’t see. Surely, I fear Allah for Allah is Severe in punishment.”
8|49|Then the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease (of disbelief) said: “These people (Muslims) are deceived by their religion.” But those who put their trust in Allah, and surely, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
8|50|And if you could only see when the angels were taking away souls (at death) of those who disbelieve! They were smiting their faces and their backs, (saying): “Taste the punishment of the blazing fire
8|51|This (punishment) is because of what your hands have sent forth. Surely, Allah is not unjust to His servants.”
8|52|Their behavior is similar (to that) of the people of Pharaoh, and those before them. They also rejected the Verses of Allah and Allah punished them for their sins. Surely, Allah is All-Mighty, Severe in punishment
8|53|That is because Allah will never change a grace which He has bestowed on a people until they themselves change what is in their own selves. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
8|54|Their behavior is similar (to that) of the people of Pharaoh, and those before them. They denied the Verses of their Lord, so We destroyed them for their sins, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh, and they all were wrongdoers
8|55|Surely, the worst of living creatures to Allah are those who disbelieve, so they shall not believe
8|56|They are those with whom you made a covenant, then they break their covenant every time, and they don’t fear (Allah)
8|57|If you gain the mastery over them in war, punish them severely in order to disperse those who are behind them so that they may learn a lesson
8|58|If you (O Muhammad) fear treachery from any people, throw back (their covenant) to them on equal terms. Certainly Allah does not like the treacherous
8|59|And let not the disbelievers think that they can outdo (escape punishment). Surely, they will never be able to save themselves (from punishment)
8|60|And make ready against them (enemy) all the power you can afford including steeds of war (all military means, cavalry, etc) to threaten them the enemy of Allah and your enemy, and others besides them whom you don’t know but Allah knows. Whatever you shall spend in the way of Allah shall be repaid to you, and you shall not be treated unjustly
8|61|But if they incline towards peace, you also incline to it, and trust in Allah. Surely, He is All-Hearer, All-Knower
8|62|And if they intend to deceive you, then surely, Allah is Sufficient for you. He is the one who has supported you and the believers with His help
8|63|and He has united their (believers) hearts. If you had spent all that is in the earth, you could not have united their hearts, but Allah has united them. Certainly He is All-Mighty, All-Wise
8|64|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Allah is sufficient for you and for the believers who follow you
8|65|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Urge the believers on to fight. If there are 20 steadfast people amongst you, they shall overcome 200 (disbelievers), and if there are 100 (steadfast people) amongst you, they will overcome 1,000 of those who disbelieve, because they (disbelievers) are people who don’t understand
8|66|Now, Allah has lightened from you (task), for He knows that there is weakness in you. So, if there are 100 steadfast (people) amongst you, they shall overcome 200, and if there are 1,000 of you, they shall overcome 2,000 with the permission of Allah. And Allah is with the patient
8|67|It is not fit for a Prophet that he should have prisoners of war until he has thoroughly subdued the land. You (Muslims) desire the good of this world while Allah desires for you the Hereafter. Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
8|68|Had there not a previous ordainment from Allah (to take ransom), a severe punishment would have touched you for what you have taken
8|69|Enjoy the booty in war which you have taken, for it is lawful and good, but be afraid of Allah. Certainly, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
8|70|O Prophet! Say to those who are from the captives in your hands: “If Allah knows any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”
8|71|But if they intend to betray you (Muhammad), they have already betrayed Allah before. So, He gave (you) power over them. Allah All-Knower, All-Wise
8|72|Surely, those who believed, emigrated, and strove hard and fought with their property and their lives in the way of Allah; and those who gave asylum and help; these are all allies to one another. As to those who believed but did not emigrate, you owe no duty of protection to them until they emigrate; but if they seek your help in religion, it is your duty to help them except against a people with whom you have a treaty of mutual alliance. Allah is All-Seer of what you do
8|73|And those who disbelieve are allies to one another. If you (Muslims) don’t do so (become allies), there will be oppression on earth, and a great mischief
8|74|Those who believed, emigrated, and strove hard in the way of Allah, and those who gave them asylum and help; these are the believers in truth, for them is forgiveness and noble provisions
8|75|Those who believed afterwards, emigrated, and strove hard along with you (in the cause of Allah), they are of you. But kindred by blood are nearer to one another in the book ordained by Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Knower of everything
9|1|Immunity from all obligations (is declared) from Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) to those of the polytheists with whom you made a treaty
9|2|“So travel freely (O polytheists) for 4 months throughout the land, but know that you cannot escape (from punishment of) Allah, and Allah will disgrace the disbelievers.”
9|3|A declaration from Allah and His Messenger to mankind on the greatest day of pilgrimage that Allah is free from all obligations to the polytheists and so is His Messenger. So if you (polytheists) repent, it is better for you, but if you turn away, then know that you cannot escape (from the punishment of) Allah. Give tidings (O Muhammad) to those who disbelieve of a painful punishment
9|4|Except those of the polytheists with whom you have a treaty, and who have not subsequently failed you in every detail, nor they have supported anyone against you. So fulfill your treaty with them to (the end of) their term. Surely Allah loves the pious
9|5|When the forbidden (4) months of Islamic calendar have passed, then fight the polytheists wherever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and prepare for them each and every ambush. But if they repent, offer prayers perfectly, and give obligatory charity, then leave their way free. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
9|6|If anyone of the polytheists seeks your protection, grant protection so that he may hear the Word of Allah (the Qur’an), and then escort to where he can be secure, that is because they are people who don’t know (the truth)
9|7|How can there be a covenant for the polytheists with Allah and with His Messenger except those with whom you made a covenant near the sacred Masjid (at Makkah)? So long as they are true to you, you stand true to them. Surely, Allah loves the pious
9|8|How (can you trust them) that when they overpower you, they don’t regard the ties, either of kinship or of covenant with you? They please you with (good words from) their mouths, but their hearts are averse to you, and most of them are disobedient
9|9|They have purchased a little gain with the revelations of Allah, and they hindered people from His Way; indeed evil is that which they used to do
9|10|With regard to a believer, they don’t respect the ties, either of kinship or of covenant. It is they who are the transgressors
9|11|But if they repent, establish prayers perfectly, and give obligatory charity, then they are your brothers in religion. We explain the revelations in detail for the people of understanding
9|12|But if they violate their oaths after their covenant, and attack your religion with disapproval and criticism, then fight the leaders of disbelief. Surely their oaths are nothing to them, so that they may be stopped (their evil actions)
9|13|Will you not fight those people who have violated their oaths, conspired to expel the Messenger, and they were the first to attack you? Do you fear them? Allah has more right that you should fear Him, if you are believers
9|14|Fight against them so that Allah will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and grant you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people
9|15|and remove the anger from their (believers) hearts. Allah accepts the repentance of whom He wills. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
9|16|Do you think that you will be left alone (without trial) while Allah has not yet tested those among you who have striven hard and fought, have not taken helpers (friends) besides Allah and His Messenger, and the believers? Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do
9|17|It is not for the polytheists to maintain the Masjids of Allah while they witness against their own selves of disbelief. Their works are in vain and they shall abide in fire forever
9|18|The Masjids of Allah shall be maintained only by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day; establish prayers, give obligatory charity, and fear none but Allah. They are expected to be of the people of true guidance
9|19|Do you consider those who provide drinking water to the pilgrims and maintain the sacred Masjid (at Makkah) equal to those who believe in Allah, the Last Day, and strive hard and fight in the way of Allah? They are not equal before Allah. Allah does not guide those people who are the wrongdoers
9|20|Those who believe, emigrate, and strive hard and fight in Allah’s Way with their wealth and their lives are far higher in degree with Allah. They are the successful
9|21|Their Lord gives them glad tidings of Mercy from Him, (His) pleasure, and gardens (Paradise) for them in which there are everlasting delights
9|22|They will reside in it forever. Surely, with Allah there is the great reward
9|23|O you who believe! Don’t take your fathers and your brothers as protectors if they prefer disbelief to belief. Whoever of you takes them, those will be the wrongdoers
9|24|Say: If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your wives, your kindred, the wealth that you have acquired, the business in which you fear a loss, and the homes in which you delight are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger, and striving hard and fighting in His way, then wait until Allah brings about His decision. Allah does not guide the people who are disobedient
9|25|Truly Allah has given you victory on many battle fields, and on the day of Hunain (battle) when you rejoiced at your great number (more than enemy), it availed you nothing. The earth, vast as it is, was straitened for you, then you turned back and fled
9|26|Then Allah did send down His Peace (tranquility) on the Messenger (Muhammad), and on the believers, sent down forces (angels) which you did not see, and punished those disbelievers. Such was the recompense of disbelievers
9|27|Then after that Allah accepted the repentance of whom He willed. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
9|28|O you who believe! Surely, the polytheists are impure. So let them not come near the sacred Masjid (at Makkah) after this year, and if you fear poverty, Allah will enrich you out of His Bounty if He wills. Surely, Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
9|29|Fight against those who don’t believe in Allah, nor in the Last Day, nor forbid that which has been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger, nor acknowledge the religion of truth (Islam) among the people who were given the Scripture, until they pay the security tax willingly, and feel themselves subdued
9|30|The Jews say: “Ezra is the son of Allah,” and the Christians say: “Christ is the son of Allah”. That is their saying with their mouths. They imitate the saying of those who disbelieve from old. Allah’s curse is on them, how they are deluded away from the truth
9|31|They took their rabbis and priests to be their Lord besides Allah, and (also took as their Lord) Jesus, son of Mary, while they were commanded (in the Torah and the Gospel) to worship no one but one Allah; there is no one worthy of worship but Allah. Praise and glory be to Allah above those whom they associate with Allah
9|32|They want to extinguish Allah’s Light with their mouths, but Allah will not allow except that Allah perfects Allah’s Light even though the disbelievers hate it
9|33|It is Allah who has sent Allah’s Messenger (Muhammad) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islam), to make it superior over all other religions even though the polytheists hate it
9|34|O you who believe! Surely, there are many of the rabbis and the priests who devour the wealth of mankind in falsehood, and hinder them from the way of Allah. Those who hoard up gold and silver, and don’t spend it in the way of Allah, announce to them a painful punishment
9|35|On the Day when their wealth will be heated in the fire of hell, and their foreheads, flanks, and backs will be branded with it. (They will be told): “This is the treasure which you hoarded for yourselves. Now taste what you used to hoard.”
9|36|Surely, the number of months with Allah is 12 months (in a year) in the book of Allah since the day when Allah created the heavens and the earth. Of them 4 are sacred; that is the right religion. So don’t wrong yourselves in it. But fight against the polytheists collectively, as they fight against you collectively. Know that Allah is with those who are pious
9|37|Indeed the postponing (of a sacred month) is an addition to disbelief; thereby those who disbelieve are led to astray. They make it lawful one year and forbid it another year in order to adjust the number of months which Allah has forbidden, and make such forbidden ones lawful. The evil of their deeds is made pleasing to them. Allah does not guide the people, who disbelieve
9|38|O you who believe! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to march forth in the Way of Allah, you cling heavily to the earth? Are you pleased with the life of this world rather than the Hereafter? The enjoyment of this life is little compared to the life of the Hereafter
9|39|If you don’t march forth, He will punish you with a painful punishment and will replace you with other people, and you cannot harm Him at all, and Allah is Able over all things
9|40|If you don’t help him (Muhammad), (does not matter) indeed Allah did help him when those who disbelieve drove him out (of his town), the 2nd of 2, when they (Muhammad and Abu Bakr) were in the cave (the enemy came close to the opening of the cave), when he (Muhammad) said to his companion (Abu Bakr): “Don’t worry, surely Allah is with us.” Then Allah sent down His Peace upon him, and strengthened him with forces (angels) which you did not see, thus made the word of those who disbelieved the lowest, while the Words of Allah remain uppermost. Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
9|41|March forth whether you are light (healthy, young, and wealthy) or heavy (ill, old, and poor), strive hard with your wealth and your lives in the Way of Allah. This is better for you, if you understand
9|42|(For the hypocrites) if the gain would have been immediate and an easy journey, they would have certainly followed you, but the long journey (Tabuk expedition) was too hard for them. (For not joining you in the expedition) they would swear by Allah: “If only we could, we would certainly have come forth with you.” They destroy their own selves, and Allah knows that they are liars
9|43|May Allah forgive you (O Muhammad). Why did you grant permission to them (to stay behind), until those who told the truth become clear to you, and you had known the liars
9|44|Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day will not ask your permission (to be exempted) from fighting with their wealth and their lives. And Allah knows all of those who are pious
9|45|It is only those who don’t believe in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are in doubt that ask your permission (exemption from fighting). So in their doubts they waver
9|46|And if they had intended to march out, certainly they would have made some preparation for it. But Allah did not like their going forth; so He made them lag behind, and it was said (to them): “You sit along with those who sit (at home).”
9|47|Had they marched out with you, they would have added to you nothing except disorder, and they would have hurried about in your midst (spread corruption) and sowing sedition among you, and there are some among you who would have listened to them. Allah is All-Knower of those who are wrongdoers
9|48|Surely, they had plotted sedition before, and had upset matters for you, until the truth (victory) came and the Decree of Allah (Islam) became clear though they hated it
9|49|And among them is he (Jad bin Qais) who said: “Grant me leave (exempt from fighting) and don’t put me into trial (temptation).” Surely, they have already fallen into trial. Surely, hell is surrounding the disbelievers
9|50|If good befalls you (Muhammad), it grieves them, but if a calamity overtakes you, they say: “Indeed we took our precaution before,” and turn away rejoicing
9|51|Say: “Nothing will ever happen to us except what Allah has ordained for us. He is our Protector.” And in Allah let the believers put their trust
9|52|Say: “Do you expect for us anything except one of the 2 best things (martyrdom or victory)? But we are waiting for you either that Allah will afflict you with a punishment from Himself or at our hands. So wait, we too are waiting with you.”
9|53|Say: “Spend (in Allah’s Cause) willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from you. Surely, you are a disobedient people.”
9|54|Nothing prevents them from being accepted from them their contributions except that they disbelieved in Allah and in His Messenger (Muhammad); and they don’t come to the prayer except they are lazy; and that they offer no contributions but they are unwilling
9|55|So let not their wealth or their children amaze you (O Muhammad); in reality, Allah intends to punish them with these things in the life of this world, and that their souls may depart (die) while they are disbelievers
9|56|They swear by Allah that they are truly of you while they are not of you, but they are people (hypocrites) who are afraid of you
9|57|If they find a refuge, or caves, or a hiding place, they would turn to it straightway with a swift rush
9|58|Some of them are those who accuse you (O Muhammad) in the matter of the alms (donations). If they are given part from it, they are pleased, but if they are not given from it, behold! They are enraged
9|59|If they would be contented with what Allah and His Messenger had given them, and had said: “Allah is sufficient for us. Allah will soon give us His Bounty, and so will His Messenger. We implore to Allah (to enrich us).”
9|60|Only Sadaqah (here it is obligatory charity), alms are for the poor (who beg), the poor (who don’t beg), those employed to collect them (the funds), those whose hearts have been inclined (towards Islam), free the captives, those in debt, those (fighting) in Allah’s Way, and the wayfarer (a traveler who is in need). That is a duty imposed by Allah. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
9|61|And among them are those who hurt the Prophet (Muhammad) by saying: “He is (lending his) ear (to everyone).” Say: “He listens to what is best for you, he believes in Allah, has faith in the believers, and is a mercy to those of you who believe.” But those who hurt Allah’s Messenger (Muhammad) for them there is a painful punishment
9|62|They swear by Allah to you in order to please you. But Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) has more right, so they should please Allah if they are believers
9|63|Do they not know that whoever opposes and shows hostility to Allah and His Messenger, certainly will be in the fire of hell to abide in it? That is extreme disgrace
9|64|The hypocrites fear lest a chapter (of the Qur’an) should be revealed about them, showing them what is in their hearts. Say: “(Go ahead and) mock! But certainly Allah will bring to light all that you fear.”
9|65|If you ask them about this, they declare: “We were only talking idly and joking.” Say: “Was it at Allah and His Verses and His Messenger that you were mocking?”
9|66|Make no excuse; indeed you have disbelieved after you had believed. If We pardon some of you, We will punish others amongst you because they are criminals
9|67|The hypocrite men and women are from one another. They enjoin evil (disbelief), forbid from good (Islam), and close their hands (not spending in Allah’s Cause). They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten them. Surely, the hypocrites are the disobedient
9|68|Allah has promised the hypocrite men and women, the disbelievers, the fire of hell, they shall abide in it. It will be sufficient for them. Allah has cursed them and for them is a lasting punishment
9|69|Like those before you, they were mightier than you in power, and more abundant in wealth and children. They had enjoyed their portion (worldly life), so enjoy your portion (a while) as those before you enjoyed their portion (a while); and you indulge in play and pastime as they indulged in play and pastime. Such are they whose deeds are in vain in this world and in the Hereafter. Such are they who are the losers
9|70|Has not the story reached them of those before them? The people of Noah, Ad, Thamud; the people of Abraham, the people of Midian and the cities were overthrown (the people of Lot). Their Messengers came to them with clear proofs. So it was not Allah who wronged them, but they used to wrong themselves
9|71|The believers, men and women, some are protectors of others, they enjoin good, and forbid from evil; and they establish prayers and give the obligatory charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah will have His Mercy on them. Surely Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
9|72|Allah has promised the believers, men and women, gardens under which rivers flow to reside in it forever, and beautiful mansions in gardens of Eden (Paradise). The greatest bliss is the good pleasure of Allah. That is the supreme success
9|73|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm against them, their abode is hell, and worst indeed is the destination
9|74|They swear by Allah that they did not say (bad), but really they said the word of disbelief, and they disbelieved after accepting Islam. They resolved (plot to murder Prophet Muhammad) which they were unable to carry out. They could not find (any cause to do so) except that Allah and His Messenger had enriched them of His Bounty. If they repent, it will be better for them, but if they turn away, Allah will punish them with a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter. There is none for them on earth as a protector or a helper
9|75|And of them are some who made a covenant with Allah (saying): “If He bestowed on us His Bounty, we will surely give charity and will be certainly among those who are righteous.”
9|76|Then when He gave them His Bounty, they became stingy with it, turned away, and they were reluctant
9|77|So He punished them by putting hypocrisy into their hearts till the Day when they shall meet Him, because they broke (the covenant with Allah) which they had promised and because they used to tell lies
9|78|Don’t they know that Allah knows their secret ideas, and their secret talk, and that Allah is the All-Knower of the unseen
9|79|Those who defame the believers who give charity voluntarily and those who could not find (to give charity) except what is available to them, so they mock at them (believers). Allah will throw back their mockery on them, and they shall have a painful punishment
9|80|Whether you (O Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them (hypocrites) or not ask forgiveness for them, even if you ask forgiveness for them 70 times, Allah will never forgive them because they have disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad). And Allah does not guide those people who are disobedient
9|81|Those who stayed behind (from Tabuk expedition), rejoiced in their places behind the Messenger of Allah; and they hated to strive and fight with their wealth and their lives in the Way of Allah. They said: “Don’t march forth in the heat.” Say: “The fire of hell is more intense in heat.” If only they could understand
9|82|So let them laugh a little and they will cry much as a recompense of what they used to earn (by sins)
9|83|If Allah brings you back to a party of them (hypocrites), and they ask your permission to go out (to fight), say: “Never you shall go out with me, nor fight an enemy with me; you agreed to sit inactive on the first occasion, then you sit (now) with those who lag behind.”
9|84|And never (O Muhammad) pray (funeral prayer) for any of them (hypocrites) who dies, nor stand at their graves. Certainly they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and they died while they were disobedient
9|85|Let not their wealth or their children amaze you. Allah intends to punish them only with these things in this world, and their souls shall depart while they are disbelievers
9|86|And when a Surah (chapter from the Qur’an) is revealed, (enjoining) that: “They believe in Allah, strive hard, and fight along with His Messenger,” they ask your permission to exempt them (from fighting) those with wealth among them and say: “Leave us (behind), we would be with those who sit (at home).”
9|87|They are contented to be with those who sit behind (at home). Their hearts are sealed up, so they don’t understand
9|88|But the Messenger (Muhammad) and those who believed with him, strove hard, and fought with their wealth and their lives. Such are they for whom are the good things, and it is they who will be successful
9|89|Allah has prepared for them gardens (Paradise) under them rivers flow, to reside in it forever. That is the supreme success
9|90|And those who made excuses from the Bedouins came (to you, O Prophet) asking your permission to exempt them (from the battle) and stay at home. Those who had lied to Allah and His Messenger, a painful punishment will seize those of them who disbelieved
9|91|There is no blame on those who are weak or on ill or on those who find no (resources) what they spend (in fighting), if they are sincere (in duty) to Allah and His Messenger. No ground (of complaint) can there be against the righteous people. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
9|92|Nor (there is blame) on those who when came to you, requested that you provide them with mounts (conveyances), and when you said: “I can find no mounts for you,” they turned back on it, while their eyes were overflowing with tears of grief that they could not find anything to spend (for fighting)
9|93|The ground (of complaint) is only against those who are rich, and yet asked exemptions. They are content to be with who sit behind (at home) and Allah has sealed up their hearts so that they don’t know (what they are missing)
9|94|They (the hypocrites) will present excuses to you when you return to them. Say (O Muhammad): “Present no excuses, we shall not believe you. Allah has already informed us of the news concerning you. Allah and His Messenger will observe your deeds. Then you will be brought back to the All-Knower (Allah) of the unseen and the seen, and then He will inform you of what you used to do.”
9|95|They will swear by Allah to you when you return to them, so that you may turn away from them. So turn away from them. Surely, they are impure, and their living place is hell a recompense for that which they used to earn
9|96|They (the hypocrites) will swear to you so that you may be pleased with them, but if you are pleased with them, certainly Allah is not pleased with the people who are disobedient
9|97|The Bedouins are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more likely don’t know the limits which Allah has revealed to His Messenger. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
9|98|Of the Bedouins, there are some who look upon what they spend as a penalty and watch for calamities for you. On them be the calamity of evil. Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
9|99|Of the Bedouins there are some who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and look upon what they spend as means of nearness to Allah, (and a cause of receiving) the Messenger’s invocations. Indeed these are means of nearness for them. Allah will admit them to His Mercy. Certainly Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
9|100|The first and the foremost of the emigrants (migrated from Makkah to Madinah) and the helpers (the citizens of Madinah) and those who followed them in goodness (in faith), Allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him. He has prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), to reside in it forever. That is the great success
9|101|From those around you of the Bedouins are hypocrites, and so are some among the people of Madinah, they persist in hypocrisy. You (Muhammad) don’t know them, We know them. We shall punish them twice, and then they will be brought back to a great punishment
9|102|And (there are) others who have confessed their sins; they have mixed a deed that was righteous with another that was evil. Perhaps that Allah will turn in forgiveness upon them. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
9|103|Take alms from their wealth in order to cleanse their wealth and purify them with it, and invoke Allah for them. Surely! Your invocations are a source of security for them, and Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
9|104|Do they not know that Allah accepts repentance from His servants and takes the charity and that Allah alone is the Accepter of repentance, Merciful
9|105|Say (O Muhammad): “Do deeds! Allah will see your deeds, and so will His Messenger and the believers. You will be brought back to the All-Knower (Allah) of the unseen and the seen. Then He will inform you of what you used to do.”
9|106|And others await Allah’s Decree, whether He will punish them or will forgive them. And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
9|107|And as for those who built a Masjid (Masjid-e-Zirar) by way of harming, disbelief, to disunite between the believers, and as an outpost for those who made war against Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) before, they will indeed swear that they want nothing but good. Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars
9|108|You should never stand (to offer prayer) in it. Surely, the Masjid whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety is more deserving that you stand (to pray) in it. In it are people who love to clean and to purify themselves. Allah loves those who make themselves clean and pure
9|109|Who is a better one; the one who lays the foundation of a building on piety from Allah and His good pleasure, or the one who lays the foundation of a building on a cliff edge ready to crumble down, so that it will crumble to pieces with him into the fire of hell? And Allah does not guide the people who are the wrongdoers
9|110|Their building which they built will not cease to be a cause of doubt in their hearts unless their hearts are cut to pieces. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
9|111|Surely, Allah has purchased from the believers their lives and their properties; for (the price) that theirs shall be the Paradise. They fight in Allah’s Way, so they kill others and are killed. It is a true promise which is binding on Him mentioned in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Qur’an. Who is truer to (fulfill) its covenant than Allah? Then rejoice in your bargain which you have made with it. That is the supreme success
9|112|Those who repent to Allah, worship (Him), praise (Him), go out (in His Cause), bow down (in prayer), prostrate themselves (in prayer), enjoin people to the good and forbid people from evil, and observe the limits set by Allah (they make such a bargain with Allah). And (O Muhammad) give glad tidings to such believers
9|113|It is not (proper) for the Prophet and those who believe to ask Allah’s forgiveness for the polytheists even though they are close relatives, after it has become clear to them that they are the inmates of the fire
9|114|And Abraham was invoking (Allah’s) forgiveness for his father only because he had made promise to his father. But when it became clear to him that he (his father) is an enemy to Allah, he dissociated himself from him. Surely Abraham was humble, forbearing
9|115|And Allah will never lead a people astray after He has guided them, until He makes clear to them what they should avoid. Surely, Allah is All-Knower of everything
9|116|Surely, to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and He causes death. And besides Allah you have neither any protector nor any helper
9|117|Allah forgave the prophet, the emigrants, and the helpers who followed him (Muhammad) in time of distress (Tabuk expedition), after the hearts of a party of them had nearly deviated (from Right Way), but He accepted repentance from them. Certainly, to them He is Kind, Merciful
9|118|And (He also forgave) the 3 (did not join the Tabuk expedition) who were left (deferred by the Prophet) till when the earth was straitened to them as it was vast and their own selves were straitened on them. They perceived that there was no refuge from Allah but to Him. Then, He forgave them so that they could repent. Surely, Allah is Accepter of repentance, Merciful
9|119|O you who believe! Be afraid of Allah, and be with those who are truthful (in words and deeds)
9|120|It is not proper for the people of Madinah and those around them of the Bedouins to remain behind from Allah’s Messenger or to prefer their own lives to his life. That is because they neither afflicts them any thirst nor fatigue, nor hunger in the Way of Allah, nor take any step to anger the disbelievers, nor inflict any injury upon an enemy, but shall be written to their credit as a righteous deed. Surely, Allah does not waste the reward of the righteous people
9|121|Nor do they spend anything (in Allah’s Cause), small or large, nor cross a valley (in struggle), but is written to their credit; so that Allah may recompense them with the best of what they used to do
9|122|And it is not proper for the believers to go out to fight all together. Of every troop of them, why not a party only should go forth, so that they (who are left behind) may get instructions in the religion (Islam), and they may warn their people when they return to them so that they may beware (of evil)
9|123|O you who believe! Fight the disbelievers who are close to you, and let them find harshness in you; and you should know that Allah is with those who are the pious
9|124|Whenever there is a Surah (chapter of the Qur’an) sent down, some of them (hypocrites) say: “Which of you has increased faith by this?” As for those who believe, it has increased them in faith, and they rejoice
9|125|But as for those in whose hearts have disease, it will add suspicion and doubt to their suspicion, disbelief and doubt; and they will die while they are disbelievers
9|126|Do they not see that they are tested every year once or twice (with calamities, disease)? Yet, they neither turn in repentance, nor learn a lesson (from it)
9|127|Whenever there is a Surah (chapter from the Qur’an) sent down, they look at one another (saying): “Does any one see you?” Then they turn away. Allah has turned their hearts because they are a people who don’t understand
9|128|Surely, there has come to you a Messenger (Muhammad) from amongst yourselves. It grieves him that you should receive any injury or difficulty. He (Muhammad) is anxious for you (to be rightly guided, to repent to Allah, etc); he is kind and merciful towards the believers
9|129|But if they turn away, say (O Muhammad): “Allah is sufficient for me. There is no one worthy of worship except Allah, in Him I put my trust and He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.”
10|1|Alif-Lam-Ra. These are the Verses of the book (the Qur’an), full of wisdom
10|2|Is it strange for mankind that We have sent revelation to a man (Muhammad) from among themselves (saying) that: “Warn mankind and give good news to those who believe that they have footing (reward of good deeds) sure with their Lord?” But the disbelievers say: “This is indeed an evident sorcerer!”
10|3|Surely, your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in 6 days and then rose over the Throne (in a manner that suits His Majesty), and is disposing the affair of all things. No intercessor (can plead with Allah) except after His permission. This is Allah, your Lord; so worship Him (alone). Then, will you not remember
10|4|To Him is the return of all of you. The Promise of Allah is true. It is He who begins the creation and then repeats (will bring back to life) it so that He may reward those who believed and did righteous deeds with justice. But those who disbelieved will have a drink of boiling fluids and painful punishment because they used to disbelieve
10|5|It is He Who made the sun with a shining thing and the moon as a light and measured out for its stages so that you may compute the number of years and the reckoning. Allah did not create them but in truth. He has explained the Verses in detail for people who have knowledge
10|6|Surely, in the alternation of the night and the day and all that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for people who fear Him much
10|7|Surely, those who don’t hope for their meeting (Day of Judgment) with Us, but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the present world, and those who are heedless of Allah’s revelations
10|8|those, their abode will be the fire, because of what they used to earn
10|9|Surely, those who believe, do righteous deeds; their Lord will guide them through their faith, under them will flow rivers in the gardens of delight (Paradise)
10|10|Their way of request in it (will be): “Glory to You, O Allah!” and their greetings in it (will be): “Peace!” Their last request (will be): “All the praises are to Allah, the Lord of the worlds!”
10|11|And if Allah were to hasten for mankind the evil (they earned) as He would hasten on the good, then their respite would be already ruined. But We leave those who don’t expect their meeting with Us, in their trespasses, wandering blindly in distraction
10|12|And when harm touches someone, one invokes Us, lying down on side, or sitting or standing. But when We have removed harm from the same one, he walks away as if never invoked Us for that harm which had touched! Thus the deeds which they do made fair-seeming to the transgressors
10|13|And indeed, We have destroyed generations before you when they did wrong while their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they would not believe! Thus, do We requite the people who are sinners
10|14|Then We made you successors after them in the land so that We may see how you would conduct
10|15|And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, those who don’t hope for their meeting with Us, say: “Bring us a Qur’an other than this, or change it.” Say (O Muhammad): “It is not for me to change it on my own accord. I only follow that which is revealed to me. Surely, I fear if I were to disobey my Lord, the punishment of the Great Day (of Resurrection).”
10|16|Say (O Muhammad): “If Allah had so willed, I should not have recited it to you nor would He have made it known to you. Surely, I have stayed amongst you a lifetime (40 years) before this. Why don’t you think?”
10|17|So who does more wrong than the one who forges a lie against Allah or denies His Verses? Surely, the sinners will never succeed
10|18|And they worship besides Allah things that neither hurt them, nor benefit them, and they say: “These are our intercessors with Allah.” Say (O Muhammad): “Do you inform Allah of that which He does not know in the heavens and on the earth? Glorified and exalted is He above all that which they associate as partners (with Him)!”
10|19|Mankind was once one community (one religion); then they differed later (inventing different creeds). Had it not been for a word that went forth before from your Lord, it would have been settled between them regarding what they differed in it
10|20|And they say: “How is it that not a sign is sent down on him from his Lord?” Say: "Surely the unseen belongs to Allah alone. So wait, surely I am with you among those who wait.”
10|21|And when We let mankind taste mercy after some adversity has afflicted them, behold! They have a plot against Our Verses! Say: “Allah is Swifter in planning; indeed Our Messengers (angels) record all that which you plot.”
10|22|It is Allah who enables you to travel through land and sea; until when you are in the ships and they sail with them with a favorable wind, and they are glad in it; but when a stormy wind comes to it and the waves come to them from every place and they think that they are being encircled in it. Then they pray to Allah, making their faith pure for Him alone (saying): “If You (Allah) deliver us from this, we shall truly be of the grateful.”
10|23|But when He delivers them, behold! They disobey in the earth wrongfully. O mankind! Your rebellion is only against your own selves, a brief enjoyment of this worldly life, then to Us (at the end is) your return, and We shall inform you that which you used to do
10|24|Surely the likeness of the worldly life is as the water (rain) which We send down from the sky, it mingles with it (soil) and produces of the earth which people and cattle eat; until when the earth takes its adornments and is beautified, and its people think that they have all the powers of disposal over it, Our command reaches it by night or by day and We make it like a clean-mown harvest, as if it had not flourished yesterday! Thus We explain in detail the Verses for the people who think
10|25|Allah invites to the home of peace (Paradise) and guides whom He wills to the Right Way
10|26|Those who have done good, will have the best reward and even more. Neither dust nor humiliating disgrace shall cover their faces. They are the residents of Paradise; they will abide in it forever
10|27|Those who have earned evil deeds, the recompense of an evil deed will be like thereof, humiliating disgrace will cover them. They will not have any defender from Allah. As if their faces will be covered with pieces from the darkness of night. They are the inmates of the fire; they will abide in it forever
10|28|And the Day when We shall gather them all together, We shall say to those who did set partners in worship (with Us): "Stop at your place, you and your partners (whom you had worshipped).” We shall separate between them, and their partners will say: “It was not us you used to worship
10|29|Allah is sufficient for a witness between us and between you that we were indeed unaware of your worship.”
10|30|Thereupon, every person will know what he had earned before, and they will be brought back towards (the court of) Allah, their rightful Lord, and what they used to invent (false deities) will vanish from them
10|31|Say (O Muhammad): “Who provides for you from the sky and the earth? Or who owns hearing and sight? Who brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living? Who disposes the affairs?” They will say: “Allah.” Say: “Will you not then be afraid of Allah’s punishment?”
10|32|Such is Allah, your rightful Lord. So after the truth, what else can save error? How then are you turned away
10|33|Thus the Word of your Lord is justified against those who disobey that they don’t believe
10|34|Say: “Can any of your partners (of worship) originate the creation and then repeats it?” (If they don’t answer) say: “Allah originates the creation and then He repeats it. Then how are you misled (from the truth)?”
10|35|Say: “Is there any of your partners (of worship) can guide to the truth?” (If they don’t answer) say: “It is Allah Who guides to the truth. Then, who is more worthy to be followed: He Who can guide to the truth, or he who cannot find guidance (himself) unless he is guided? What is the matter with you? How do you judge?”
10|36|And most of them don’t follow but guess. Certainly, guess can be of no avail against the truth. Surely, Allah is Well-Aware of what they do
10|37|This Qur’an is not such as could ever be produced by other than Allah; in fact it is a confirmation of (revelation) which was before it (Torah, Psalms, Gospel) and a full explanation of the book; there is no doubt in it (that is revealed) from the Lord of the worlds
10|38|Or do they say: “He (Muhammad) has forged it?” Say: “So bring a chapter like it, and call upon (for aid) whoever you can besides Allah, if you are truthful!”
10|39|Nay, they deny the knowledge which they cannot comprehend and the interpretation of it has not yet fulfilled (seen). (In the same way) those before them did deny. Then see how the end of the wrongdoers was
10|40|And there are some of them who believe in it, and there are some of them who don’t believe in it. Your Lord is aware of all the evil-doers
10|41|And if they deny you, say: “I am (responsible) for my deeds and you are for your deeds! You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what you do!”
10|42|And among them there are some who (pretend to) listen to you, but can you make the deaf to hear even though they don’t understand
10|43|And among them there are some who (pretend to) look at you, but can you guide the blind, even though they don’t see
10|44|Truly! Allah does not do wrong to mankind in any way; but mankind do wrong to themselves
10|45|And on the Day when He shall gather them all together, it will look as if they had not stayed (in the world) but an Hour of a day. They will recognize each other. Indeed (they will realize that) those who will be ruined who denied the meeting with Allah, and they were not guided
10|46|Whether We show you (in your lifetime, O Muhammad) some of what We have promised them, or We cause you to die (before them), still their return is to Us, moreover Allah is Witness over what they used to do
10|47|And for every nation, there is a Messenger. When their Messenger comes, the matter will be judged between them with justice, and they will not be wronged
10|48|They say: “When this promise (will be fulfilled), if you speak the truth?”
10|49|Say (O Muhammad): “I have no power over any harm or benefit to myself except what Allah wills. For every nation, there is a deadline; when their deadline comes, neither can they delay it even for a moment nor can they advance it.”
10|50|Say: “Have you thought if His punishment should come to you by night or by day, (if you can not avert then) which portion from it would the sinners hasten on
10|51|Will you believe in it when it has actually befallen? Is it now (that you believe)? You used to (wish to) hasten it!”
10|52|Then it will be said to those who wronged themselves: “You taste the everlasting punishment! Should you not be recompensed for what you used to earn?”
10|53|And they ask you (O Muhammad) to inform them (saying): “Is it true (the punishment)?" Say: “Yes! By my Lord! Surely it is the absolutely true! You will not be able to escape it!”
10|54|And if every person who has wronged possessed all that is on the earth, would be willing to offer it in ransom (to redeem oneself, but it will not be accepted). They will regret in their hearts when they see the punishment. It will be judged (between them) with justice, and no wrong will be done to them
10|55|No doubt, surely, all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. No doubt, surely, Allah’s Promise is true, yet, most of them don’t know
10|56|It is He Who gives life, and causes death, and to Him you all shall return
10|57|O mankind! Surely a good advice has come to you from your Lord, a cure for that (disease) is in your hearts, guidance, and a Mercy for the believers
10|58|Say: “In the Bounty of Allah, and in His Mercy (for this Qur’an), so let them rejoice in it. That is better than what (worldly wealth) they collect.”
10|59|Say (O Muhammad to these polytheists): “Have you seen what provision Allah has sent down to you! You have made (some) of it lawful and (others) unlawful.” Say (O Muhammad): “Did Allah permit you, or do you invent a lie against Allah?”
10|60|And what (punishment) do you think for those who invent lies against Allah, on the Day of Resurrection? Truly, Allah is full of Bounty to mankind, but most of them are not grateful
10|61|Whatever you may be engaged in, whatever you may be reciting from the Qur’an, and whatever deeds you may be doing, We are witness over you when you are doing it. Nothing is hidden from your Lord even the weight of an atom on the earth or in the heaven. Neither anything smaller than that nor larger, but is written in a Clear Record
10|62|No doubt! Surely, for the friends of Allah, no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve
10|63|Those who believe, and (constantly) fear Allah
10|64|for them there are glad tidings in the life of the world, and in the Hereafter. No change can be in the Words of Allah, this is the supreme success
10|65|And let not their speech grieves you (O Muhammad), surely, all power and honor belongs to Allah. He is All-Hearer, All-Knower
10|66|No doubt! Surely, whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Allah. Those who don’t follow and invoke the partners besides Allah, they don’t follow but guess, and they don’t but invent lies
10|67|It is He Who has appointed for you the night that you may rest in it, and the day to make things visible to you. Surely, there are Verses in this for a people who listen
10|68|They say: “Allah has begotten a son.” Glory be to Him! He is Rich. He owns all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth! You have no proof for this. Do you say against Allah what you don’t know
10|69|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, those who invent lie against Allah will never be successful.”
10|70|(They have) a brief enjoyment in this world, then to Us will be their return, and then We shall make them taste the severest punishment because they used to disbelieve
10|71|And recite to them the news of Noah. When he said to his people: “O my people, if my stay with you and my reminding you of the Verses of Allah is hard on you, then I put my trust in Allah. So gather your plot, you and your partners, and let not your plot be in doubt for you. Then pass your sentence on me and give me no respite
10|72|But if you turn away, I have not asked you any reward, my reward is not but from Allah, and I have been commanded to be of the Muslims.”
10|73|They denied him. So We saved him and those with him in the ship, and We made them generations replacing one after another while We drowned those who denied Our Verses. See how the end of those who were warned was
10|74|Then We sent after him Messengers to their people, they brought them clear proofs, but they would not believe what they had already rejected before. Thus, We seal up the hearts of the transgressors
10|75|Then We sent after them Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our Verses. But they behaved arrogantly and they were sinners
10|76|So when the truth came to them from Us, they said: “This is indeed clear magic.”
10|77|Moses said: “Is this what you say about the truth when it has come to you? Is this magic? The magicians are not successful.”
10|78|They said: “Have you come to us to turn us away from the faith of our forefathers in order that you 2 (Moses and Aaron) may have greatness (become leaders) in the land? We are not going to believe in you 2!”
10|79|Pharaoh said: “Bring to me every skilled sorcerer.”
10|80|When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them: “Cast down what you want to cast!”
10|81|Then when they had cast down, Moses said: “What you have brought, it is sorcery; surely Allah will make it invalid. Surely, Allah does not set right the work of the evil-doers
10|82|And Allah will establish and make apparent the truth by His Words, however sinners may hate it.”
10|83|But none believed in Moses except the offspring of his people, because of the fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, lest he should persecute them; and surely, Pharaoh was an arrogant tyrant on the earth, he was indeed one of the transgressors
10|84|Moses said: “O my people! If you believe in Allah, then put your trust in Him if you are Muslims.”
10|85|They said: “In Allah we put our trust. Our Lord! Make us not a trial for the folk who are wrongdoers
10|86|and save us by Your Mercy from the disbelieving folk.”
10|87|And We revealed to Moses and his brother (saying) that: “You provide residences for your people in Egypt, and make your residences as your Qiblah (for worship), and establish prayers perfectly, and give glad tidings to the believers.”
10|88|And Moses said: “Our Lord! You have indeed bestowed on Pharaoh and his chiefs splendor and wealth in the life of this world. Our Lord! Is it because they may lead people astray from Your Way? Our Lord! Destroy their wealth, and harden their hearts, so that they will not believe until they see the painful punishment.”
10|89|Allah said: “Surely, the prayer of you both is accepted. So you both keep to the Right Way, and don’t follow the way of those who don’t know the truth.”
10|90|And We took the children of Israel across the sea. Pharaoh followed them with his hosts in oppression and enmity, until when drowning overtook him, he said: “I believe that there is no one worthy of worship but He whom the children of Israel believe, and I am one of the Muslims.”
10|91|(It was said): “Now (you believe)! But a little while before you refused to believe and you were one of the evil-doers
10|92|So this day We shall save your (dead) body (from the sea) so that you may be a sign to those who will come after you! Surely, many among mankind are heedless of Our Verses.”
10|93|And indeed, We settled the children of Israel in an honorable residing place and provided them with good things. They did not differ until the knowledge came to them. Surely, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in that (those matters) in which they used to differ
10|94|So if you (O Muhammad) are in doubt concerning that which We have revealed to you (that your name is in the Torah and the Gospel), then ask those who have been reading the book (the Torah and the Gospel) before you. Surely, the truth has come to you from your Lord. So you be not of those who doubt
10|95|and you be not one of those who deny Verses of Allah; for then you shall be one of the losers
10|96|Truly! Those against whom the Word of your Lord has been justified, will not believe
10|97|even if every Verse should come to them, until they see the painful punishment
10|98|Was there any town that believed (after seeing the punishment), and their faith benefited them (from the punishment) except the people of Jonah? When they believed, We removed from them the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world, and permitted them to enjoy for a while
10|99|If your Lord had willed, those on earth would have believed, all of them together. So, will you (O Muhammad) then compel mankind until they become believers
10|100|It is not (possible) for anyone to believe except by the permission of Allah, and He will put the wrath on those who don’t understand
10|101|Say: “Behold what is in the heavens and the earth.” But neither Verses nor warnings benefit those who don’t believe
10|102|Then do they wait for (anything) except (for destruction) like the days of those who passed away before them? Say: “So wait, I too will wait with you.”
10|103|Then (at the end) We save Our Messengers and those who believe! Thus it is incumbent upon Us to save the believers
10|104|Say (O Muhammad): “O you mankind! If you are in doubt as to my religion (Islam), then I will never worship those whom you worship besides Allah. But I worship Allah Who causes you to die, and I am commanded to be one of the believers.”
10|105|And (it is revealed to me): “Direct entirely yourself (O Muhammad) towards the religion upright, and you never be one of the polytheists
10|106|Don’t invoke besides Allah, who can neither benefit nor harm you, but if you do so, surely you will then be of the wrongdoers
10|107|And if Allah afflicts you with hurt, there is none who can remove it but He; and if He intends for you any good, there is none who can repel His Favor. He reaches with it whoever He wills of His servants. And He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
10|108|Say: “O you mankind! Surely the truth (the Qur’an and Muhammad) has come to you from your Lord. So whoever follows guidance (Right Way), then only follows for its own good and whoever goes astray, they only goes strays at its own risk; and I am not a custodian over you.”
10|109|And (O Muhammad) follow what is revealed to you, and be patient till Allah gives judgment. And He is the Best of judges
11|1|Alif-Lam-Ra. This is a book, the Verses in it are perfected, then explained in detail from One (Allah), who is All-Wise and Well-Acquainted
11|2|(saying) you to worship none but Allah. Surely, I (Muhammad) am to you from Him a Warner and a bearer of glad tidings
11|3|And you should seek forgiveness of your Lord, and turn in repentance to Him, He will grant you good enjoyment for an appointed term, and bestow His Grace to every owner of grace. But if you turn away, then I (Muhammad) fear for you the punishment of a great Day (of Resurrection)
11|4|To Allah is your return, and He is Omnipotent (has power) over every thing
11|5|No doubt! They cover up their hearts so that they may hide from Him. Surely, even when they cover themselves with their garments, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal. Surely, He is All-Knower of everything of that (innermost secrets) which is in the hearts
11|6|And there is no moving creature on earth but its provision is due from Allah. And He knows its residing place and its deposit (uterus or grave); all is in a clear book
11|7|And it is He Who has created the heavens and the earth in 6 days and His Throne was on the water, so that He may test you which of you are the best in deeds. But if you say (to them): “You shall indeed be raised up after death,” those who disbelieve would be sure to say: “This is nothing but obvious magic.”
11|8|And if We delay the punishment for them till a determined time, they are sure to say: “What keeps it back?” Surely, on the day it reaches them, nothing will turn it away from them and they will be surrounded by what they used to mock at it
11|9|And if We give a person taste of Mercy from Us, and then withdraws it from him, surely he is despairing, ungrateful
11|10|But if We let those taste good (favor) after evil (poverty and harm) have touched them, they are sure to say: “The ills have departed from us.” Surely they are jubilant, and arrogant
11|11|Except those who show patience and do righteous good deeds, those will have their forgiveness and a great reward
11|12|So perhaps you (Muhammad) may omit to recite a part of what is revealed to you and your heart may feel straitened for it because they might say: “Why a treasure has not been sent down to him or an angel has come with him?” But you are only a Warner! And Allah is the guardian over all things
11|13|Or they say: “He (Muhammad) has forged it (the Qur’an).” Say: “Then you bring 10 forged chapters like it, and call whoever you can other than Allah, if you speak the truth
11|14|Then if they don’t answer you, then know that it (the Qur’an) is sent down with the knowledge of Allah and that there is no one worthy of worship except He! Will you then be Muslims?”
11|15|Whoever desires the life of the world and its glitter; We shall pay in full to them (the wages of) their deeds therein and they will have no reduction therein
11|16|They are those there will be nothing for them in the Hereafter but fire and whatever they did (deeds) are in vain. There is no effect of that which they used to do
11|17|Can they (be like those) who have clear proof (the Qur’an) from their Lord and to whom a witness (Muhammad) from Him recites it; and before them came the book of Moses, a guidance and a Mercy? They will believe in it, but those of the sects that reject it (the Qur’an); the fire will be their promised meeting place. So don’t be in doubt about it. Surely, it is the truth from your Lord, but most of the mankind does not believe
11|18|Who does more wrong than the one who invents a lie against Allah? Such people will be brought before their Lord and the witnesses will say: “These are the ones who lied against their Lord!” No doubt! The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers
11|19|those who hinder others from the way of Allah and seek a crookedness therein, they are disbelievers in the Hereafter
11|20|Such people will not be able to escape (from Allah’s punishment) on earth, or they will have any protectors besides Allah. The punishment will be doubled for them. They could not bear to hear the truth and they used not to see the truth
11|21|They are those who have lost their own selves and what they were inventing (false deities) will vanish from them
11|22|Certainly, they are those who will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter
11|23|Surely, those who believe, do righteous deeds, and humble themselves before their Lord, they will be residents of Paradise, and they will reside therein forever
11|24|The example of the 2 parties is as the (one who is) blind and the deaf, and the (other who is) seer and the hearer. Are they equal when compared? Will you not then take heed
11|25|And indeed We sent Noah to his people (and he said): “Surely I have come to you as a plain Warner
11|26|that you worship none but Allah, surely I fear for you the punishment of a painful Day.”
11|27|So the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said: “We see you not but a man like ourselves, and we see anyone follow you but those who are the rejected among us without deep thinking. We don’t see in you any merit above us, in fact we think you are a liar.”
11|28|He said: “O my people! See if I am on a clear proof from my Lord, and has given me a Mercy from Him, but that Mercy has been hidden from your sight. Can I compel you to accept it when you have hatred for it
11|29|And O my people! I ask you no wealth for it, my reward is from none but Allah. I am not going to drive away those who have believed. Surely, they are going to meet their Lord, but I see you a people that are ignorant
11|30|And O my people! Who will help me against Allah, if I drove them away? Will you not then give a thought
11|31|And I don’t say to you that with me are the treasures of Allah, nor that I know the unseen; nor do I say surely I am an angel, nor I say of those whom your eyes look down upon that Allah will never bestow any good on them. Allah knows best what is in their inner-selves (belief). Surely I will be in that case (if I say anything like this) indeed one of the wrongdoers.”
11|32|They said: “O Noah! Surely you have disputed us and you have prolonged much the dispute with us, now bring upon us what you have threatened us with if you are of the truthful.”
11|33|He said: “Only Allah will bring it (punishment) on you if He wills, and then you will not escape it
11|34|My advice will not profit you even if I wish to give you good counsel, if Allah’s Will is to keep you astray. He is your Lord and to Him you shall return.”
11|35|Or they (disbelievers of Makkah) say: “He (Muhammad) has fabricated it (the Qur’an).” Say: “If I have fabricated it, upon me be my crimes, but I am innocent of what crime you commit.”
11|36|And it was revealed to Noah: “None of your people will believe except those who have already believed. So don’t be sad because of what they do
11|37|Construct the ship under Our Eyes and with Our Revelation, and don’t plead with Me on behalf of those who do wrong; they are surely to be drowned.”
11|38|He was constructing the ship, and whenever the chiefs of his people passed by him, they made a mockery of him. He said: “If you mock at us, so we mock at you as you mock
11|39|You will know who will be covered by a humiliating punishment and who will fall on a lasting punishment.”
11|40|It was till when there came Our Command and the oven (Al-Tannur) gushed forth (water from the earth). We said: “Carry therein, of each kind 2 (male and female), and your family, except those against whom the word has already gone forth, and those who believe. Those who believed with him were only a few.”
11|41|And he (Noah) said: “Embark in it, in the name of Allah (who has) its moving course and its resting anchorage. Surely, my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.”
11|42|So it (the ship) sailed with them amidst the waves like mountains, and Noah called out to his son and he was in apart: “O my son! Embark with us and not be with the disbelievers.”
11|43|He (the son) replied: “I will take myself (refuge) to a mountain; which will save me from the water.” Noah said: This Day there is no savior from the Decree of Allah except the one on whom He has Mercy.” The wave came in between them, so he (the son) was among the drowned
11|44|And it was said: “O earth! Swallow up your water, and O sky! Withhold (your rain).” The water subsided and the Decree (of Allah) was fulfilled. And it (the ship) rested on mount Judi, and it was said: “Away with the people who are wrongdoers!”
11|45|And Noah called his Lord and said: “O my Lord! Surely, my son is of my family. Certainly, Your Promise is true, and You are the most Just of the judges.”
11|46|He replied: “O Noah! Surely, he is not of your family; surely his work is not righteous. So don’t ask Me anything of which you have no knowledge! Indeed I admonish you, lest you become one of the ignorant.”
11|47|Noah said: “O my Lord! Surely I seek refuge with You for asking You that of which I have no knowledge. And unless You forgive me and have Mercy on me, I shall indeed be one of the losers.”
11|48|It was said: “O Noah! Come down (from the ship) with peace from Us and blessings on you and on the people who are with you. Other people to whom We shall grant their pleasures (for some time), then a painful punishment will reach them from Us.”
11|49|This is the news of the unseen which We have revealed to you (O Muhammad). Neither you nor your people knew this before. So be patient. Surely, the (good) end is for the pious
11|50|And to Ad people (We sent) their brother Hud. He said: “O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other one worthy of worship but Him. You don’thing but invent lies
11|51|O my people! I ask you no reward for it (message). My reward is not but from Him, Who created me. Then will you not understand
11|52|And O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord, and then repent to Him. He will send (from the sky) abundant rain to you, and add strength to your strength. So don’t turn away as sinners.”
11|53|They said: “O Hud! No evidence you have brought to us. We shall not leave our deity just for your saying! We are not believers in you
11|54|We don’t say but (perhaps) some of our gods - (false deities) has seized you with evil.” He said: “Surely I call Allah to witness and bear you witness that I am free from that which you ascribe as partners (in worship)
11|55|other than Him. So plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite
11|56|Surely I put my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord! There is not a moving creature but He has grasped its destiny. Surely, my Lord is on the Right Way
11|57|So if you turn away, then surely, I have conveyed the message what I was sent with to you. My Lord will make other people succeed besides you, and you will not harm Him in the least. Surely, my Lord is Guardian over all things.”
11|58|And when Our Commandment came, We saved Hud and those who believed with him by a Mercy from Us, and We saved them from a severe punishment
11|59|Such were Ad (people). They rejected the Verses of their Lord and disobeyed His Messengers, and followed the command of every proud stubborn oppressor
11|60|And they were pursued by a curse in this world and will be on the Day of Resurrection. No doubt! Surely, Ad disbelieved in their Lord. So away with Ad, the people of Hud
11|61|And to the Thamud people, (We sent) their brother Saleh. He said: “O my people! Worship Allah, you have no other deity but Him. He brought you forth from the earth and settled you therein. So ask the forgiveness of Him, and then turn to Him in repentance. Certainly, my Lord is Near, Responsive.”
11|62|They said: “O Saleh! Surely you have been among us as a figure of good hope before this message. Do you now forbid us to worship what our fathers have worshipped? Surely, we are really in grave doubt as to that which you invite us to it.”
11|63|He said: “O my people! Do you see if I am on a clear proof from my Lord, and has given me Mercy from Him, who then will help me against Allah if I disobey Him? Then you increase me not but in loss
11|64|O my people! This she-camel of Allah is a sign to you. So leave her to feed on Allah’s earth, and don’t touch her with evil, lest a near punishment should seize you.”
11|65|But they killed her. So he said: “Enjoy yourselves in your homes for 3 days. This is a promise that will not be denied.”
11|66|So when Our Commandment came, We saved Saleh and those who believed with him by a Mercy from Us, and from the disgrace of that Day. Surely, your Lord, He is the All-Strong, the All-Mighty
11|67|The awful blast overtook those who wronged, so they lay (dead), prostrate in their homes
11|68|as if they had never lived there. No doubt! Surely, Thamud disbelieved in their Lord. So away the people of Thamud
11|69|And surely, there came Our Messengers (angels) to Abraham with glad tidings. They said: “Greetings of peace!” He answered: “Greetings of peace!” and he hastened to entertain with a roasted calf
11|70|But when he saw their hands not reaching towards it (the meal), he felt some mistrust of them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: “Don’t fear, we have been sent against the people of Lot.”
11|71|His wife was standing there and she laughed. But We gave her glad tidings of (her son) Isaac, and after Isaac, of (grandson) Jacob
11|72|She said: “Woe unto me! Shall I bear a child now when I am an old woman, and this is my husband, an old man? Surely! This is a strange thing!”
11|73|They said: “Do you wonder at the Decree of Allah? The Mercy of Allah and His Blessings be on you, O the family (of Abraham) of the house. Surely, He is All-Praiseworthy, All-Glorious.”
11|74|Then when the fear had gone away from (the mind of) Abraham, and the glad tidings had reached him, he began to plead with Us for the people of Lot
11|75|Surely, Abraham was, without doubt, forbearing, used to invoke Allah with humility, and was regretful (to Allah)
11|76|(The angels said): “O Abraham! Forsake this (topic). Indeed, the commandment of your Lord surely has come. Surely, a punishment will come for them which cannot be turned back.”
11|77|And when Our Messengers (angels) came to Lot, he was grieved on their account and felt helpless to offer protection for them. He said: “This is a painful Day.”
11|78|And his people came rushing towards him, and since they used to commit crimes (sodomy) before, he said: “O my people! Here are my daughters (of my nation); they are purer for you (if you marry lawfully). So fear Allah and don’t disgrace me with regard to my guests! Is there not among you a single man right-minded?”
11|79|They said: “Surely you know that we don’t have any desire in your daughters, and indeed you know well what we want!”
11|80|He said: “I wish if I had that strength (to overpower) you or that I could find myself some powerful support.”
11|81|They (Messengers) said: “O Lot! Surely, we are the Messengers (angels) from your Lord! They will not reach you! So travel with your family in a part of the night, and let not any of you look back except your wife (who should remain behind). Surely, it (punishment) will afflict her, will afflict them. Indeed, morning is their appointed time. Is not the morning near?”
11|82|So when Our Commandment came, We turned (towns of Sodom) upside down, and rained on it stones of baked clay, piled up
11|83|marked from your Lord, and they are not far from the wrongdoers
11|84|To the Midian people (We sent) their brother Shuaib. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no other one worthy of worship but Him, and don’t give short measure and weight. Surely I see you in prosperity; and surely I fear for you punishment of a Day encompassing
11|85|O my people! Give full measure and weight in justice. Don’t defraud the people of their due things and don’t commit mischief in the land causing corruption
11|86|What is left by Allah is better for you if you are believers. And I am not a guardian over you.”
11|87|They said: “O Shuaib! Does your prayer command that we give up what our forefathers used to worship or that we give up doing what we like with our property? Surely, you are the gracious, right-minded!”
11|88|He said: “O my people! You see if I am on clear evidence from my Lord and He has given me a good sustenance from Him. I don’t wish that I contradict to you what I forbid you from it. I don’t desire but reform so far as I am able (within my power). My success is not except from Allah, in Him I trust and to Him I repent
11|89|And O my people! Let not my separation harm you to befall you similar to what befall on the people of Noah or of Hud people or of Saleh people, and the people of Lot are not far off from you
11|90|And ask forgiveness of your Lord, and then turn in repentance to Him. Surely, my Lord is Merciful, Loving.”
11|91|They said: “O Shuaib! We don’t understand much of what you say. We see you a weak (blind man) among us. Was it not for your family, we would certainly have stoned you, and you are not powerful against us.”
11|92|He said: “O my people! Is then my family of more weight with you than Allah? You have taken Him away behind your backs. Surely, my Lord surrounds of what all you do
11|93|And O my people! Act according to your ability, and surely I am acting my way. You will know who it is on whom the punishment descends that will cover with disgrace, and who is a liar! Watch you! Surely, I too am watching with you.”
11|94|And when Our Commandment came, We saved Shuaib and those who believed with him by a Mercy from Us. The awful blast seized the wrongdoers and they lay prostrate dead in their homes
11|95|as if they had never lived there! So away with Midian just as away with Thamud
11|96|And indeed We sent Moses with Our Verses and a clear authority
11|97|to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and the command of Pharaoh was not rightly guide
11|98|He will go ahead of his people on the Day of Resurrection, and will lead them into the fire. Evil indeed is the place to which they will be brought
11|99|They were pursued by a curse in this life and on the Day of Resurrection. How bad is the given gift (curse)
11|100|That is from the news of the towns which We relate to you (Muhammad); of them (some are) standing, and (some have) ceased to exist
11|101|We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves. So their deity was other than Allah whom they invoked, profited them nothing when there came the command of your Lord, nor did they add to them but destruction
11|102|Such is the seizure of your Lord when He seizes the town (population) while they are doing wrong. Surely, His seizure is painful and severe
11|103|Indeed in that there is a sure lesson for those who fear the punishment of the Hereafter. That is a Day when mankind will be gathered together for it, and that will be a Day of witness (all will be present)
11|104|And We don’t delay it but for a fixed term
11|105|When the Day will come, no one will speak except by His permission. Some among them will be wretched and others blessed
11|106|As for those who are wretched, they will be in the fire, for them in it is sighing and inhaling
11|107|They will reside therein as long as the heavens and the earth will last, except what your Lord wills. Surely your Lord is the doer of what He wants
11|108|And as for those who are blessed, they will be in Paradise, abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth will last, except what your Lord wills, a gift without an end
11|109|So don’t be in doubt as to what these people worship. They worship nothing but what their forefathers used to worship before them. Surely, We shall repay them their portion in full without any decrease
11|110|Indeed We gave the book to Moses, but differences arose therein, and had it not been for a word that had gone forth before from your Lord, the case would have been judged between them. Indeed they are in suspicious doubt about it (this Qur’an)
11|111|And surely to each of them your Lord will repay them in full for their works. Surely, He is fully aware of what they do
11|112|So you (Muhammad) stand firm and straight (on religion) as you are commanded and those who turn in repentance (to Allah) with you, and don’t transgress. Surely, He is All-Seer of what you do
11|113|Don’t incline towards those who do wrong, lest the fire should touch you, and you will not have any protector other than Allah, nor you will be helped
11|114|Establish prayers perfectly at the 2 ends of the day and in some Hours of the night. Surely the good deeds remove the evil deeds (small sins). That is a reminder for the mindful
11|115|Be patient; for surely, Allah does not waste the reward of the righteous people
11|116|If there had not been among the generations before you, people having wisdom, prohibiting others from mischief in the earth, except a few of those whom We saved from among them. Those who did wrong, pursued what they were provided with good things in it (worldly life), and they were sinners
11|117|Your Lord would never destroy the towns wrongfully, while their people were right-doers
11|118|If your Lord had so willed, He could surely have made mankind one nation, but they will not cease to disagree
11|119|except those on whom your Lord has bestowed His Mercy and for that He created them. The Word of your Lord shall be fulfilled (His saying): “Surely, I shall fill hell with jinns and human all together.”
11|120|And all that We relate to you (O Muhammad) of the news of the Messengers is that We may make strong and firm your heart thereby. In this (the Qur’an) has come to you with the truth, as well as an admonition and a reminder for the believers
11|121|Say to those who don’t believe: “Act according to your ability, surely We are acting (in our way)
11|122|And you wait! We (too) are waiting.”
11|123|And to Allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth and to Him all affairs return. So worship Him (O Muhammad) and put your trust in Him. Your Lord is not unaware of what you people do
12|1|Alif-Lam-Ra. These are the Verses of the clear book
12|2|Surely, We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur’an so that you may understand
12|3|We relate to you (Muhammad) the best of the stories through this Qur’an what We have revealed to you. Though before this you were among those who did not know
12|4|(Remember) when Joseph said to his father: “O my father! Surely, I saw (in a dream) 11 stars, the sun, and the moon - I saw them prostrating themselves to me.”
12|5|He (the father) said: “O my son! Don’t relate your vision to your brothers, lest they plot against you a plot. Surely! Satan is an open enemy to human beings
12|6|Thus your Lord will choose you; teach you from interpretation of dreams, perfect His Favor on you, and on the offspring of Jacob, just as He perfected it on your 2 forefathers, Abraham and Isaac previously! Surely, your Lord is All-Knower, All-Wise.”
12|7|Surely, there are signs in Joseph and his brothers for those who ask
12|8|When they (his step brothers) said: “Truly, Joseph and his brother (Benjamin) are dearer to our father than us, but we are a strong group (of 10). Really, our father is in a plain error
12|9|Kill Joseph or cast him out to some other land, so that the favor of our father may be given to us exclusively, and after that we will be righteous people.”
12|10|One of them said: “Don’t kill Joseph, but throw him down to the bottom of a well, so that some travelers of caravan may pick him if you are doing.”
12|11|They said: “O our father! Why do you not trust us with Joseph, when we are indeed his well-wishers
12|12|Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play. Surely, we will take care of him.”
12|13|He (Jacob) said: “Truly, it will worry me if you take him away. I fear lest a wolf should devour him while you are careless of him.”
12|14|They said: “If a wolf devours him while we are a strong group, then surely, we are the losers.”
12|15|So, when they went away with him, they all agreed to put him down in the bottom of the well. We inspired in him (Joseph): “Indeed, you will (one day) inform them this about their affair, now they don’t know you.”
12|16|And they came to their father in the early part of the night weeping
12|17|They said: “O our father! Surely we went racing with one another, we left Joseph by our belongings, and a wolf devoured him! But you will never believe us even though we are truthful.”
12|18|They brought (as proof) his shirt (stained with) false blood. He said: “Nay, but your own souls have made up a tale. So patience is most fitting for me. It is Allah (alone) who can help me against what you assert.”
12|19|There came a caravan of travelers, they sent their water-drawer who let down his bucket (into the well). He said (seeing Joseph): “What a good news! This is a boy.” So they concealed him like merchandise (a captive). And Allah knew what they did
12|20|And they sold him for a low price, for a few dirham (silver coins). And they were of those not concerned about him
12|21|And he (the man) from Egypt who bought him, said to his wife: “Make his stay comfortable, may be that he will profit us or we shall adopt him as a son.” Thus We established Joseph in the land and arranged to teach him the interpretation of events. And Allah has full power and control over His Affairs, but most of the people don’t know
12|22|And when he (Joseph) attained his full manhood, We bestowed on him wisdom and knowledge (the Prophethood). Thus We reward the righteous people
12|23|And she (wife of the master) sought to seduce (do evil act) him who was in her house. She closed the doors and said: “Come on, O you.” He said: “I seek refuge in Allah! Truly, he (your husband) is my master! He made my stay agreeable! Surely, the wrongdoers will not be successful.”
12|24|And indeed she did desire him and he would have inclined to her desire had he not seen the evidence of his Lord. Thus it was that We turned away from him evil and indecent deeds. Surely, he was one of Our sincere devotees
12|25|So they raced with one another to the door and she tore his shirt from the back (while trying to stop). They both found her husband at the door. She said: “What is the punishment for him who intended an evil design against your wife except imprisonment or a painful punishment?”
12|26|He (Joseph) said: “It was she who sought to seduce me.” A witness of her household bore witness (saying): “If his shirt is torn from the front, then she is speaking the true and he is lying
12|27|But if his shirt is torn from the back, then she is lying and he is speaking the truth.”
12|28|So when he (her husband) saw his (Joseph’s) shirt torn from the back; he said (to her): “Surely, it is your plot (O women). Certainly your plot is mighty
12|29|O Joseph! Turn away from this, and you (O my wife) ask forgiveness for your sin. Surely, you were of the sinful.”
12|30|And women in the city (heard the incident and) said: “The wife of Al-Aziz is seeking to seduce her young captive, indeed she has fallen in love madly with him. Surely, we see her in plain error.”
12|31|So when she heard about their accusation, she invited them, and prepared a banquet for them; and she gave each one of them a knife (to cut fruit). (When they were ready to cut) she asked (Joseph): “Come out before them.” When they saw him, they exalted him (at his beauty) and (to their surprise) cut their hands. They exclaimed: “Allah forbid! This is not a man! This is none but a noble angel!”
12|32|She said: “This is he (young man) about whom you did blame me. Indeed I sought to seduce him, but he refused. Now if he does not do what I order him, he will certainly be cast into prison, and will be one of those who are disgraced.”
12|33|He (Joseph) said: "O my Lord! Prison is dearer to me than what they invite me to it. Unless You turn away their plot from me, I may feel inclined towards them and be one of the ignorant.”
12|34|So his Lord answered his prayer and turned away their plot from him. Surely, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
12|35|Then it appeared to them after they had seen the proofs (of his innocence) to imprison him for a while
12|36|And there entered with him 2 young men in the prison. One of them said: “Surely, I saw myself (in a dream) pressing wine.” The other said: “Surely, I saw myself (in a dream) carrying bread on my head and birds were eating from it.” (They said): “Tell us the interpretation of these dreams. Surely, we think you (are one) of the righteous people.”
12|37|He (Joseph) replied: “No food will come to you as your provision, but I will inform you of its interpretation before it (the food) comes to you. This is what my Lord has taught me. Surely, I have abandoned the religion of those people who don’t believe in Allah and they are disbelievers in the Hereafter
12|38|I follow the religion of my forefathers - Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. It is not for us that we attribute any partners with Allah. This is the Grace of Allah to us and to mankind, but most of the people don’t thank
12|39|O my 2 companions of the prison! Are many different Lords (worthy of worship) better or Allah, the One, the Irresistible
12|40|You don’t worship besides Him but mere names which you and your forefathers have named (invented), for which Allah has not sent down any authority. The command is not but for Allah. He has commanded that you worship none but Him alone, that is the true religion, but most people don’t know
12|41|O 2 companions of the prison! (The interpretation of dream is) one of you will (be released and) serve wine to his master (the king of Egypt); and the other will be crucified, and birds will eat from his head. That is how the cases will be judged concerning which you both inquired.”
12|42|And he said to the one of them whom he knew to be saved (released): “Mention me to your master (king).” But Satan made him forget to mention it to his master. So he (Joseph) stayed in prison a few more years
12|43|The king (of Egypt) said: “Surely, I saw (in a dream) 7 fat cows, whom 7 lean cows were devouring; and 7 green ears of corn, and 7 others dry. O notables! Explain to me my dream if you are able to interpret the dreams.”
12|44|They said: “Mixed up false dreams and we are not skilled in interpretation of dreams.”
12|45|One from the 2 of them (inmates) who was released remembered (Joseph) after a period, said: “I will tell you its interpretation, just send me (to Joseph in prison).”
12|46|(He said): “O Joseph, the truthful one! Explain to us the dream of 7 fat cows whom 7 lean cows are devouring, and of 7 green ears of corn, and 7 others dry; so that I may return to the people and let them know (the meaning of the dream).”
12|47|He (Joseph) said: “For 7 years, you will sow as usual and that (the harvest) which you reap, you should leave in ears, except a little of it which you may eat
12|48|Then 7 hard years will come after that, which will eat away what you have stored in advance for them, except a little of that which you have guarded
12|49|Then a year will come thereafter in which people will have abundant rain and in which they will press (wine and oil).”
12|50|The king said: “Bring him to me.” But when the Messenger came to him, he (Joseph) said: “Return to your master and ask him, what happened to the women who cut their hands? Surely, my Lord is well aware of their plot.”
12|51|He (king) said (to the women): “What do you say about the affair when you did seek to seduce Joseph?” The women said: “Allah forbid! We don’t know evil against him!” The wife of Al-Aziz said: “Now the truth is clear, it was I who sought to seduce him. He is surely of the truthful.”
12|52|(Joseph) said: “(I asked for this enquiry) in order that he (Al-Aziz) may know that I did not betray him in secret. Allah does not guide the plot of the betrayers
12|53|I can not free myself (from the blame). Surely, the (human) soul is inclined to evil, except when my Lord bestows His Mercy. Surely, my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.”
12|54|The king said: “Bring him to me so that I may attach him to my service.” When he spoke to him (Joseph), he said: “Surely, from this Day, you are with us high in rank and fully trusted.”
12|55|He (Joseph) said: “Place me over the storehouses of the land. Surely I will guard them with full knowledge.”
12|56|Thus We did give full authority to Joseph in the land to take possession from it, as when or where he likes. We bestow Our Mercy on whom We will and We don’t let the reward of the righteous people be lost
12|57|And surely, the reward of the Hereafter will be better for those who believe and fear Allah
12|58|And Joseph’s brothers came (several years later when there was food shortage) and they entered to him. He recognized them but they did not recognize him
12|59|And when he had furnished them with their provisions, he said: “Bring me (next time) a brother of yours from your father (meant Benjamin). Do you not see that I give full measure, and that I am the best of the hosts
12|60|But if you don’t bring him to me, there shall be no measure (grain) for you with me, nor shall you come near me.”
12|61|They replied: “We shall try to get permission for him from his father, and surely, we shall do it.”
12|62|(Joseph) told his servants to put their money (of grain) into their bags, so that they might know about it when they go back to their people, in order that they might come back
12|63|When they returned to their father, they said: “O our father! Measure of grain has been denied for us (unless we take our brother Benjamin). Send our brother with us so that we may get our measure and truly we are guardians for him.”
12|64|He said: “Can I entrust him to you except as I entrusted on his brother (Joseph) to you before? But Allah is the best to guard and He is Merciful of those who show mercy.”
12|65|And when they opened their bags, they found their money had been returned to them. They said: “O our father! What more can we desire? Here is our money returned to us. We will get food for our family; we will guard our brother, and add more measure of camel’s load (of grain). This quantity is easy (for the king to give).”
12|66|He (Jacob) replied: "I will not send him with you until you give a solemn oath to me in the name of Allah that you will bring him back to me unless you are yourselves surrounded (by enemies).” When they gave him their solemn oath, he said: “Allah is trustee over what we have said.”
12|67|And he said: “O my sons! Don’t enter by one gate, but enter by different gates. I cannot avail you anything against Allah. Surely! The decision rests only with Allah. In Him, I put my trust. In Him let all those that trust, put their trust.”
12|68|When they entered (the city) from where their father had ordered them, it did not avail them in the least against (the will of) Allah, but it was a need of Jacob’s inner-self which he discharged. Surely, he was endowed with knowledge because We had taught him, but most people don’t know
12|69|When they went before Joseph, he called his brother (Benjamin) to himself and said: “Surely! I am your brother, so don’t grieve for what they used to do.”
12|70|So when he (Joseph) had furnished them with their provisions, he put the (golden) bowl into his brother’s bag, then a crier cried: “O you in the caravan! Surely, you are thieves!”
12|71|They said turning towards them: “What is it that you have lost?”
12|72|They said: “We have lost the (golden) bowl of the king and for him who produces it (is the reward of) a load of camel; and I will be bound by it.”
12|73|They said: “By Allah! Indeed you know that we came not to make mischief in the land, and we are not thieves!”
12|74|They (Joseph’s people) said: “What then should be the penalty of him, if you are liars?”
12|75|They (Joseph’s brothers) replied: “His penalty should be he, in whose bag it is found, and then it is his punishment. Thus we punish the wrongdoers!”
12|76|So he (Joseph) began to search their bags before the bag of his brother (Benjamin). Then he brought it out of his brother’s bag. Thus We did plan for Joseph. He could not take his brother by the law of the king, except that Allah willed it. We raise to degrees whom We will, but over all those endowed with knowledge is the All-knower (Allah)
12|77|They (Joseph’s brothers) said: “If he steals, surely, a brother of his (Joseph) did steal before him.” But these things Joseph did keep in himself, not revealing (the secrets) to them. He said: “You are in worst case. Allah is the Best Knower of the truth what you assert!”
12|78|They said: “O mighty one! Surely, he (Benjamin) has a very old father (who will grieve for him); so take one of us in his place. Indeed we think you are one of the righteous people.”
12|79|He (Joseph) replied: “Allah forbids that we should take anyone but him with whom we found our property. Indeed we then should be wrongdoers.”
12|80|When they despaired of him, they held a conference in private. The eldest among them said: “Don’t you know that your father indeed took an oath from you in Allah’s name, and before this you did fail in your duty with Joseph? Therefore, I will not leave this land until my father permits me, or Allah decides my case (by releasing Benjamin) and He is the Best of the judges.”
12|81|Return to your father and say: “O our father! Surely, your son (Benjamin) has stolen. We don’t testify except according to what we know, and we could not be guardians of the unseen
12|82|Ask (the people of) the town where we have been in it, and the caravan in which we returned, and indeed we are telling the truth.”
12|83|He (Jacob) said: “Nay, you have lured your own souls into something (story). So patience is most fitting for me. May be Allah will bring them all to me. Truly He! He is the All-Knower, All- Wise.”
12|84|He turned away from them and said: “Alas for Joseph!” His sight was whitened (lost) because of the sorrow that he was suppressing
12|85|They said: “By Allah! You will never cease remembering Joseph until you become weak with old age, or until you are of the dead.”
12|86|He said: “I only complain of my grief and sorrow to Allah, and I know from Allah what you don’t know
12|87|O my sons! You go and enquire about Joseph and his brother, and never give up hope of Allah’s Mercy. Certainly no one despairs of Allah’s Mercy, except the disbelievers.”
12|88|When they entered unto him (Joseph), they said: “O ruler of the land! A hard time has hit us and our family, and we have brought little money, so pay us full measure and be charitable to us. Truly, Allah rewards the charitable.”
12|89|He (Joseph) said: “Do you know what you did with Joseph and his brother, when you were ignorant?”
12|90|They said: “Are you indeed Joseph?” He said: "I am Joseph, and this is my brother (Benjamin). Allah has indeed been gracious to us. Surely, he who fears Allah and is patient, then surely, Allah does not make the reward of the righteous people to be lost.”
12|91|They said: ‘By Allah! Indeed Allah has preferred you above us, and certainly we have been sinners.”
12|92|He (Joseph) said: “There is no blame on you this Day. May Allah forgive you. He is the Merciful of those who show mercy
12|93|You go with this shirt of mine, cast it over the face of my father, he will become clear-sighted, and bring to me all your family.”
12|94|When the caravan departed, their father said: “I do indeed feel the smell of Joseph, even if you think me weak of mind due to old age.”
12|95|They said: “By Allah! Certainly, you are in your old error.”
12|96|Then when the bearer of the glad tidings arrived, he cast it (the shirt) over his face, and he became clear-sighted. He (father) said: “Did I not say to you, surely I know from Allah what you don’t know?”
12|97|They said: “O our father! Ask forgiveness (from Allah) for our sins, indeed we have been sinners.”
12|98|He replied: “I will ask my Lord for forgiveness for you. Surely He! Only He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
12|99|When they entered unto Joseph, he took his parents to himself and said: “Enter Egypt, if Allah wills, in security.”
12|100|And he raised his parents to the throne, and they fell down before him prostrate. He said: “O my father! This is the interpretation of my dream from before! My Lord has made it come true! Indeed He was good to me, when He took me out of the prison, and brought you out of the Bedouin-life, after Satan had sown enmity between me and between my brothers. Certainly, my Lord is kind to whom He wills. Truly He! Only He is the All-Knower, the All-Wise
12|101|My Lord! You have indeed bestowed on me the sovereignty and taught me the interpretation of dreams; the Creator of the heavens and the earth! You are my Protector in this world and in the Hereafter, cause me to die as a Muslim, and join me with the righteous.”
12|102|This is of the news of the unseen which We reveal to you (O Muhammad). You were not present with them when they arranged their plan together, and while they were plotting
12|103|And most of mankind will not believe even if you desire it eagerly
12|104|And you (O Muhammad) don’t ask them any reward for it; it (the Qur’an) is a reminder and an advice to the worlds
12|105|And there are many signs in the heavens and the earth which they pass by, yet they are reluctant from it
12|106|And most of them don’t believe in Allah except that they attribute partners to Him
12|107|Do they feel secure that Allah’s punishment will not come against them, or that the Hour (of Judgment) will not come against them all of a sudden while they don’t perceive
12|108|Say (O Muhammad): “This is my way. I invite you to Allah with sure knowledge which I and whosoever follow me. And glory be to Allah. I am not one of the polytheists.”
12|109|And We did not send (as Messengers) before you but human. We revealed to them from among the people of the towns. Have they (disbelievers) not traveled through the land and seen how was the end of those who were before them? Surely the home of the Hereafter is the best for those who fear Allah. Do you not then understand
12|110|(They were pardoned) until when the Messengers gave up hope and thought that they were denied (by their people), then came to them Our Help, and were rescued whoever We willed. And Our punishment cannot be warded off from the people who are sinners
12|111|Surely in their stories, there is a lesson for people of understanding. It (the Qur’an) is not a forged statement but a confirmation (of the existing books of Allah) - a detailed explanation of everything, a guide, and a Mercy for the people who believe
13|1|Alif-Lam-Meem-Ra. These are the Verses of the book (the Qur’an), and that which has been revealed to you (Muhammad) from your Lord is the truth, but most people don’t believe
13|2|Allah is the one Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see. Then, He rose above the Throne and has subjected the sun and the moon! Each is running (its course) for an appointed term. He manages all affairs. He explains in details the Verses that you may believe with certainty in the meeting with your Lord
13|3|And it is He who has spread out the earth, placed therein firm mountains and rivers, and made every kind of fruits 2 in pairs in it. He brings the night as a cover over the day. Surely, in these things, there are Verses for people who reflect
13|4|And in the earth there are tracts side by side, gardens of vines, green crop fields and date-palms growing into 2 or 3 from a single stem root, or otherwise one stem root for every palm, watered with the same water, yet We make more excellent some of them than others in taste. Surely, in these things, there are signs for the people who understand
13|5|If you (O Muhammad) wonder, then amazing is their saying: “When we are dust, shall we indeed be raised in a new creation?” They are those who disbelieve in their Lord! They are those who will have iron chains in their necks. They will be inmates of the fire, they will abide in it
13|6|They ask you to hasten the evil before the good, and surely exemplary punishments have occurred before them. But surely, your Lord is full of forgiveness for mankind in spite of their wrong-doing. Surely, your Lord is Severe in punishment
13|7|And those who disbelieve say: “Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" You are only a Warner, and to every nation there is a guide
13|8|Allah knows what every female bears (in womb), and by how much the wombs fall short (of time) and what they exceed (of time). Everything with Him is in due proportion
13|9|All-Knower of everything of the unseen and the seen, the Great, the High
13|10|It is the same (to Him) whether any of you conceals speech and declares it openly, and whoever hides by night or go freely by day
13|11|For him, there are angels in succession, before and behind. They guard him by the command of Allah. Surely, Allah does not change the condition of a people until they change what is in themselves. When Allah wills for a people misfortune, there can be no turning away of it, and there is no protector for them besides Him (Allah)
13|12|It is He Who shows you the lightning as a fear (for travelers) and as a hope (for rain). It is He who brings up the heavy clouds (with water)
13|13|The thunder glorifies and praises Him, and so do the angels because of His awe. He sends the thunderbolts and strikes with it whom He wills. Yet they (disbelievers) dispute about Allah. He is Mighty in punishment
13|14|For Him (alone) is the Word of truth. And those (deities) whom they (disbelievers) invoke besides Him, can not answer anything, except like the one who stretches forth its hands (at edge of well) for water to reach its mouth, but it does not reach it, and the invocation of the disbelievers is nothing but an error
13|15|And to Allah (alone) falls in prostration whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and so do their shadows in the mornings and in the afternoons
13|16|Ask (O Muhammad): “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Say: “Allah.” Ask: “Have you then taken (for worship) protectors other than Him who have no power for themselves either for benefit or for harm?” Say: “Is the blind equal to the one who sees? Or darkness equal to light? Or do they assign to Allah partners who created the like of His creation, so that the creation seemed alike to them?” Say: “Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Irresistible.”
13|17|He sends down water (rain) from the sky, and the valleys flow according to their measure, but the flood bears away the foam that mounts up to the surface, and also from that ore they heat it in the fire in order to make ornaments or utensils, raises foam like to it. Thus Allah does set forth examples of truth and falsehood. As for the foam it passes away as scum upon the banks, while that which benefits mankind remains in the earth. Thus Allah sets forth examples
13|18|(The reward) for those who answer their Lord’s call is Paradise. But those who don’t answer His Call, if that they had all that is in the earth together with its like, they would offer to save themselves (from the punishment). They are those for whom there will be the terrible reckoning. Their residing place will be hell; and worst indeed is that place for rest
13|19|Shall the one who knows what has been revealed to you (O Muhammad) from your Lord is the truth, be like the one who is blind? But it is only the people of understanding that pay heed
13|20|Those who fulfill the Covenant of Allah and don’t break the covenant
13|21|and those who join what Allah has commanded to be joined, fear their Lord, and are afraid of the terrible reckoning
13|22|and those who remain patient seeking the pleasure of their Lord, establish prayers perfectly, and spend what We have bestowed on them secretly and openly, and they repel evil with good, they are those for whom there is the good home of the Hereafter
13|23|gardens of Eden (Paradise), in which they will enter along with those who acted righteously from their forefathers, their wives, and their offspring. The angels will enter to welcome them from every gate
13|24|(saying) “Peace be upon you for what you persevered in patience! Excellent indeed is the final home!”
13|25|Those who break the Covenant of Allah after its approval, sever what Allah has commanded to join (bond of kinship), and work mischief in the land; they are those for them is the curse and for them is the evil home
13|26|Allah increases the provision for whom He wills, straitens (it for whom He wills). They (disbelievers) rejoice in the life of the world; the worldly life as compared with the Hereafter is nothing but a brief enjoyment
13|27|And those who disbelieve say: “Why not a sign is sent down to him (Muhammad) from his Lord?” Say: “Surely, Allah sends astray whom He wills and guides those who turn to Him in repentance
13|28|those who believe and whose hearts find rest in the remembrance of Allah, surely, in the remembrance of Allah hearts find rest
13|29|Those who believe, and do good deeds, bliss is for them and a beautiful place of final return.”
13|30|Thus We have sent you (O Muhammad) to a community surely before it other communities have passed away, in order that you might recite to them what We have revealed to you, and they disbelieve in the Gracious (Allah). Say: “He (Allah) is my Lord! There is no one worthy of worship but He! In Him I trust, and to Him will be my return with repentance.”
13|31|And if there had been a Qur’an with it mountains could be moved, or with it the earth could be cloven asunder, or with it the dead could be made to speak (it would be the same Qur’an). But the decision of all things is certainly with Allah. Yet those who believe have not known that had Allah willed, He could have guided all mankind? A disaster will not cease to strike those who disbelieve because what (evil) they did or it (disaster) settles close to their homes, until the Promise of Allah comes. Certainly, Allah does not break His Promise
13|32|And indeed many Messengers were mocked before you (O Muhammad), but I granted respite to those who disbelieved, then I seized them. So how (terrible) was My punishment
13|33|Is it He who takes charge of every one by what he has earned it? Yet they ascribe partners to Allah. Say: “Name them! Or will you inform Him of what He does not know in the earth or is it just a show of false words?” Nay! To those who disbelieve, their plotting is made fair-seeming, and they have been hindered from the Right Way, and those whom Allah sends astray, there is no guide for them
13|34|For them there is a punishment in the life of this world, and certainly their punishment in the Hereafter is harder. They have no protector against Allah
13|35|The likeness of the Paradise which the pious have been promised (is): rivers flow beneath it, its provision is eternal, and so is its shade; this is the end (final destination) of those who are pious and the end (final destination) of the disbelievers is fire
13|36|Those whom We have given the book, rejoice at what has been revealed to you (the Qur’an), but there are those among the clans who reject a part thereof. Say (O Muhammad): “I am commanded only to worship Allah (alone) and not to join partners with Him. To Him alone I call and to Him is my return.”
13|37|And thus We have sent it (the Qur’an) down to be a judgment of authority in Arabic. Were you (O Muhammad) to follow their vain desires after the knowledge has come to you, then you will not have any protector or defender against Allah
13|38|And indeed We have sent Messengers before you (O Muhammad), and have made for them wives and offspring. It was not for a Messenger to bring a sign except by Allah’s permission. For each and every matter there is a Decree (from Allah)
13|39|Allah wipes out what He wills and confirms (what He wills). And with Him is the mother (master copy) of the book
13|40|Whether We show you (O Muhammad) part of what We have promised them or cause you to die, your duty is only to convey (the message) and on Us is the reckoning
13|41|Don’t they see that We are gradually reducing the land from its outlying borders? And when Allah judges, there is none to put back His judgment and He is Swift at reckoning
13|42|And surely, those (disbelievers) who devised plots were before them, but Allah is planning all. He knows what every one earns. The disbelievers will know for whom will be the good end of the home (of Paradise)
13|43|And those who disbelieve, say: “You (O Muhammad) are not a Messenger.” Say: “Allah is sufficient for witness between me and between you and whoever has knowledge of the Scripture.”
14|1|Alif-Lam-Ra. (This is) a book which We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) in order that you bring out mankind from darkness (of disbelief) into light (of belief) by permission of their Lord, to the way of the All-Mighty, the Praise-worthy
14|2|Allah to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth! Woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment
14|3|Those who prefer the worldly life to the Hereafter, hinder people from the way of Allah (Islam), and seek crookedness in it, they are far astray
14|4|And We did not send any Messenger except with the language of his people, in order that he might make (the message) clear for them. Then Allah misleads whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
14|5|And indeed We sent Moses with Our Verses (saying) that: “Bring out your people from darkness into light, and make them remember the days (history) of Allah. Truly, there are Verses for every patient, thankful.”
14|6|And (remember) when Moses said to his people: “Call to remind Allah’s Favor to you, when He delivered you from Pharaoh’s people who were afflicting you with horrible punishment, were slaughtering your sons and letting your women alive, and in it was a tremendous trial from your Lord.”
14|7|And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed: “If you give thanks, I will give you more (of My Blessings), but if you are ungrateful, surely! My punishment is indeed severe.”
14|8|And Moses said: “If you and all on earth together disbelieve, then surely! (know that) Allah is Rich (free from all needs), Praise-worthy.”
14|9|Has not the news come to you, of those before you, the people of Noah, Ad, and Thamud? Those after them? No one knows them but Allah. Their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they put their hands in their mouths (biting with anger) and said: “Surely, we disbelieve in what you have been sent with and we are really in strongly doubt as to what you invite us to it.”
14|10|Their Messengers said: “Can there be a doubt about Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you (to Allah) so that He may forgive you of your sins and give you respite for a term appointed.” They said: “You are not but a human being like us! You wish to turn us away from what our forefathers used to worship. Then bring us a clear authority.”
14|11|Their Messengers said to them: “We are not but human beings like you, but Allah bestows His Grace on whom He wills of His servants. It is not for us that we bring you an authority (proof) except by the permission of Allah. And in Allah let the believers put their trust
14|12|And what is the reason for us that we don’t put our trust in Allah while indeed He has guided us our ways? We shall certainly bear with patience what hurt you may cause us, and in Allah (alone) let those who trust, should put their trust.”
14|13|And those who disbelieved said to their Messengers: “Surely, you return to our religion or we will drive you out of our land.” But their Lord revealed to them: “Surely, We shall destroy the wrongdoers
14|14|And indeed, We shall make you reside in the land after them. This is for those who fear standing before Me and also fear My threat.”
14|15|But they (the Messengers) sought help and victory (from Allah), and every stubborn, arrogant dictator (who refused to believe in Allah) was destroyed
14|16|Hell is in front of him (dictator) who will be made to drink boiling rotten water
14|17|who will sip it (unwillingly) but will find hard to swallow. Death will surround him from every side, yet will not die and in front of him will be a great punishment
14|18|The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord is that their deeds are like ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day; they will not be able to get anything from what they have earned. That will be straying far away (from the Right Way)
14|19|Do you not see that Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He wills, He can remove you and bring (in your place) a new creation
14|20|And that is not difficult for Allah
14|21|And when they all will appear before Allah (on the Day of Resurrection), then the weak (of the world) will say to those who were arrogant (chiefs): “Surely, we were following you. Can you avail us anything from Allah’s punishment?” They will say: “If Allah had guided us, we would have guided you. It is equal on us (now) whether we rage, or bear (those punishments) with patience, there is no place of refuge for us.”
14|22|And when the matter has been decided, Satan will say: “Surely, Allah promised you a promise of truth. I too promised you, but I betrayed you. I had no authority over you except that I called you, and you responded to me. So don’t blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. Surely I deny what you associated me as a partner (with Allah) before. Surely, there is a painful punishment for them, the wrongdoers.”
14|23|And those who believe and do righteous deeds will be made to enter (Paradise with) gardens with river flowing under them, to reside therein forever with the permission of their Lord. Their greeting therein will be: “Peace.”
14|24|Don’t you see how Allah sets forth an example of a good word as a good tree, whose roots are firm, and its branches are in the sky
14|25|It gives its fruit at all times by the permission of its Lord. Allah sets forth examples for mankind in order that they may remember
14|26|The example of an evil word is that of an evil tree uprooted from the surface of the earth with no stability
14|27|Those who believe with the word that stands firm, Allah will keep them firm in the life of this world and Hereafter. Those who are wrongdoers, Allah will cause them to go astray. Allah does what He wills
14|28|Have you not seen those who have changed the blessings of Allah into disbelief, and have caused their people to reside in the house of destruction
14|29|Hell, in which they will burn, and what an evil place to settle in
14|30|They set up rivals to Allah, to mislead people from His way! Say: “Enjoy (your brief life)! But certainly, your destination is the hell fire!”
14|31|Say (O Muhammad) to My devotees who have believed, that they should establish prayer, and spend in charity from what We have provided them secretly and openly; before a Day comes in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor friendship
14|32|Allah is the one Who has created the heavens and the earth, sends down water (rain) from the sky, and thereby brings forth fruits as provision for you. He has made the ships to be of service to you, that they may sail through the sea by His Command; and He has made rivers to be of service to you
14|33|And He has made the sun and the moon to be of service to you, both constantly pursuing their courses; and He has made the night and the day to be of service to you
14|34|And He has given you all that you have asked for, and if you count the blessings of Allah, you will not be able to count them. Surely! Human being is unjust, ungrateful
14|35|(Remember) when Abraham said: “O my Lord! Make this city (Makkah) safe, and keep me and my sons away from the worship of idols
14|36|O my Lord! Surely they (idols) have led many people astray. So, those who follow me, surely they are of mine. Whoever disobeys me, still You are indeed Forgiving, Merciful
14|37|O our Lord! Surely I have made some of my offspring to reside in a valley not with cultivation near Your sacred house (the Ka’bah). O our Lord! (I have done this) in order that they would establish prayers; so turn hearts among mankind love towards them, and (O Allah) provide them with fruits so that they may give thanks
14|38|O our Lord! Certainly, You know what we conceal and what we reveal. Nothing on the earth or in the heaven is hidden from Allah
14|39|All the praises and thanks are to Allah, Who has given me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age. Surely! My Lord indeed is All-Hearer of prayers
14|40|O my Lord! Make me one who establishes prayers perfectly, and from my offspring. Our Lord! Accept my prayer
14|41|Our Lord! Forgive me, my parents, and all the believers on the Day when the reckoning will be established.”
14|42|You don’t think that Allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do. Only He gives them respite up to that Day when their eyes will stare in horror
14|43|(they will be) rushing forward with necks outstretched, their heads will be raised up (towards the sky), their gaze will not return towards them, and their hearts will be empty (because of fear)
14|44|And warn (O Muhammad) mankind of the Day when the punishment will come to them; then those who wronged will say: “Our Lord! Respite us for a little while, we will answer Your Call and follow the Messengers!” (It will be said): “Did you not sworn before that you would never leave
14|45|And you lived in the residences of those who wronged themselves and it was clear to you how We had dealt with them. And We (even) put forth examples for you.”
14|46|Indeed, they planned their plot, but their plots were within the sight of Allah, even though their plot was such that it could move the mountains
14|47|So, don’t think that Allah will fail to keep His Promise to His Messengers. Certainly, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Able of retribution
14|48|On the Day when the earth will be changed to other than earth and the heavens (as well), and all creatures will appear before Allah, the One, and the Irresistible
14|49|and on that Day you will see the sinners bound together in fetters (their hands and feet tied to their necks with chains)
14|50|their garments will be of tar, and fire will cover their faces
14|51|Allah will requite each person according to its deeds. Truly, Allah is swift at reckoning
14|52|This (Qur’an) is a message for mankind, in order that they may be warned thereby; and that they may know that Allah is the only one worthy of worship, and that people of understanding may take heed
15|1|Alif-Lam-Ra. These are the Verses of the book and a plain Qur’an
15|2|Perhaps (the Day will come when) those who disbelieve wish that they were Muslims
15|3|Leave them (alone) to eat, let them enjoy, and be preoccupied (with false) hope. They will come to know (the truth)
15|4|And Allah did not destroy a town but there was a known decree for it
15|5|No nation can advance its term (fate), nor delay it
15|6|And they say: “O you (Muhammad) to whom the reminder (the Qur’an) has been sent down! Surely, you are insane
15|7|Why don’t you bring angels to us if you are of the truthful ones?”
15|8|We don’t send down the angels except with the truth (for punishment), and when they come, they (the disbelievers) are not given respite
15|9|Truly, We have sent down the reminder (the Qur’an), and surely, We will guard it
15|10|Indeed, We sent (Messengers) before you (O Muhammad) amongst the early communities
15|11|and any Messenger came to them, they mocked at him
15|12|Thus We let it (disbelief) enter into the hearts of the sinners
15|13|so they don’t believe in it (the Qur’an), though the examples of (Allah’s punishment of) the ancients have passed
15|14|And even if We had opened to them a gate from the heaven and they continue to ascend through it
15|15|surely they would have said: “Our eyes have been blocked (blurred). But nay, we have been bewitched.”
15|16|And indeed, We have put big stars in the heaven and beautified it for the beholders
15|17|and We have protected them from every outcast devil
15|18|Except him (devil) who steals a hearing, he is pursued by a clear flaming fire
15|19|And We have spread the earth and placed firm mountains in it; and caused to grow therein every thing balanced (in due proportion)
15|20|and Allah has made provision for you therein means of living, and for those whom you don’t provide
15|21|And there is not a thing but its (inexhaustible) treasures are with Us. And We have not sent it down except in a known measure
15|22|And We send the fertilizing winds (fill clouds with water), then causes the water (rain) to descend from the sky, gives it to you to drink, and it is not you who is able to store
15|23|And certainly We! It is We Who give life, cause death, and We are the Inheritors
15|24|And indeed, We know the first generations of you who have passed away, and indeed, We know the present generations who will come afterwards
15|25|And surely, your Lord will gather them. Truly, He is the All-Wise, the All-Knower
15|26|And indeed, We created human from clay of mud altered into shape
15|27|And the jinn, We created it before from fire of smokeless flame
15|28|And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels: “Surely, I am going to create a human (Adam) from clay mud altered into shape
15|29|when I have fashioned him and breathed into him the soul (which Allah created for him), then you fall down prostrating before him.”
15|30|So, the angels prostrated all of them together
15|31|except Satan, he refused to be with those who prostrated
15|32|(Allah) said: “O Satan! What is your reason that you are not with those who prostrated?”
15|33|(Satan) said: “I am not the one to prostrate to a human whom You have created from clay of mud molded into shape.”
15|34|(Allah) said: “Then, get out from here, for surely you are accursed
15|35|Surely, the curse will be upon you till the Day of recompense.”
15|36|(Satan) said: “O my Lord! Give me respite till the Day of Resurrection.”
15|37|Allah said: “Then surely, you are given the respite
15|38|till the Day of appointed time.”
15|39|(Satan) said: “O my Lord! Since You let me go astray, I shall indeed adorn (path of error) for them (mankind) on the earth, and I shall mislead them all
15|40|except those who are Your sincere devotees.”
15|41|(Allah) said: “This is the way straight to Me
15|42|Certainly, you will have no authority over My devotees, except those who follow you of the ones who go astray
15|43|And surely, hell is the promised place for them all
15|44|it (hell) has 7 gates; each gate will be assigned to a separate class (for sinners) from them
15|45|Truly! The pious people will be in the midst of the gardens and water-springs (of Paradise)
15|46|(It will be said to them): “Enter therein (Paradise) in peace and security.”
15|47|And We shall remove all hatred from their hearts, so they will be like brothers and sit on couches face to face
15|48|No fatigue will touch them in it, nor shall they be removed from it
15|49|Inform (O Muhammad) to My devotees that truly, I am the Forgiving, the Merciful
15|50|but My Punishment is also the most painful punishment
15|51|And tell them about the guests (the angels) of Abraham
15|52|They entered upon him and said: “Peace!” Abraham replied: “Indeed! We are afraid of you.”
15|53|They (the angels) said: “Don’t be afraid! We truly bring to you glad tidings of a son (possessing) knowledge.”
15|54|Abraham said: “Do you give me glad tidings (of a son) when old age has overtaken me? What kind of glad tidings you are giving?”
15|55|They (the angels) said: “We give you glad tidings in truth. So don’t be those who despair.”
15|56|(Abraham) said: “Who despairs of the Mercy of his Lord except those who are astray?”
15|57|(Abraham again) said: “Then what is your mission, O Messengers?”
15|58|They (the angels) said: “We have been sent (to punish) the people who are criminals
15|59|except the family of Lot. We truly will save them all (from destruction)
15|60|except his wife, Allah has decreed that she shall be of those who will stay behind (to be destroyed).”
15|61|When the Messengers (the angels) came to the family of Lot
15|62|he said: “Surely! You are people unknown to me.”
15|63|They said: “Nay, we have come to you with that (punishment) concerning which they have doubts
15|64|We have brought you the truth (news of destruction of your nation) and we are telling the truth
15|65|Then travel with your family during the last part of the night, and you follow from their rear; no one of you look back, but go on where you are ordered to go.”
15|66|And We have made this decree known to him that the roots of those (sinners) will be cut off in the early morning
15|67|And the people of the city came (to Lot’s house) rejoicing (at the news of the 2 young male visitors)
15|68|(Lot) said: “Surely! These are my guests, so don’t disgrace me
15|69|And fear Allah and don’t disgrace me.”
15|70|They (people of the city) said: “Did we not forbid you from (entertaining) any of the people?”
15|71|(Lot) said: “These (the girls of the nation) are my daughters (to marry lawfully), if you must act.”
15|72|Truly, by your life (O Muhammad), they were wandering blindly in their wild intoxication
15|73|So the awful blast overtook them at the time of sunrise
15|74|And We turned it (towns of Sodom in Palestine) upside down and rained to them stones of baked clay
15|75|Surely! In this are signs for those who see
15|76|And surely, they (the cities) are on an established road (from Makkah to Syria i.e. the place where the Dead Sea is now)
15|77|Surely! Therein is indeed a sign for the believers
15|78|And surely, the people in the wood (the people of Midian to whom Prophet Shuaib was sent by Allah) were also wrongdoers
15|79|So, We took vengeance on them. They are both (ruined) on a clear road
15|80|And surely, the people of Hijr (the rocky tract) denied the Messengers
15|81|And We gave them Our Verses, but they were averse to them
15|82|And they used to cut out secure homes in the mountains
15|83|But the awful blast overtook them in the early morning
15|84|and all their earnings (building homes by craving the rock) did not avail
15|85|And We have not created the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them except with truth. Surely, the Hour (of Doom) is coming, so overlook (O Muhammad) their faults with gracious forgiveness
15|86|Surely, your Lord is the All-Knowing Creator
15|87|And indeed, We have given you 7 of the repeatedly recited Verses (Al-Fatihah) and the Glorious Qur’an
15|88|Don’t look with your eyes at what We have bestowed on certain classes of them (disbelievers), nor grieve over them. And lower your wings (be courteous) to the believers
15|89|And say (O Muhammad): “I am indeed the plain Warner.”
15|90|As We have sent down (this warning) on the dividers
15|91|who have made the Qur’an into parts (believe some parts and deny others)
15|92|So, by your Lord (O Muhammad), We shall certainly ask them all
15|93|about what they used to do
15|94|Therefore proclaim that which you are commanded and turn away from the polytheists
15|95|Truly! We will suffice you against the scoffers (mockers)
15|96|who set up another deity along with Allah, so they will come to know
15|97|Indeed, We know that your heart is distressed by what they say
15|98|So, glorify the praises of your Lord, be of those who prostrate (to Him)
15|99|and worship your Lord until the certainty (death) comes to you
16|1|The Command of Allah has come, so don’t seek to hasten it. Glorified is He and above all that they associate as partners with (Him)
16|2|He sends down the angels with the revelation of His Command to whom He wills of His servants (saying): “Warn (mankind) that there is no one worthy of worship but I, so fear Me.”
16|3|He has created the heavens and the earth with truth. He is exalted above all they associate as partners (with Him)
16|4|He has created human from semen, yet the he becomes an open opponent
16|5|And He has created the cattle for you; in them there is warmth (clothing), numerous benefits, and you eat some of them
16|6|And there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home in the evening and when you lead them to pasture in the morning
16|7|And they carry your loads to a land where you could not reach except with great trouble to yourselves. Truly, your Lord is Kind, Merciful
16|8|And (He has created) horses, mules, and donkeys so that you may ride them and as an adornment. And He has created (others about which) you have no knowledge
16|9|And upon Allah is (to show) the direction of the Right Way, but there are some of them (ways) that are crooked. And had He willed, He could have guided you all
16|10|It is He Who sends down water (rain) from the sky, from it you drink and from it grows vegetation therein to pasture your cattle
16|11|With it He grows for you the crops, the olives, the date-palms, the grapes, and every kind of fruit. Surely, there is a sign in this for people who think
16|12|And He has subjected to you the night and the day, the sun and the moon; and the stars are subjected by His Command. Surely, there are signs in this for people who understand
16|13|And He has created for you on this earth of varying colors. Surely, there is a sign in this for people who remember
16|14|And it is He Who has subjected the sea to you so that you may eat fresh tender meat (fish) from it, and that you may bring out ornaments to wear from it, and that you see the ships plough through it. (All these are done) so that you may seek His Bounty and you may give thanks (to Allah)
16|15|He has affixed mountains into the earth standing firm, lest it should shake with you. (He made) rivers and roads so that you may be guided
16|16|and land-marks and the stars for your guidance
16|17|Is then He, who has created all these, like the one who can not create? Why don’t you remember
16|18|And if you want to count the Favors of Allah, you can not count them. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
16|19|And Allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal
16|20|Those who invoke other than Allah, they have created nothing, and they themselves are created
16|21|(They are) dead, lifeless, and they don’t know when they will be resurrected
16|22|Your deity is One (Allah). As for those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, their hearts deny, and they are proud
16|23|No doubt that Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal. Surely, He does not like the proud
16|24|And when they are asked: “What is that your Lord has sent down?” They say: “Tales of the ancient people!”
16|25|They will bear their own burdens in full on the Day of Resurrection, and the burdens of those whom they have misguided without knowledge. Indeed it is evil that they will bear
16|26|Indeed those before them also plotted, but Allah struck their buildings from the foundations, the roof fell upon them from above, and the punishment came to them from where they did not even perceive
16|27|Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will disgrace them and say: “Where are those partners whom you used to associate with (Allah), about whom you used to disagree and dispute (with the believers)?” Those who have been given the knowledge (about the punishment of Allah) will say: “Surely! Today disgrace and misery are upon the disbelievers
16|28|those whom the angels cause to die while they wronged themselves.” Then they will make false submission (saying): “We were not doing any evil.” (The angels will reply): “Yes! Surely, Allah is the All-Knower of what you used to do
16|29|So enter the gates of hell to abide in it.” Indeed, what an evil abode for the arrogant
16|30|And (when) the pious people are asked: “What (is it that) your Lord has sent down?” They say: “(That which is) good.” There is good for those who do good in this world and the home of the Hereafter will be even better. Excellent indeed will be the home (Paradise) of the pious
16|31|Gardens of Eden (Paradise) which they will enter, rivers flow from beneath them, they will have all that they wish in it. Thus Allah will reward the pious
16|32|those whose lives the angels take while they are pious saying (to them): “Peace be on you, enter Paradise because of what you used to do.”
16|33|Do they (the disbelievers) wait for the angels to come to them (to take souls at death), or command of your Lord to come? So did those before them. And Allah did not wrong them, but they used to wrong themselves
16|34|Then, the evil results of what they did overtook them, and surrounded them by that they used to mock at
16|35|And those who join others in worship (with Allah) say: “If Allah had willed, neither we would have worshipped anything other than Him, nor our forefathers, nor we would have forbidden anything without (command from) Him.” So did those who were before them. Then are the Messengers charged with anything but to convey the clear message
16|36|And surely, We have sent in every nation a Messenger (saying): “You worship Allah, and avoid false deities.” Then, there were some whom Allah has guided and there were some upon whom the straying was justified. So travel through the land and see what the end of those who denied (the truth) was
16|37|If you (O Muhammad) desire for their guidance, then surely Allah does not guide whom He lets to go astray. They will have no helpers
16|38|And they swear their strongest oaths by Allah: “Allah will never raise the dead who dies (to life).” Yes, (He will raise them up), it is a Promise upon Him in truth, but most of mankind don’t know
16|39|(He will fulfill) in order to illustrate for them that they differ in it, and those who disbelieved may know that they were liars
16|40|When We intend to do a thing which We want, We only say to it: “Be!” and it is
16|41|And for those who migrated for the cause of Allah after persecution, We will certainly give them good residence in this world, and indeed the reward of the Hereafter will be greater, if they but knew
16|42|(They are) those who remained patient (in this world), and put their trust in their Lord
16|43|We have not send (Messengers) before you (O Muhammad) but men, whom We have sent revelation. So ask those who knows the Scripture (learned people of the Torah and the Gospel), if you don’t know
16|44|with clear signs and books. And We have sent down to you (O Muhammad) the reminder (the Qur’an) so that you may explain to mankind what was sent down to them so that they may give thought
16|45|Do those who devise evil plots feel secure that Allah will not sink them into the earth, or that the punishment will not come to them from directions that they don’t perceive
16|46|Or that He may not seize them in their going to and from (journey) so they will not be able to escape (from His punishment)
16|47|Or that He may seize them with a gradual wasting (of wealth and health)? Surely! Your Lord is indeed Gracious, Merciful
16|48|Do they not see how Allah has created from things, their shadows incline to the right and to the left, making prostration to Allah, and they are humble
16|49|And to Allah prostate all the living creatures that are in the heavens and in the earth, and the angels, and they are not proud
16|50|they fear their Lord above them, and they do what they are commanded
16|51|And Allah said (O mankind): “Don’t take – 2 deities. Surely, He is the only one worthy of worship. Then you should fear Me.”
16|52|To Him belongs all that are in the heavens and in the earth and His religion is everlasting. Would you fear any one other than Allah
16|53|And whatever blessings you have are from Allah. When harm touches you, you cry to Him aloud for help
16|54|Yet, when He removes the harm from you, behold! Some of you associate others in worship with their Lord
16|55|so they deny that which (Favors) We have bestowed on them! So enjoy yourselves (short stay), soon you will come to know (the consequences)
16|56|And they assign a portion of what We have provided them (for those deities) about whom they don’t know. By Allah, you shall certainly be asked about what you used to fabricate
16|57|And they assign daughters to Allah! Glorified is He. To themselves what they desire (sons)
16|58|And when the news of (birth of) a female child is brought to any of them, his face remains dark, and he is filled with inward grief
16|59|He hides himself from the people because of the evil of what he has been informed. (He asks himself) shall he keep her with dishonor or bury her in the earth? Certainly, evil is what they decide
16|60|Those who don’t believe in the Hereafter set an evil example, and for Allah is the highest example. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
16|61|And if Allah were to seize mankind for their wrong-doing, He would not leave on it (the earth) a single living creature, but He postpones them for an appointed term. When their appointed term comes, neither they can delay it for an Hour nor can they advance it
16|62|They assign to Allah what they dislike. Their tongues describe the falsehood that the better things will be theirs. No doubt that for them is the fire, and they will be sent ahead of the others
16|63|By Allah, indeed We have sent (Messengers) to the nations before you (O Muhammad), but Satan made their deeds fair-seeming to them. So he (Satan) is their helper today (in this world), and they will have a painful punishment
16|64|And We have not sent down to you (O Muhammad) the book (the Qur’an) except that you may explain to them those things in which they differ, as guidance, and a Mercy for those who believe
16|65|And Allah sends down water (rain) from the sky, and it gives life in the earth after it has been dead. Surely, in this is a sign for people who listen
16|66|Surely! In the cattle, there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink of what is in their bellies, between bowels and blood - pure milk; pleasant to the drinkers
16|67|And (similarly) from the fruits of date-palms and grapes, you derive strong drink from it and good provision. Surely, there is indeed a sign for people who think
16|68|And your Lord inspired the bees, saying: “Take your habitations in the mountains, in the trees, and in what they (people) erect
16|69|then eat all fruits and follow the easy ways of your Lord.” There comes forth from their bellies, a drink of different colors, which is healing for people. Surely, in this there is indeed a sign for people who think
16|70|And Allah has created you, then He will cause you to die, and there are some of you who are sent back to the worst of old age so that they know nothing after having known. Surely! Allah is the All-Knower, All-Powerful
16|71|And Allah has preferred some of you above others in provision. Those who are preferred will not hand over their wealth to what their right hands possess so that they are equal in it. Then do they deny the Grace of Allah
16|72|And Allah has given to you your kind wives, and has given to you from your wives, sons and grandsons, and has provided to you good things. Then do they believe in false deities and deny the Favors of Allah
16|73|They worship others besides Allah, which don’t own anything to provide any provision for them from the heavens and the earth, nor they can
16|74|So don’t compare anything with Allah. Surely! Allah knows and you don’t know
16|75|Allah puts forward the example (of 2 men): a captive (disbeliever) under the possession of another, he has no power over anything, and (the other), a man (believer) on whom We have provided a good provision from Us, and he spends from it secretly and openly. Can they be equal? All the praises are to Allah. Nay! But most of them don’t know
16|76|And Allah puts forward an example of 2 men: one of them is dumb, has no power over anything, and is a burden to his master, whatever way he directs him, he brings no good. Is he equal to one who commands justice, and he is on the Right Way
16|77|And to Allah (belongs) the unseen of the heavens and the earth. The matter of the Hour (of Judgment) is not but as a twinkling of the eye, or it is even nearer. Surely! Allah has power over everything
16|78|And Allah has brought you out of the wombs of your mothers, you don’t know anything. And He has given you hearing, sight, and intelligence so that you may give thanks (to Allah)
16|79|Do they not see the birds flying in the midst of the sky? None holds them but Allah. Surely, in this are clear signs for people who believe
16|80|And Allah has made for you in your homes an abode, and made for you out of the hides of the cattle (as tent for) homes which you find light during the day of your travel and during the day of your stay (in travel); and from their wool, fur, and hair, (Allah provides) furniture, articles of convenience (such as carpets, blankets), comfort for a while
16|81|And Allah has made shades (from sun) for you out of that which He has created. He has made for you places of refuge in the mountains, has made for you garments to protect you from the heat, and coats of armor to protect you from your mutual violence. Thus He perfects His Grace to you so that you may submit (to Islam)
16|82|If they still turn away, then it is only on you (O Muhammad) to convey (the message) in a clear way
16|83|They recognize the Favors of Allah, yet they deny them and most of them are (ungrateful) disbelievers
16|84|And (remember) the Day when We shall raise up a witness (their Messenger) from each nation. Then those who have disbelieved will neither be permitted (to excuse), nor will they be allowed to repent
16|85|And when those who did wrong (disbelievers) will see the punishment, it will neither be lightened for them, nor will they be given respite
16|86|And when those who associated partners (with Allah) see their partners, they will say: “Our Lord! These are our partners whom we used to invoke besides you.” But they (partners) will throw back their word at them (and say): “Surely! You are liars!”
16|87|And they will offer submission to Allah (alone) on that Day and what they used to invent (false deities) will vanish from them
16|88|Those who disbelieved and hinder people from the way of Allah, We will add punishment over the punishment for them because they used to spread corruption
16|89|And (remember) the Day when We shall raise up a witness in every nation against them from amongst themselves. And We shall bring you (O Muhammad) as a witness against them. (For this reason) We have sent down to you the book (the Qur’an) as an explanation of everything, a guide, a Mercy, and glad tidings for the Muslims
16|90|Surely, Allah enjoins justice, doing good (to others), giving help to kith and kin, and forbids lewdness, evil deeds, and oppression. He admonishes you so that you may take heed
16|91|And fulfill the Covenant of Allah when you have taken a covenant, and don’t break your oaths after you have confirmed them; and indeed you have appointed Allah over you as guarantor. Surely! Allah knows what you do
16|92|And don’t be like that (woman) who had spun thread strongly and then undo it by weakening it; nor take your oaths as a means of deception among yourselves so that a nation may take undue advantage over another nation. Only Allah tests you by these (oaths). He will make clear to you on the Day of Resurrection what you used to differ about it
16|93|And if Allah willed, He could have made you all one nation, but He sends astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. Certainly you will be questioned for what you used to do
16|94|Don’t take your oaths as a means of deception among yourselves, lest your foot slip after being firmly fixed; and you may have to taste the punishment for hindering people from the Way of Allah, and there will be a great punishment for you
16|95|And don’t purchase a small gain (at the cost of) Allah’s Covenant. Surely! What is with Allah is better for you if you but knew it
16|96|Whatever is with you, will be exhausted, and whatever is with Allah, will remain. We will certainly pay those who are patient; their reward will be in proportion to the best of what they used to do
16|97|Whoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female, while he (or she) is a believer; We will give a good life, and We shall pay such people their reward according to the best of what they used to do
16|98|When you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from Satan, the outcast
16|99|Surely! He (Satan) has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord
16|100|Only he (Satan) has power over those who follow him, and those who join partners with Him (Allah)
16|101|And when We change a Verse (of the Qur’an) in place of another Verse, and Allah knows the best of what He sends down, they (disbelievers) say: “You (O Muhammad) are but a forger, liar.” But most of them don’t know
16|102|Say (O Muhammad): “The Holy Spirit (angel Gabriel) has brought it (the Qur’an) down from your Lord with truth to strengthen those who believe, and as guidance, and glad tidings to the Muslims.”
16|103|And indeed We know what they (polytheists) say: “It is only a human being who teaches him (Muhammad).” But the language of the man whom they refer to him is foreign, while this (the Qur’an) is a clear Arabic language
16|104|Surely! Those who don’t believe in the Verses of Allah, Allah will not guide them and for them will be a painful punishment
16|105|It is only those who don’t believe in the Verses of Allah, fabricate falsehood, and they are liars
16|106|Whoever is forced to deny faith after its acceptance while the heart is at rest with faith in Allah, shall be forgiven; but whoever opens its heart to disbelief (willingly after accepting the faith), shall incur the wrath from Allah, and for them will be a great punishment
16|107|That is because they love and prefer the life of this world over that of the Hereafter. Allah does not guide the disbelievers
16|108|They are those whom Allah has set a seal upon their hearts, their hearings, and their eyes. They are those who are heedless
16|109|No doubt, they will be the losers in the Hereafter
16|110|Then surely! Your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful afterwards to those who emigrated after they had been put to trials (for their faith), struggled hard, and were patient
16|111|(Remember) the Day when every soul will come up pleading for itself, every soul will be paid in full for what it did, and they will not be dealt with unjustly
16|112|And Allah puts forward the example of a town (Makkah) which was enjoying security and peace, its provision was coming to it in abundance from every place; then it (its people) denied the Favors of Allah. So Allah made it (its people) taste the seize of hunger and fear because of what they used to do
16|113|And surely, a Messenger (Muhammad) was sent to them from among themselves, but they denied him; so the punishment overtook them while they were wrongdoers
16|114|So eat of the lawful and good things which Allah has provided for you; and thank Allah’s Bounty if you really worship Him
16|115|He has only forbidden you to eat the dead animal, blood, the flesh of swine, and (any animal) which is slaughtered as a sacrifice for others than Allah with it. But if one is forced (by necessity) without willful disobedience, and not transgressing, then surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
16|116|And you don’t say that which describe your tongues falsely: “This is lawful and this is unlawful,” in order to invent lies against Allah. Surely, those who invent lies against Allah will never prosper
16|117|A brief enjoyment is (in this life) for them, but they will have a painful punishment
16|118|And to those who are Jews, We have forbidden such things as We have already mentioned to you (Muhammad) before (6:146). And We have not wronged to them, but they did wrong to themselves
16|119|Then surely, yet, your Lord is Forgiving and Merciful to those who do evil in ignorance, then they repent after that, and do righteous deeds
16|120|Surely, Abraham was a nation (a leader with all the good qualities), straight obedient to Allah, and he was not of the polytheists
16|121|(He was) thankful for His Graces. He chose him and guided him to the Right Way
16|122|And We gave him good (life) in this world, and surely in the Hereafter he will be of those who are righteous
16|123|Then, We have sent the revelation to you (O Muhammad saying): “Follow the faith of Abraham and he was not one of the polytheists.”
16|124|The Sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed in it. Surely, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that over which they used to differ
16|125|Invite (mankind, O Muhammad) to the Way of your Lord (Islam) with wisdom, kind advice, and reason with them in a way that it is better. Surely, your Lord knows best who has gone astray from His Way, and He knows best those who are guided
16|126|And if you (have to) punish (your enemy), then let your punishment be like that which you were punished with. But if you endure patiently, surely, it is better for the patient
16|127|And endure patiently (O Muhammad), and your patience is not but from Allah. And don’t grieve over them (polytheists), and be not in distress from what they plot
16|128|Surely, Allah is with those who fear Him, and those who are righteous people
17|1|Glory be to He (Allah) Who took His devotee (Muhammad) for a journey by night from the sacred Masjid (at Makkah) to the farthest Masjid (Al-Aqsa at Jerusalem), which We have blessed around it (vicinity), to show him (Muhammad) some of Our signs. Surely, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer
17|2|And We gave Moses the Scripture and made it a guide for the children of Israel (saying): “Don’t take other than Me as protector
17|3|(You are) offspring of those whom We carried (in the ship) with Noah. Surely, he was a grateful devotee.”
17|4|And We decreed for the children of Israel in the Scripture: indeed you will do mischief in the earth twice, indeed you will become tyrants, and extremely arrogant
17|5|When the promise for the first of the 2 came, We sent against you servants of Ours (the Assyrians) who gave a terrible warfare. They entered the very innermost parts of your homes and the promise was fulfilled
17|6|Then We gave you a return of victory over them, helped you with wealth and children, and granted you more manpower
17|7|(We said) if you did good, you did good for yourselves; but if you did evil, it was for your own selves. Then, when the last (2nd) promise came to pass, (We permitted your enemies – the Romans) to disgrace your faces and to enter the Masjid (of Jerusalem) just as they had entered it 1st time, and they destroyed all that they had conquered (fell in their hands) with complete destruction
17|8|It may be that your Lord may show Mercy to you; but if you return (to sins), We shall return (to Our Punishment). And Allah has made hell a prison for the disbelievers
17|9|Surely, this Qur’an guides to the way which is just perfect and gives the glad tidings to the believers who do righteous deeds so that they shall have a great reward
17|10|and those who don’t believe in the Hereafter; We have prepared for them a painful punishment
17|11|And mankind invokes (Allah) for evil as mankind invokes (Allah) for good, and mankind is ever hasty
17|12|And We have made the night and the day as 2 signs. Then, We have covered the night with darkness and have given light to the day so that you may seek Bounty from your Lord, and that you may compute number of the years and the reckoning. Thus We have explained everything with full explanation
17|13|And We have fastened the deeds of every human in its neck, and on the Day of Resurrection We shall bring out for him a book which will be wide open
17|14|(It will be said): “Read your book. You yourself are sufficient today as a reckoner (accountant) against you.”
17|15|Whoever goes right, then it goes right only for its own self. Whoever goes astray, then it goes astray only against its own self. No one shall bear the burden of another (on the Day of Judgment). And We don’t punish (in this world) until We have sent a Messenger
17|16|And when We decide to destroy a town, We first send commandments to its wealthy luxurious people, but they transgress in it. Thus the word (of punishment) is justified against it. Then We destroy it with complete destruction
17|17|And how many generations We have destroyed since after Noah? Your Lord is Sufficient as an All-Knower and All-Seer of the sins of His servants
17|18|Whoever wishes for the quick-passing (enjoyment of this world), We quickly grant it to whoever He wills. Then, We condemn him to hell who will burn therein disgraced and rejected
17|19|And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it with its striving while he is a believer, then they are such that their striving will be appreciated
17|20|We provide each of these and those from the Bounties of your Lord. The Bounties of your Lord can never be forbidden
17|21|See how We prefer some of them over others and surely, the Hereafter will be greater in degrees and greater in preference
17|22|Don’t set up another one worthy of worship with Allah, lest you sit down condemned, forsaken
17|23|And your Lord has decreed that you worship none except Him. You shall be good (dutiful) to parents. If one of them or both of them attain old age with you, then don’t say to them a word of disrespect, nor scold them but address them in terms of honor
17|24|And lower to them the wing of submission (humility) through Mercy, and say: “My Lord! Bestow on them Your Mercy just as they raised me (when I was) a little child.”
17|25|Your Lord knows best what is in your hearts. If you are righteous, then surely, He is forgiving to those who often turn (to Him)
17|26|Give to your relatives their due and to the poor, and to the wayfarers. But don’t spend wastefully (your wealth like a spendthrift)
17|27|surely, the spendthrifts are brothers of the devils, and the devil is ever ungrateful to its Lord
17|28|And if you (O Muhammad) turn away from them (kinsman, poor, wayfarer, etc) seeking a Mercy from your Lord which you hope, then say kind word to them
17|29|And you shall neither tie your hands (like a miser) to your neck nor stretch them to their utmost reach, so that you become blameworthy, and in severe poverty
17|30|Surely, your Lord extends the provision to whom He wills and straitens (for whom He wills). Surely, He is All-Knower, All-Seer of His servants
17|31|And don’t kill your children for fear of poverty. We provide (sustenance) for them and for you. Surely, killing them is a great sin
17|32|Don’t approach adultery. Surely, it is a great sin, and it is the worst way
17|33|Don’t kill a soul which Allah has forbidden, except for a just cause. And whoever is killed wrongfully, and then surely We have made for its heir (guardian) an authority. But let him not exceed limits in killing (should not kill except the killer only). Surely, he is helped (by Islamic law)
17|34|And don’t go near the property of the orphan except with what is best (to improve), until it attains the age of full strength. Fulfill the covenant. Surely! The covenant is a responsibility (will be questioned)
17|35|And give full measure when you measure, and weigh with a straight balance. That is good and better interpretation (in the end)
17|36|And don’t follow (anyone blindly in matters) about which you don’t have knowledge. Surely, the (use of) hearing, the sight, and the heart - for each of these, you will be questioned (by Allah on the Day of Judgment)
17|37|And don’t walk on the earth with arrogance. Surely, you can neither penetrate the earth nor can attain the height of the mountains
17|38|All that is evil are hateful to your Lord
17|39|This is part of wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you (Muhammad). Don’t set up with Allah another one worthy of worship lest you should be thrown into hell, blameworthy and rejected
17|40|Has your Lord preferred for you (O pagans of Makkah) to give sons and adapted (for Himself) from among the angels as females (daughters)? Surely! You utter awful statement
17|41|And surely, We have explained in this Qur’an so that they (disbelievers) may take heed, but it has only increased their dislike
17|42|Say (O Muhammad to polytheists): “If there were other one worthy of worship besides Him as they say, they would have certainly sought a way to (dethrone) the Master of the Throne
17|43|Glorified and exalted is He! (He) is far above (the great falsehood) that they say
17|44|The 7 heavens, the earth, and all that is in them glorify Him. There is not a single thing but glorifies Him with praise. But you don’t understand their glorification. Surely, He is Forbearing, Forgiving
17|45|And when you (Muhammad) recite the Qur’an, We make an invisible veil (unseen barrier) between you and between those who don’t believe in the Hereafter
17|46|And We put coverings over their hearts so that they don’t understand it (the Qur’an), and create deafness in their ears. When you mention of your Lord alone in the Qur’an, they turn their backs in extreme dislike
17|47|We know best what they like to listen when they listen to you. When they take secret counsel, then the wrongdoers say: “You follow none but a bewitched man.”
17|48|See how they have put forward examples for you. They have gone astray, and they can not find a way
17|49|And they say: “When we are reduced to bones and fragments (ashes), shall we really be resurrected to a new creation?”
17|50|Say (O Muhammad):“(You will be brought back to life) even if you be stones or iron
17|51|or even a creation that is greater (or harder) than you may think of.” Then they will ask: “Who will return us (back to life)?” Say: “He Who created you first time.” Then they will shake their heads at you and ask: “When it will be?” Say: “Perhaps it is near (soon)!”
17|52|On the Day when He will call you, you will answer with His Praise, and you will think that you have stayed (in death) but a little while
17|53|And say to My servants (true believers) that they should only say those words that are the best. Surely, Satan sows (disagreements) among them. Surely, Satan is a plain enemy to mankind
17|54|Your Lord knows you best. If He wills, He will have Mercy on you, or if He wills, He will punish you. And We have not sent you (Muhammad) as a guardian over them
17|55|And your Lord knows best all those that are in the heavens and the earth. Indeed, We have preferred some of the prophets above others, and We gave the Psalms to David
17|56|Say (O Muhammad): “Call to those whom you pretend (to be worthy of worship) besides Him. They have neither the power to remove the hardship from you nor even to change it.”
17|57|Those to whom they pray, desire the means of access to their Lord, which of them should be the nearest, and they hope for His Mercy and fear Hiss punishment. Surely, the punishment of your Lord is (something to be) afraid of
17|58|There is not a town but We shall destroy it before the Day of Resurrection, or punish it with severe punishment. That is written in the book (of records)
17|59|And nothing stops Us to send the signs but that the people of old denied them. And We sent the she-camel to Thamud as a clear sign, but they did her wrong. And We don’t send the signs except to warn
17|60|And (remember) when We said to you (O Muhammad): “Surely! Your Lord has encompassed mankind.” And We have not make the vision (Al-Isra) which We showed you (O Muhammad on the night of Al-Isra) but a trial for mankind, and likewise the accursed tree (Zaqqoom) in the Qur’an. We warn them but it does not increase (fear in) them except great disbelief, oppression and disobedience
17|61|And (remember) when We said to the angels: “Prostrate unto Adam.” They prostrated except Satan. He said: “Shall I prostrate to one whom You have created (from) clay?”
17|62|(Satan) said: “Is this the one whom You have honored above me? If You give me respite (keep alive) to the Day of Resurrection, I will surely seize and mislead his (Adam’s) offspring (sending them astray) all but a few!”
17|63|(Allah) said: “Go, and whoever of them follows you, then surely, hell will be the recompense of all of you, an ample recompense
17|64|And befool whom you can of them with your voice, and make assaults on them with your cavalry and your infantry, and share with them in wealth and children, and promise them. But Satan promises them nothing but deception
17|65|Surely! My servants, there is no authority for you over them. Your Lord is All-Sufficient as a Guardian.”
17|66|Your Lord is the one who drives your ships in the sea in order that you may seek His Bounty. Surely! He is Merciful towards you
17|67|And whenever any harm touches you at the sea, all those to whom you call upon except Him (Allah) vanish. Yet, when He brings you safely to the land, you turn away (from Him). And human is ever ungrateful
17|68|Do you then feel secure that He will not cause side of the land to swallow you up, or send against you a violent sand-storm? Then, you shall not find a guardian for you
17|69|Or do you feel secure that when you will return to it (sea) a 2nd time, He will not send a hurricane of wind against you and drown you because of your disbelief? (If that happens) then you will not find for you therein an avenger (to take revenge) against Us
17|70|And indeed, We have honored the children of Adam, We have carried them on land and sea, have provided them with good things, and have preferred them over many of those whom We have created with a marked preference
17|71|(Remember) the Day when We shall call all human beings with their leaders. Those who will be given their book (of records) in their right hand will read their records and will not be dealt unjustly in the least
17|72|But those who are blind (acted) in this world will be blind in the Hereafter and more astray from the way
17|73|Surely, they were about to tempt you (O Muhammad) away from that which We have revealed (the Qur’an) to you, to fabricate something other than it against Us, and (if successful) then they would have certainly taken you a friend
17|74|And had We not made you stand firm, surely you would nearly have inclined to (compromise with) them a little bit
17|75|Then We would have made you taste a double punishment in this life and a double punishment after death. Then you would not have found anyone to help you against Us
17|76|And surely, they were about to frighten you so that they might drive you out from the land. But then they would not have stayed after you, except a little while
17|77|(This was Our) way with whom indeed We sent Messengers before you (O Muhammad), and you will not find any alteration in Our Way
17|78|Establish prayer from mid-day till the darkness of the night (Zuhr, Asr, Maghrib, and Isha prayers), and (recite the) Qur’an in the early dawn (the morning prayer- Fajr). Surely, the recitation of the Qur’an in the early dawn is witnessed (by angels)
17|79|And in (some parts of) the night perform the night prayer with it (recite the Qur’an) as an additional prayer (Tahajjud) for you (O Muhammad). It may be that your Lord will raise you to ‘Maqam-e-Mahmood’ (a station of praise-worthy on the Day of Resurrection)
17|80|And say (O Muhammad): “My Lord! Make me enter (the city of Madinah) one entry in truth, and bring me out (from the city of Makkah) one exit in truth. And grant me from You an authority helper,”
17|81|and say: “Truth has come and the falsehood has vanished. Surely! Falsehood is bound to vanish.”
17|82|And We have sent down the Qur’an which is a healing and a Mercy to the believers, while it increases nothing but loss to the wrongdoers
17|83|And when We bestow Our Grace on mankind, it turns away and becomes far away at one side (from the Right Way). When evil touches, it is in great despair
17|84|Say (O Muhammad to mankind): “Everyone acts according to its manner; but your Lord knows best whose way (religion) is best guided.”
17|85|And they ask you (O Muhammad) about the soul (spirit). Say: “The soul is one of the commands of my Lord and you have not been given the knowledge of it but a little.”
17|86|And if We willed, We could surely take away all that which We have revealed to you (this Qur’an). Then you would find no protector for you against Us (to get it back)
17|87|except as a Mercy from your Lord. Surely! His Grace to you (O Muhammad) is great indeed
17|88|Say: “If the mankind and the jinns together were to bring the like of this Qur’an, they could not bring the like thereof, even if some of them was helper to some others.”
17|89|And indeed We have fully explained to mankind in this Qur’an every kind of similitude, but most people refuse but disbelief
17|90|And they say: “We shall not believe in you (O Muhammad) until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us
17|91|or there is a garden of date-palms and grapes for you and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst abundantly
17|92|or you cause to fall the heaven upon us in pieces as you have claimed, or you bring Allah and the angels (face to face) before us
17|93|or there is a house of adorable materials (like silver and gold) for you, or you ascend up into the sky, and we shall not believe in your ascension until you bring down for us a book that we would read.” Say (O Muhammad): “Glory be to my Lord! Am I (claimed) anything more but a human, sent as a Messenger?”
17|94|And nothing prevented people from belief when the guidance came to them except that they said: “Has Allah sent a human as (His) Messenger?”
17|95|Say: “If there were angels walking on the earth in peace, then We would certainly have sent down to them an angel from the heaven as a Messenger.”
17|96|Say: “Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and between you. Surely! He is All-Knower, the All-Seer of His servants.”
17|97|And those whom Allah guides are rightly guided; but those whom He sends astray, they will never find protectors for them besides Him. We shall gather them on the Day of Resurrection on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf. Their abode will be hell; whenever its flame abates, We shall increase the fierceness of fire for them
17|98|That is their recompense because they denied Our Verses and they said: “When we are reduced to bones and fragments, shall we really be resurrected as new creation?”
17|99|They don’t see that Allah, who has created the heavens and the earth, is able to create the people like them. He has made for them an appointed term; there is no doubt in it. But the wrongdoers refuse but disbelief
17|100|Say (to the disbelievers): “Even if you possessed all the treasures of the Mercy of my Lord, you would surely hold them back for fear of spending. Human is ever miserly!”
17|101|And indeed We gave to Moses 9 clear signs. Ask the children of Israel, when he came to them, then Pharaoh said to him: “O Moses! I think you are indeed bewitched.”
17|102|(Moses) replied: “Surely, you know that no one has sent down these signs but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as clear signs. Surely O Pharaoh, I think you are doomed to destruction.”
17|103|So he (Pharaoh) wanted to turn them out of the land (of Egypt). But We drowned him and all who were with him
17|104|And We said to the children of Israel after him: “You reside in the land and then when the last promise comes, We shall assemble you as a mixed crowd.”
17|105|And We have sent it (the Qur’an) down with truth and with truth it has descended. And We have not sent you (O Muhammad) except as a bearer of glad-tidings and a Warner
17|106|And We have divided the Qur’an (into parts) so that you may recite it to people at intervals. And We have revealed it by stages (in 23 years)
17|107|Say (O Muhammad to them): “Whether you believe in it (the Qur’an) or don’t believe, surely those who were given knowledge before it (Jews and Christians like Abdullah bin Salam and Salman Al-Farsi), they fall down on their faces in prostration when it is recited to them
17|108|and they say: ‘Glory be to our Lord! Surely, the Promise of our Lord must be fulfilled.’
17|109|And they fall down on their faces, weeping and it increases their humility.”
17|110|Say (O Muhammad): “Invoke Allah or invoke the Beneficent, by whatever name you invoke Him, to Him belongs the best names. Offer your prayer neither aloud nor make it in a low voice but seek a way between these
17|111|and say: “Praise be to Allah, Who has not taken a son, and Who has no partner in (His) Dominion, nor there is any protector for Him out of dependence. And magnify Him with all magnificence.”
18|1|All the praises be to Allah Who has sent down to His servant (Muhammad) the book (the Qur’an) and has not placed therein any crookedness
18|2|(He has made it) right to give warning (to the disbelievers) of a severe punishment from Him, and to give glad tidings to the believers who work righteous deeds so that they shall have a good reward (Paradise)
18|3|(they shall) abide in it forever
18|4|Also to warn those who say: “Allah has begotten a son.”
18|5|They don’t have knowledge about it, nor did their forefathers. Mighty is the word that comes out of their mouths. They say nothing but a lie
18|6|Perhaps, you would kill yourself (O Muhammad) in grief over their footsteps, because they don’t believe in this narration (the Qur’an)
18|7|Surely! We have made the earth with all kinds of adornments in order that We may test them (mankind) and to see which of them are best in deeds
18|8|And surely We shall reduce what is on it (the earth) to a bare dry soil
18|9|Do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription (news or name writing of the people of the cave) were a wonder among Our Signs
18|10|(Remember) when the young men fled (for refuge from their disbelieving folk) to the cave, they said: “Our Lord! Bestow on us Mercy from You and facilitate for us in our affair to the Right Way!”
18|11|Therefore We covered on their ears (causing them into deep sleep) in the cave for a number of years
18|12|then We raised them up (from sleep) so that We might test which of the 2 parties (believers and disbelievers) was best at calculating the time period for which they had stayed
18|13|We narrate to you (O Muhammad) their story with truth. Surely they were young men who believed in their Lord and We increased them in guidance
18|14|And We made their hearts firm and strong when they stood up and said: “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, we shall never call upon any deity other than Him; for if we do, then we shall utter something improper (in disbelief)
18|15|These are our people who have taken for deities other than Him (Allah). Why do they not bring for them a clear authority? And who does more wrong than the one who invents a lie against Allah?”
18|16|(They consulted with one another and said): “Now we have withdrawn from them and denounced those deities whom they worship except Allah, then seek refuge in the cave; our Lord will open a way for us from His Mercy and will make easy for us in our affair.”
18|17|And you might have seen the sun when it rose, it declines to the right from their cave; and when it set, it turns away from them towards the left while they lay in the middle of the cave. That is one of the signs of Allah. Whoever He guides is rightly guided; but whoever He sends astray, you will never find guiding friend (to lead to the Right Way) for him
18|18|And you would have thought them awake, though they were asleep. And We turned them to the right and to the left sides, while their dog stretched out its 2 forelegs at the entrance (of the cave). Had you looked at them, you would have certainly turned back from them in flight and (their sight) certainly would have filled with awe of them
18|19|Thus, We awakened them (from long deep sleep) so that they could question among them. A speaker from them said: “How long have you stayed here?” They said: “Perhaps we have stayed here for a day or part of a day.” They said: “Our Lord knows best how long we have stayed here. So send one of us with our silver coin to the city, and let him find out which is the purest food, and let him bring us some of it. Let him be careful and don’t let anyone know our whereabouts
18|20|Surely if they learn about you, they will stone you (to death), or turn you back into their religion, and in that case you will never ever be successful.”
18|21|And thus We made their case known so that people might know that the Promise of Allah is true and that there is no doubt about the Hour (of Judgment). (Remember) when they (the people of the city) disputed among themselves about their case, they said: “Construct a building over them, their Lord knows best about them.” Those who won on their point said: “Surely we shall build a place of worship over them.”
18|22|Some say they were 3 and their dog was the 4th of them. Others say they were 5 and their dog was the 6th of them guessing at the unseen. Yet, others say they were 7 and their dog was the 8th of them. Say (O Muhammad): “My Lord knows best their number. None knows them but a few.” So don’t debate about them except with clear proof and don’t consult about them (people of Cave) with anyone
18|23|And never say of anything: “Surely I shall do that tomorrow,”
18|24|except that (say): “If Allah wills!” And remember your Lord when you forget and say: “I hope that my Lord will guide me to a closer way of guidance than this.”
18|25|And (some say) they stayed in their cave 300 years (solar) and add 9 (lunar years)
18|26|(O Muhammad) say: “Allah knows best how long they stayed. With Him is (the knowledge of) the unseen of the heavens and the earth. How clearly He sees with it and how clearly He hears! They did not have any helper other than Him, and He does not share in His Decision and rule with anyone.”
18|27|And recite what has been revealed to you (O Muhammad) from the book (the Qur’an) of your Lord. None can change His Words and you will never find a refuge other than Him
18|28|Keep yourself (O Muhammad) patiently with those who call their Lord in the morning and the evening seeking His pleasure, and don’t let your eyes overlook them desiring the beauty of the life of the world; don’t obey the one whose heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance, who follows own lusts and whose affair has been lost
18|29|(O Muhammad) say: “The truth is from your Lord. Whoever wills let him believe, and whoever wills, let him disbelieve.” Surely, We have prepared a fire for the wrongdoers; its walls will surround them (disbelievers). If they ask for help, they will be granted water like boiling oil that will burn faces. Terrible is the drink and evil is the resting place
18|30|Surely! Those who believe and do righteous deeds, We shall not lose the reward of him who does good deeds
18|31|Those are the ones for them there will be gardens of Eden; rivers flow beneath them; they will be decorated therein with bracelets of gold, and they will wear green garments of fine and thick silk. They will recline therein on raised thrones. How good is the reward, and how excellent is the resting place
18|32|And (O Muhammad) put forward to them the example of 2 men: We had given 2 gardens of grapes to one of them, We had surrounded them with date-palms, and had made cultivated fields between them
18|33|Both the gardens brought forth their produce and did not fail in the least. We (even) caused a river to gush forth in the middle of them
18|34|And there was abundant produce for him and he said to his companion while he was talking to him: “I have more wealth than you and stronger (in respect of) men.”
18|35|And he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself. He said: “I don’t think that this garden will ever perish
18|36|And I don’t think the Hour will ever come. Even if I am brought back to my Lord, surely I shall find better than this at the end.”
18|37|His companion said to him while he was talking to him: “Do you disbelieve in Him Who created you out of dust, then out of semen, then fashioned you into a man
18|38|He is my Lord and I shall not associate anyone with my Lord
18|39|When you entered your garden, why did you not say: ‘It is as Allah wills! There is no power but with Allah!’ If you see me, I have less wealth than you and children
18|40|it may be that my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and may send a punishment from the sky on it, then turn it into a slippery earth
18|41|Or its water will become deep-sunken (dry underground) so that you will never be able to find it.”
18|42|(It so happened that) his fruits were surrounded (with ruin). He began twisting his hands (with sorrow) over what he had spent on it while all (fruits) were destroyed on their nets, and he said: “I wish I had not associated anyone with my Lord!”
18|43|And he could neither find anyone to help him other than Allah, nor could he defend himself
18|44|The real power (protection) comes from Allah, the true one worthy of worship. He (Allah) is the best for reward and the best for the final end
18|45|And (O Muhammad) put forward for them the example of the worldly life. It is like water (rain) which We send down from the sky and the vegetation of the earth mingles with it. (But later it) becomes dry stalks which the winds scatter. And Allah has power over everything
18|46|Wealth and children are the adornment of the worldly life. But the lasting righteous deeds are better with your Lord for rewards and better hope
18|47|And (remember) the Day when We shall cause the mountains to move, you will see the earth as a leveled plain (of waste), We shall gather them, and will not leave anyone of them behind
18|48|And they will be set before your Lord in rows (and Allah will say): “Now indeed you have come to Us as We created you the first time. Nay, but you thought that We had never appointed a meeting for you.”
18|49|And the book (one’s record) will be placed (before them), and you will see the sinners fearful of what is (recorded) in it. They will say: “Woe to us! What is the matter with this book? Neither it leaves out a small thing nor a big thing but has recorded it with numbers!” They will find all that they did and placed before them. Your Lord will not treat anyone with injustice
18|50|And (remember) when We said to the angels: “Prostrate to Adam,” all prostrated except Satan. He was one of the jinns; he disobeyed the command of its Lord. Will you then take him (Satan) and its progeny as your protectors rather than Me while they are enemies to you? What an evil is the exchange for the wrongdoers
18|51|(Allah) did not make them (Satan and its offspring) to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation, nor I (Allah) took the misleaders (of mankind) as helpers
18|52|And (remember) the Day when He will say: “Call those partners of Mine whom you claimed.” They will cry to them but they will not answer them and We shall put a barrier between them
18|53|And the sinners will see the fire and realize that they have to fall therein. And they will not find a way of escape from it
18|54|And indeed We explained every example in this Qur’an for mankind (to understand). But human is quarrelsome of most things
18|55|And nothing prevents mankind from believing and asking forgiveness of their Lord when the guidance (the Qur’an) has come to them, except that the way of the ancients come upon them or the punishment come upon them face to face
18|56|We sent the Messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners. But the disbelievers disputed with false argument in order to refute the truth. They took My Verses with which they were warned, as a joke
18|57|And who is more unjust than the one who, when reminded of the Verses of the Lord, turns away from them and forgets what deeds its own hands have done? (For these people) surely, We have set veils over their hearts so they don’t understand it (the Qur’an), and their ears are (covered) with deafness. If you (O Muhammad) call them to the guidance, even then they will never be guided
18|58|And your Lord is Forgiving, the Owner of Mercy. If He calls them to account for what they have earned, He would have hastened the punishment for them. But they have their appointed time, beyond which they will never find an escape
18|59|And We destroyed these towns with them (Ad, Thamud inhabitants) when they did wrong. We appointed a fixed time for their destruction
18|60|And (remember) when Moses said to his young servant: “I will not give up (traveling) until I reach the junction of the 2 seas or (until) I spend years (in traveling).”
18|61|But when they reached the junction between them, they forgot (about) their fish (they were carrying), which made its way through the sea as in a tunnel
18|62|So when they had passed further on, he (Moses) said to his young servant: “Bring us our breakfast; truly we have suffered this fatigue in our journey.”
18|63|He replied: “Do you remember when we were resting ourselves beside the rock? Indeed I forgot the fish, none but Satan made me forget to remember it. It took its way into the sea in a strange way!”
18|64|(Moses) said: “That is what we have been seeking.” So they went back retracing their footsteps
18|65|Then they found one of Our servant (Khidr) whom We had bestowed Mercy from Us, and We had taught him knowledge from Us
18|66|Moses requested him: “May I follow you so that you may teach me something of that knowledge which you have been taught (by Allah)?”
18|67|He (Khidr) said: “Surely! You will never be able to have patience with me
18|68|how can you have patience about that which is beyond your knowledge?”
18|69|(Moses) said: “You will find me patient if Allah wills, and I will not disobey your command.”
18|70|He (Khidr) said: “Then, if you follow me, don’t ask me about anything until I myself mention it to you.”
18|71|So they both proceeded, till when they embarked in a ship, Khidr made a hole in it. Moses said: “Have you made a hole in it to drown its people? Surely, you have done a bad thing.”
18|72|He (Khidr) said: “Did I not tell you that you would never be able to have patience with me?”
18|73|(Moses) said: “Don’t call me to account for what I forgot, and don’t be hard on me for my affair (with you).”
18|74|Then they both proceeded till they met a boy, then Khidr killed him. Moses said: “Have you killed an innocent person who killed none? Surely, you have committed an evil thing!”
18|75|(Khidr) said: “Did I not tell you that you would never be able to have patience with me?”
18|76|(Moses) said: “If I ever ask you about anything after this, don’t keep me in your company, (If I ask again then) surely you will have an excuse in my case.”
18|77|Then they both proceeded, till they came to the people of a town. They asked its people for food, but they refused to entertain them. Then they found in it a wall that was about to collapse, so Khidr set it up straight. Moses said: “If you had wished, surely you could have taken some wages for it!”
18|78|(Khidr) said: “This is the parting (time) between me and you. (First) I will tell you the interpretation of those (acts) over which you could not have patience
18|79|As for the ship, it belonged to poor people working in the sea. I intended to damage it as there was a king after them who was seizing every ship by force
18|80|As for the boy, his parents were believers, and we feared lest he would oppress them by rebellion and disbelief
18|81|So we intended that their Lord should exchange for them one (son) better than him in righteousness and near to mercy
18|82|As for the wall, it belonged to 2 orphan boys in the town and there was a treasure for them under it. Since their father was a righteous man, your Lord intended that they should attain their age of full strength and then take out their treasure as a Mercy from your Lord. I did not do them by my own will. That is the interpretation of (those actions) over which you could not hold patience.”
18|83|And (O Muhammad) they ask you about Dhul-Qarnain. Say: “I shall recite to you something of him.”
18|84|Surely, We established him in the earth and gave him means of everything
18|85|So he followed a way (towards the west)
18|86|until, when he reached the setting place of the sun, he found it setting in a spring of black muddy water. He found a people near it. We said: “O Dhul-Qarnain! Either you punish them, or treat them with kindness.”
18|87|He said (to people): “Whoever will do wrong, we shall punish him; then he will be brought back to the Lord, who will punish with a terrible punishment
18|88|As for him who believes and does righteous deeds, he shall have the best reward (Paradise), and we (Dhul-Qarnain) shall speak to him with mild words.”
18|89|Then he followed another way (towards the east)
18|90|until, when he reached the rising place of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had not provided any shelter against it (the sun)
18|91|(He left them) as it was! And We knew whatever information was with him (Dhul-Qarnain)
18|92|Then he followed (another) way
18|93|until, when he reached between 2 mountains where he found (near) them a people who almost did not understood a word
18|94|They said: “O Dhul-Qarnain! Surely! (The people of) Gog and Magog are doing mischief in the land. Shall we pay to you a tribute in order that you make a barrier between us and them?”
18|95|He said: “What my Lord has granted me is better (than your tribute). Just help me with strength (manpower) and I will erect a barrier between you and them
18|96|Give me pieces (blocks) of iron.” Until when he leveled the gap between the 2 mountain-cliffs, he said: “Blow,” until when he had made it (red iron) fire, he said: “Bring me molten copper to pour over it.”
18|97|So they (Gog and Magog) could not scale it nor could they dig through
18|98|(Dhul-Qarnain) said: “This is a Mercy from my Lord. But when the Promise of my Lord will come, He shall make it flat (leveled). Promise of my Lord is true.”
18|99|And that Day (when Gog and Magog will come out), We shall leave some of people to surge like waves on others. The trumpet will be blown and We shall collect them (the creatures) all together
18|100|On that Day We shall present hell to the disbelievers with plain view
18|101|(to) those whose eyes had been under a covering from My Reminder (this Qur’an), and who could not bear to hear it
18|102|Do the disbelievers then think that they can take My Servants as protectors besides Me? Surely, We have prepared hell as an entertainment for the disbelievers
18|103|Say (O Muhammad): “Should We inform you of the greatest losers in respect of deeds
18|104|Those whose efforts have been wasted in the worldly life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their deeds
18|105|they are those who disbelieve in the Verses of their Lord and the meeting with Him (Hereafter). So their deeds will be in vain, We shall not assign any weight (reward) on the Day of Resurrection for them
18|106|Thus their recompense will be hell; because they disbelieved, took My Verses and My Messengers as a joke
18|107|Surely! Those who believe and do righteous deeds, they will be entertained with the gardens of Paradise
18|108|They will reside in it forever. They will never desire for removal from there.”
18|109|Say (O Muhammad to mankind): “If the sea were ink for (writing) the Words of my Lord, the sea would be exhausted before the Words of my Lord would be exhausted, even if We brought (another sea) like it for its aid.”
18|110|Say (O Muhammad): “I am but a human like you. It has been revealed to me that your deity is One (Allah). So whoever has hopes for the meeting with the Lord, let him do righteous deeds and don’t associate anyone as a partner in the worship of the Lord.”
19|1|Kaf-Ha-Ya-Ain-Sad
19|2|(This is) a mention of the Mercy of your Lord to His servant Zachariah
19|3|when he called out his Lord in secret
19|4|he said: "O my Lord! Indeed I have grown weak bones, head of mine has turned grey, and I have never been unblessed in my invocation to You, O my Lord
19|5|Surely! I fear my relatives after me and my wife is barren. So give me an heir from You
19|6|who shall inherit me and inherit from the family of Jacob. O my Lord, make him a desirable (person to You)!”
19|7|(Allah said): “O Zachariah! Surely, We give you the glad tidings of a son, his name shall be John. We have not given that name to anyone before.”
19|8|He asked: “My Lord! How shall I have a son when my wife is barren and I have reached the extreme old age?”
19|9|(Allah) said: “So (it will be). Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me. Certainly I have created you before when you were not anything!’”
19|10|(Zachariah) said: “My Lord! Appoint for me a sign.” He (Allah) said: “Your sign is that you shall not speak to people for 3 nights together though you have no bodily defect.”
19|11|So he came out to his people from the praying place, then he told them by signs to glorify (Allah) in the morning and in the afternoon
19|12|(It was said to his son): “O John! Hold the Scripture with strength.” And We gave him wisdom while he was a child
19|13|compassion (sympathetic to people) from Us, (made him) pure from sins, and he was righteous
19|14|and dutiful to his parents, and he was neither arrogant nor disobedient
19|15|Peace be on him the day he was born, the day he dies, and the day he will be raised up to life (again)
19|16|And mention in the book (the Qur’an, O Muhammad, the story of) Mary, when she withdrew in seclusion from her family to a place facing east
19|17|Then she placed a screen (to separate herself) from them. We sent to her Our angel Gabriel and he appeared before her as a human in all respects
19|18|She said: “Surely! I seek refuge with the Gracious (Allah) from you, if you fear (Allah).”
19|19|(The angel) said: “I am only a Messenger from your Lord (to inform) you the gift of a righteous son.”
19|20|She said: “How can I have a son when no man has touched me, nor am I unchaste?”
19|21|He (the angel) said: “So (it will be), your Lord says: ‘That is easy for Me. And We will appoint him (son) as a sign to mankind and a Mercy from Us and it is a matter (already) decreed (by Allah).’”
19|22|So she conceived him and she withdrew with him to a far place (Bethlehem about 4-6 miles from Jerusalem)
19|23|The labor pains drove her to the trunk of a date-palm. She cried (in her anguish): “Would that I had died before this, and I had been forgotten out of sight!”
19|24|So he (Gabriel) called to her from below her, saying: “Don’t grieve! Indeed your Lord has provided a water stream under you
19|25|Shake the trunk of date-palm towards you; it will let fall fresh ripe-dates upon you
19|26|So eat, drink, and cool your eyes. If you see anyone from human being, say: ‘I have vowed a fast to the Gracious (Allah), so I shall not speak today to any human being.”’
19|27|Carrying the baby, she brought him to her people. They said: “O Mary! Indeed you have brought a mighty thing (hard to believe)
19|28|O sister of Aaron (a woman from the family)! Your father was not a man of evil nor was your mother an unchaste woman.”
19|29|Then she pointed to him (baby). They said: “How can we talk to one who is a child in the cradle?”
19|30|He (Jesus as the baby) said: “Surely! I am a servant of Allah. He has given me the Scripture and made me a prophet
19|31|And He has made me blessed wherever I may be and has enjoined on me (to establish) the prayer, give obligatory charity as long as I am live
19|32|be dutiful to my mother, and made me not arrogant, unblessed
19|33|Peace be upon me the day I was born, and the day I shall die, and the day I shall be raised alive!”
19|34|Such (was) Jesus, son of Mary. It is a statement of truth about which they dispute in it
19|35|It is not for Allah that He should beget any son. Glorified is He when He decrees an affair, He only says to it: “Be!” and it becomes
19|36|(Jesus said): “Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. This is the Right Way
19|37|Then the sects differed (Christians about Jesus) among themselves. So woe to those who disbelieve from meeting of a great Day (of judgment)
19|38|How clearly will they hear and see the Day when they will appear before Us! But today the wrongdoers (who don’t hear and see) are in plain error
19|39|Warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day of grief when the case will be decided, while (today) they are unaware, and don’t believe
19|40|Surely! We will inherit the earth (after destruction) and whatever is on it. And to Us they shall be returned
19|41|And mention in the book (the Qur’an) about Abraham. Surely! He was a truthful prophet
19|42|When he said to his father: “O my father! Why do you worship that which can neither hear, nor see, and cannot avail you anything
19|43|O my father! Surely! The knowledge has come to me that which did not come to you. So follow me. I will guide you to the Right Way
19|44|O my father! You don’t worship Satan. Surely! Satan has been a rebel against the Gracious (Allah)
19|45|O my father! Surely! I fear lest a punishment from the Gracious (Allah) should touch you so that you become a companion of Satan.”
19|46|He (father) said: “Do you reject my deity, O Abraham? If you don’t stop this, I will indeed stone you ( to death). So get away from me safely.”
19|47|(Abraham) said: “Peace be on you! I will ask forgiveness of my Lord for you. Surely! He is to me, ever Gracious
19|48|And I shall turn away from you and what you invoke besides Allah. And I shall call on my Lord; and may be I shall not be unblessed (in my invocation) in calling my Lord.”
19|49|So when he had turned away from them and what they worshipped besides Allah, Allah granted him Isaac and Jacob, and Allah made each one of them a prophet
19|50|And We gave them Our Mercy and We granted them honor on the tongues (being mentioned) of truth
19|51|And mention in the book (this Qur’an) about Moses. Surely! He was chosen and he was a Messenger and a prophet
19|52|And We called him from the right side of the Mount (Tur), and made him draw near for whispering (for a talk)
19|53|We bestowed on him out of Our Mercy his brother Aaron, also a prophet
19|54|And mention in the book (the Qur’an) about Ishmael. Surely! He was true in promise, and he was a Messenger, and a prophet
19|55|And he used to command his family to establish prayer, give obligatory charity, and his Lord was pleased (with him)
19|56|And mention in the book (the Qur’an) about Enoch. Surely! He was a truthful prophet
19|57|And We raised him to a high place
19|58|These are they on whom Allah bestowed (Grace) from among the prophets, of the offspring of Adam, of those whom We carried (in ship) with Noah, of the offspring of Abraham and Israel, and from among those whom We guided and chose. When the Verses of the Gracious (Allah) were recited to them, they fell down to prostrate and weep
19|59|But the generations who succeeded them gave up the prayer and followed their lusts. So they will soon meet transgression
19|60|Except those who repent, believe, and do righteous deeds. Such will enter the Paradise and they will not be wronged in anything
19|61|(They will enter) gardens of Eden which the Gracious (Allah) has promised to His servants in the unseen. Surely! His Promise shall be fulfilled
19|62|They shall not hear in it (Paradise) vain talk, but salutation (peace). They will have their sustenance in it, morning and afternoon
19|63|Such is the Paradise which We shall give as an inheritance to those of Our servants who lead a pious life
19|64|(The angel Gabriel said): “We (angels) don’t descend except by the command of your Lord (O Muhammad). To Him belongs what is before us and what is behind us, and what is between them. Your Lord is never forgetful
19|65|(Allah is the) Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, so worship Him, and be patient in His worship. Do you know of anyone similar to Him?”
19|66|And the person (disbeliever) says: “When I am dead, shall I then be raised up alive?”
19|67|Don’t people remember that Allah created them before out of nothing
19|68|By your Lord, surely We shall gather them together and the devils, then We shall bring them round hell on knees
19|69|then indeed We shall drag out from every sect all those who were worst in rebellion against the Gracious (Allah)
19|70|Then, surely We know best those who deserve to be burnt in it
19|71|There is not one of you, who will not pass over it (hell); this is a Decree with your Lord
19|72|then We shall save those who feared (Allah) and were dutiful to Him. And We shall leave the wrongdoers in it (hell) kneeling
19|73|And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, the disbelievers say to those who believe: “Which of the 2 groups (believers and disbelievers) have best position and better place?”
19|74|And how many from a generation have We destroyed before them, who were better in goods and outward appearance
19|75|Say (O Muhammad): “Whoever is in the error, the Gracious (Allah) provides an extension (of opportunity) to him, until they see about which they were warned; either it is the punishment or the Hour (of Doom), they will know who is in worst position, and who is weaker in forces
19|76|And Allah increases in guidance for those who seek guidance. The everlasting righteous deeds are better with your Lord for reward and better for resort.”
19|77|Have you seen the one who disbelieved in Our Verses and yet says: “Indeed I will be given wealth and children?”
19|78|Has he known the unseen or has he taken a Covenant from the Gracious (Allah)
19|79|Nay! We shall record what he says, and We will increase the punishment for him
19|80|And We will inherit from him (at death) all that he talks and he shall come to Us alone
19|81|And they have taken (for worship) deities besides Allah so that they might give honor (source of strength) for them
19|82|Nay, but they (false deities) will deny their worship of them, and will turn against them (on the Day of Judgment)
19|83|Don’t you see that We have sent the devils to the disbelievers to push them to do evil
19|84|So don’t make haste against them; We only count out to them a (limited) number
19|85|The Day We shall gather the pious persons to the Gracious (Allah) like a delegation
19|86|and We shall drive the sinners to hell in a thirsty state
19|87|They shall not own (power of) intercession except those who have taken a covenant (permission) from the Gracious (Allah)
19|88|And they say: “The Gracious (Allah) has begotten a son,”
19|89|indeed you have brought forth a terrible thing
19|90|whereby the heavens are almost torn, the earth is split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins
19|91|that they ascribe a son to the Gracious (Allah)
19|92|but it is not suitable for the Gracious (Allah) that He should beget a son
19|93|There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the Gracious (Allah) in full submission
19|94|Surely, He knows each of them, and has counted them a full counting (of all the creatures of Allah)
19|95|and every one of them will come to Him alone on the Day of Resurrection
19|96|Surely, those who believe and do righteous deeds, the Gracious (Allah) will bestow love for them
19|97|So We have only made this (the Qur’an) easy on your tongue (O Muhammad) so that you may give glad tidings to the pious with it and warn with it the most quarrelsome people
19|98|And how many generations before them We have destroyed? Can you (O Muhammad) find anyone from them or hear even a whisper of them
20|1|Ta-Ha
20|2|We have not sent down the Qur’an to you (O Muhammad) to cause you distress
20|3|but only as a reminder to those who fear (Allah)
20|4|A revelation from Him Who has created the earth and high heavens
20|5|the Gracious (Allah) rose over the Throne (to suit Majesty)
20|6|to Him belongs all that is in the heavens, all that is on the earth, all that is between them, and all that is under the soil
20|7|And if you (O Muhammad) speak (statement) aloud, then surely He knows the secrets and what is hidden
20|8|Allah! There is no one worthy of worship but He! To Him belong the Best Names
20|9|And has there come to you the story of Moses
20|10|When he saw a fire, he said to his family: “You wait! Surely, I have seen a fire; perhaps I can bring you some burning brand from there, or find guidance (from someone) at the fire.”
20|11|And when he came to it (the fire), he was called (by name): “O Moses
20|12|Surely! I am your Lord! Take off your shoes; surely you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa
20|13|And I have chosen you. So listen to that which is being revealed (to you)
20|14|Surely! I am Allah! There is no one worthy of worship but I, so worship Me, and establish the prayer for My Remembrance
20|15|Surely, the Hour is almost coming and I hide it so that every soul may be rewarded for that which he strives
20|16|Therefore, don’t let you divert from it, one who does not believe in it and follows its own lusts, lest you perish
20|17|And what is that in your right hand, O Moses?”
20|18|He said: “This is my stick, I lean on it, beat down branches with it for my sheep, and for me there are other uses in it.”
20|19|(Allah) said: “Cast it down, O Moses!”
20|20|So he cast it down, and behold! It was a snake, moving quickly
20|21|(Allah) said: “Grasp it and don’t fear, We shall return it to its former state
20|22|Press your hand to your side (armpit); it will become (shining) white without any disease (hurting) as another sign
20|23|Thus We show you some of Our greatest Signs
20|24|You go to Pharaoh! Surely, he has transgressed.”
20|25|(Moses) said: “O my Lord! Open for me my chest
20|26|and ease my task for me
20|27|and loose knot (defect) from my tongue
20|28|so that they understand my speech
20|29|and appoint for me a helper from my family
20|30|Aaron, my brother
20|31|Increase my strength with him
20|32|and share him in my task
20|33|so that we may glorify You frequently
20|34|and remember You often
20|35|surely! You see well all of us.”
20|36|(Allah) said: “Indeed you are granted your request, O Moses
20|37|And indeed We conferred a Favor on you another time (before)
20|38|when We inspired to your mother that which We inspired
20|39|saying that: ‘you put him (the child) into a box and you float it into river. Then the river shall cast him up on the bank, and an enemy of Mine and an enemy of his shall take him.’ I brought you up with love from Me so that you may be brought up under My Eye (supervision)
20|40|When your sister went to them and said: ‘Shall I show you one who will nurse him?’ So We restored you to your mother so that she might cool her eyes and not grieve. Then you did kill a man, but We saved you from great distress and tested you with various trials. You stayed years with people of Midian. Now you came here according to fixed term, O Moses
20|41|And I have chosen you for Myself (service)
20|42|You and your brother go with My Verses and both of you don’t become weak in My Remembrance
20|43|Go both to Pharaoh, surely he has transgressed
20|44|Speak both of you to him with soft words, perhaps he may accept admonition or fear (of punishment).”
20|45|They said: “Our Lord! Surely! We fear that he may hasten to punish us or may transgress.”
20|46|(Allah) said: “You don’t fear, surely! I am with you both, I hear and see (everything)
20|47|So both of you go to him, and say: ‘surely we are Messengers of your Lord, so let the children of Israel go with us and don’t punish them. Indeed, we have come to you with a sign from your Lord! Peace will be upon those who follow the guidance
20|48|Surely, indeed it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be on those who deny and turn away.’”
20|49|Pharaoh said: “Then who is the Lord of you 2, O Moses?”
20|50|(Moses) said: “Our Lord is He who gave each thing its form and nature, then rightly guided it.”
20|51|(Pharaoh) said: “Then what is the state of the old generations?”
20|52|(Moses) said: “The knowledge is with my Lord in a record book. My Lord neither errs nor forgets.”
20|53|Who (Allah) has made for you the earth as a bed, has opened roads for you in it, and has sent down water (rain) from the sky with which We have brought forth various kinds of vegetation
20|54|You eat (from these) and pasture your cattle. Surely, there are indeed signs in it for the people of understanding
20|55|We have created you from it (the earth), into it We shall return you, and from it We shall bring you out once again
20|56|And indeed We showed him (Pharaoh) all of Our Signs, but he denied and refused
20|57|He (Pharaoh) said: “Have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic, O Moses
20|58|Then surely, we can produce to you with magic like yours. So appoint a meeting between us and between you, neither we nor you shall fail to keep it, in an equal place (where both shall have equal chances).”
20|59|(Moses) said: “Your appointment is the day of the festival, and let the people assemble before noon.”
20|60|So Pharaoh withdrew, he devised his plan and then came back
20|61|Moses said to them: “Woe to you! You don’t invent a lie against Allah, lest He destroy you by a punishment. Surely, he fails who invents a lie (against Allah).”
20|62|Then they debated with one another their matter among them, and they kept their talk secret
20|63|They said: “Surely! These 2 magicians intend that they drive you out from your land with their magic, and take away from your superior way
20|64|So devise your plot and then assemble in a row.” (Pharaoh said): “And indeed he who overcomes today will be successful.”
20|65|They said: “O Moses! Either you throw first or we are the first who will throw?”
20|66|(Moses) said: “Nay, you throw (first)!” Then behold! their ropes and their sticks appeared to him (Moses) as though they moved fast by their magic
20|67|so Moses conceived a fear in himself
20|68|We (Allah) said: “You don’t fear! Surely, you will have the upper hand
20|69|And throw that which is in your right hand! It will swallow up all that they have made. They have made only trick of a magician, and the magician will never be successful no matter whatever (amount of skill) he may possess.”
20|70|(When all were swallowed up by the serpent of Moses) the magicians fell down in prostration. They said: “We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.”
20|71|Pharaoh said: “How do you believe in him (Moses) before I give permission to you? Surely, he is your chief who taught you the magic. So surely I will cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, surely I will crucify you on the trunks of date-palms, then surely you will know which of us (Pharaoh or the Lord of Moses, Allah) is more severe in punishment and more lasting.”
20|72|They said: “We never prefer you over what has come to us from the clear signs and to Him who created us. So you decree whatever you wish to decree, you can only decree about this worldly life
20|73|Surely! We have believed in our Lord so that He may forgive us our faults and from the magic which you did compel on us. And Allah is better and lasting.”
20|74|Surely! Whoever comes to its Lord as a sinner, then surely hell is for him who will neither die nor live in it
20|75|But whoever will come to Him as a believer and has done righteous deeds, for such are the high ranks
20|76|gardens of Eden with rivers flowing under them, they will abide in it forever, such is the reward of those who purify themselves (from evil)
20|77|And indeed We revealed to Moses (saying) that: “You travel by night with My servants and strike a dry path for them in the sea, neither fear to be overtaken (by Pharaoh) nor being afraid (of drowning in the sea).”
20|78|Then Pharaoh pursued them with his hosts but the sea (water) completely overwhelmed them and covered them up
20|79|Thus Pharaoh led his people astray and he did not guide them
20|80|O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, We made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount (Tur to grant Torah), and We sent down to you sweet dish (Manna) and quail meat (Salva)
20|81|(saying): “You eat from good lawful things which We have provided you, don’t commit oppression in it lest My Anger should descend on you, whoever incurs My Anger is indeed perished
20|82|Surely, I am indeed forgiving the one who repents, believes, does righteous deeds, and then remains guided (till death).”
20|83|(Allah said): “What made you hasten from your people, O Moses?”
20|84|He (Moses) said: “They are close on my footsteps, and I hastened to You, O my Lord so that You may be pleased.”
20|85|(Allah) said: “Surely! We have indeed tried your people after you and Samiri has led them astray.”
20|86|Then Moses returned to his people with anger and sorrow. He said: “O my people! Did not your Lord promise you a fair promise? Did then the promise to you seem long? Or did you desire that Wrath from your Lord should descend on you, so you broke your promise to me?”
20|87|They said: “We did not break the promise to you at our own will. We were made to carry the weight of the ornaments of (Pharaoh) people and cast them (into the fire) as Samiri suggested
20|88|Then he took out (of the fire) for them (statue of) a calf body and it had a low sound. Then said: ‘This is your one worthy of worship, and the deity of Moses, but (Moses) has forgotten (his deity).’”
20|89|Did they not see that it could not return to them a word (for answer), nor it had power for them to harm nor help
20|90|And indeed Aaron had said to them before: “O my people! Only you are being tried with it, and surely, your Lord is the Gracious, so you follow me and obey my order.”
20|91|They said: “We will never stop worshipping it (the calf), until Moses returns to us.”
20|92|He (Moses) said: “O Aaron! What stopped you when you saw them going astray
20|93|that you did not follow me? Have you then disobeyed my order?”
20|94|He (Aaron) said: “O son of my mother! You don’t seize me by my beard, or by my head! Surely, I feared lest you should say: ‘You have caused a division between children of Israel, and you did not respect my word!’”
20|95|(Moses) said: “Then what is the matter with you, O Samiri?”
20|96|(Samiri) said: “I saw what they did not see, so I seized a handful (of dust) from the footprint of the Messenger (angel) and then threw it (into the casting of the calf). This my inner soul suggested to me.”
20|97|(Moses) said: “Then go away! Surely, (the punishment) for you in this life is that you will say: ‘Don’t touch me (you will live alone in exile away from mankind)’; and surely you have a promise (of future punishment) that will not fail. Look at your deity which you have been devoted to it. Certainly we will burn it, and then certainly we will scatter its particles in the sea.”
20|98|(Then Moses told his people): “Your One worthy of worship is only Allah; there is no one worthy of worship but He. He comprehends every thing in knowledge.”
20|99|Thus We relate to you (O Muhammad) from information of what happened before. Indeed We have given you a reminder (this Qur’an) from Us
20|100|Whoever turns away from it (this Qur’an), then surely will bear a burden (of sins) on the Day of Resurrection
20|101|They will abide in that (fire of hell) and evil will be that load for them on the Day of Resurrection
20|102|The Day, when the trumpet will be blown and We shall gather the sinners that Day (they will be) blue or blind eyed (by fear)
20|103|They will whisper among themselves (saying): “You did not stay longer than 10 (days on earth).”
20|104|We know very well what they will say, the best among them in knowledge and wisdom will say: “You did not stay except a day!”
20|105|And they ask you about the mountains. You say: “My Lord will blast them as particles of dust
20|106|Then He will leave it as a smooth level
20|107|you will neither see in it crookedness nor curve.”
20|108|On that Day the people will follow the caller (of Allah); there is no crookedness for the caller. (All voices) will be humbled for the Gracious (Allah), so you shall hear nothing but a whisper (of footsteps)
20|109|On that Day no intercession will be available, except the one to whom the Gracious (Allah) will give permission and whose word is acceptable to Him
20|110|He (Allah) knows what is before them, what is behind them, and they will never compass any knowledge (about Him)
20|111|And faces shall be humbled before the ever-Living, the self-Sustaining (Allah). Indeed the one who carried a burden of wrong-doing will be disappointed
20|112|And one who is a believer and does righteous deeds, then he will neither have fear of injustice, nor reduction (of reward)
20|113|And thus We have sent down the Qur’an in Arabic, has explained in it the details of the warnings so that they may fear Allah, or may generate lesson from it
20|114|Then high above is Allah, the True King! Don’t hasten (O Muhammad) with the Qur’an before its revelation is completed to you, and you say: “My Lord! Increase my knowledge.”
20|115|And indeed We made a covenant with Adam before, but he forgot. And We found in him no firm will-power
20|116|And (remember) when We said to the angels: “Prostrate yourselves to Adam.” They prostrated except Satan, who refused
20|117|Then We said: “O Adam! Surely, this is an enemy to you and to your wife. So let him not get you both out from Paradise so that you will be distressed
20|118|Surely, you have (a Promise from Us) that you will neither be hungry in it (Paradise) nor you will be naked
20|119|you will neither suffer from thirst in it nor you will suffer from the sun.”
20|120|Then Satan whispered to him saying: “O Adam! Shall I lead you to the tree of Eternity and to a kingdom that will never waste away?”
20|121|Then they both ate from that tree, so their private parts appeared to them, and they began to stick on themselves from leaves of the garden (for covering). Thus Adam disobeyed his Lord, so he went astray
20|122|Then (after repentance) his Lord chose him, turned to him with forgiveness, and gave him guidance
20|123|(Allah) said: “Get down you both together from here (Paradise to earth); some of you are an enemy to some others. If guidance comes to you from Me, then whoever follows My Guidance neither will go astray, nor will fall into distress
20|124|but whoever will turn away from My Remembrance, then surely him will have a life of hardship, and I will raise him up blind on the Day of Resurrection.”
20|125|He will say: “O my Lord! Why have you raised me up blind while indeed I had clear sight (before)?”
20|126|(Allah) will say: “Just as Our Verses came to you but you disregarded them, so you are neglected today.”
20|127|And thus We requite the one who transgresses and don’t believe in the Verses of its Lord. Surely the punishment of the Hereafter is more severe and more lasting
20|128|It it not a guidance for them (to know) how many generations We have destroyed before them and in whose residences they walk? Surely, in these (ruins) there are signs for people of understanding
20|129|And had it not been for a word that went forth from your Lord and a term determined, it (judgment) would have been inevitable
20|130|So you (O Muhammad) bear patiently on what they say. Glorify the praises of your Lord before sunrise, before sunset, during Hours of the night, and glorify at the ends of the day, so that you may become pleased (satisfied)
20|131|And don’t strain your eyes (with envy) for what We have given for enjoyment to various groups of them (disbelievers), and with the luxury of the worldly life We may test them in it. The (lawful) provision of your Lord is better and more lasting
20|132|And enjoin the prayer on your family, and be patient in it. We don’t ask you a provision; We provide for you. And the good end (Paradise) is for the pious
20|133|They say: “Why does he (Muhammad) not bring us a sign from his Lord?” Has not proof (the Qur’an) came to them which is (contains teachings) of the previous Scriptures
20|134|And if We had destroyed them with a punishment before this (the Qur’an), surely they would have said: “Our Lord! If You only had sent us a Messenger, we would certainly have followed Your Verses before we were disgraced and humiliated.”
20|135|Say (O Muhammad): “Each one (believer and disbeliever) is waiting, so you wait too. Then you shall know who is following the Right Way and who have been rightly guided.”
21|1|(The Day of) their reckoning draws near for mankind, yet they are heedless and turn away (from warning)
21|2|(Every time) an admonition from their Lord comes to them as a recent revelation, but they listen to it while they play
21|3|In a light mood their hearts are occupied (with evil things), and they conceal the private counsels, those who do wrong (say): “Is this (Muhammad) but a human being like you? Will you submit to magic while you see it?”
21|4|He (Muhammad) said: “My Lord knows every word spoken in the heavens and the earth. And He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower.”
21|5|Nay, they say: “(These revelations of the Qur’an are) strange false dreams! Nay, he (Muhammad) has invented it! Nay, he is a poet! Let him then bring us a sign as the ancients (previous prophets) did!”
21|6|Not one town (people) before them believed (though Allah sent signs), which We destroyed. Will they then believe
21|7|And We did not send before you (O Muhammad) but human to whom We revealed. So you ask the people of the reminder (Scripture - the Torah and the Gospel) if you don’t know
21|8|And We did not create them (the Messengers with) bodies which did not eat food, nor they were immortals
21|9|Then We fulfilled to them the promise. We saved them, and those whom We willed, but We destroyed the extravagant
21|10|Indeed, We have sent down for you (O mankind) a book (the Qur’an) in which there is your reminder (to follow). Will you not then understand
21|11|How many nations have We destroyed who were wrongdoers and raised up (replaced) them with other nations
21|12|When they perceived that Our Punishment was coming, behold, they fled from it
21|13|(They were told): “Don’t flee but return to your luxurious life and to your homes so that you may be questioned.”
21|14|They said: “Woe to us! Surely we were wrongdoers.”
21|15|And then their cry did not cease till We made them as a field that was reaped (all dead)
21|16|We have not created the heavens, the earth, and all that lies between them as a game
21|17|Had We intended to take a pastime, surely We could have taken it from Us, if We were going to do that
21|18|Nay, We have sent down the truth (this Qur’an) against the falsehood so it destroys it, and then it (falsehood) is vanished. Woe to you for that (false deity) which you ascribe
21|19|To Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and on earth. And those who are near Him (the angels), are neither proud from worshiping Him, nor they are tired (of His worship)
21|20|They (the angels) glorify Him night and day, they never pause
21|21|Or have they taken ones worthy of worship from the earth who (has the power to) raise the dead
21|22|Had there been ones worthy of worship besides Allah in it (heavens and the earth), surely both would have been ruined (by disorder). Glory be to Allah, the Lord of the Throne (high above all falsehood) that they attribute (to Him)
21|23|He cannot be questioned as to what He does, while they will be questioned
21|24|Or have they taken other deities for worship besides Him? Say: “Bring your proof. This (the Qur’an) is a reminder for those who are with me and reminder for those before me.” But most of them don’t know the truth, so they are reluctant
21|25|And We did not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad) but We revealed to him (every one saying) that: “There is no one worthy of worship but I, so worship Me (alone).”
21|26|And (after receiving message still) they say: “The Gracious (Allah) has begotten a son.” Glory to Him! They (angels) are but honored servants
21|27|They don’t speak until He has spoken and they act on His Command
21|28|He knows what is before them, what is behind them, and they don’t intercede except for the one with whom He is pleased. They stand in awe from the fear of Him
21|29|And if anyone of them should say: “Surely I am one worthy of worship besides Him,” then We would recompense to hell. Thus We recompense the wrongdoers
21|30|Have not the disbelievers known that the heavens and the earth were once joined together (as one piece) and then We parted them? And We have made every living thing from water. Will they still not believe
21|31|And We have placed firm mountains on the earth lest it should shake with them and We placed in them broad passages so that they may be guided
21|32|And We have made the heaven a roof, safe, and well guarded. Yet they turn away from its signs
21|33|And it is He Who has created the night, the day, the sun, and the moon, each in a floating orbit (of their own)
21|34|And We have not granted immortality to any human being before you (Muhammad), then if you die, will they (disbelievers) live forever
21|35|Everyone is going to taste death, and We shall test all of you with evil and with good as a temptation. And to Us you will be returned
21|36|And when you (Muhammad) see those who disbelieve, they don’t take you except for mockery (saying): “Is this the one who talks against your deity?” They disbelieve at the mention of the Gracious (Allah)
21|37|Man is a creature of haste (impatient). I will show you My Signs, so don’t ask Me to hasten
21|38|And they ask: “When will this promise (be fulfilled) if you are truthful?”
21|39|(They would not ask) if the disbelievers knew the time when they will neither be able to protect their faces from the fire nor their backs, and they will not be helped
21|40|Nay, it (the fire) will come to them all of a sudden and will perplex them, so they will neither be able to avert it nor they will get any respite
21|41|Indeed Messengers were mocked before you (O Muhammad), but those who mocked were surrounded by what they used to mock at
21|42|Say: “Who can protect you in the night and the day from the (punishment of) the Gracious?” Nay, but they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord
21|43|Or do they have (ones worthy of worship) who can guard them from Us? They have neither any power to help themselves, nor can they be protected from Us (punishment)
21|44|Nay, We gave luxuries (of this life to) these people and their forefathers until the life grew long for them. Don’t they then see how We (gradually) reduce the land (their control) from its all sides? Is it then they who will overcome (be victorious)
21|45|Say (O Muhammad): “I warn you only by the revelation (from Allah).” But the deaf will not hear the call when they are warned
21|46|And if a breath (minor calamity) of punishment of your Lord touches them, surely they will cry: “Woe to us! Surely, we were wrongdoers.”
21|47|And We shall set up the balances of justice on the Day of Resurrection so that no one will be dealt with unjustly at all. If there is (an act as small as the) weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to account). And We are sufficient as Reckoner (accountant)
21|48|And indeed We granted to Moses and Aaron the criterion (of right and wrong), a shining light (Torah), and a reminder for the pious
21|49|those who fear their Lord with unseen while they are afraid of the Hour (of Judgment)
21|50|And this is a blessed reminder (the Qur’an) which We have sent down. Will you then deny it
21|51|And indeed We gave Abraham his guidance from before and We were Well-Acquainted with him
21|52|When he said to his father and his people: “What are these images which you are devoted to?”
21|53|They said: “We found our forefathers worshipping to them.”
21|54|He said: “Indeed you and your forefathers have been in clear error.”
21|55|They said: “Have you brought us the truth, or are you one of those who play?”
21|56|He replied: “Nay, your Lord is the Owner of the heavens and the earth, Who has created them, and I am one of the witnesses to that
21|57|And by Allah, surely I will plot a plan against your idols after you go away and turn your backs.”
21|58|So he made them fragments, except the biggest of them so that they might turn to it
21|59|(When they retuned and saw their idols) some said: “Who has done this to our deity? Surely he is among the wrongdoers.”
21|60|Others said: “We heard a young man talking against them who is called Abraham.”
21|61|They said: “Then bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may testify.”
21|62|They asked: “Have you done this to our deity, O Abraham?”
21|63|(Abraham) said: “Nay, this one, the biggest of them did it. Ask them, if they can speak!”
21|64|So they turned to themselves and said: “Surely you are the wrongdoers.”
21|65|Then they turned to themselves (and said): “Indeed you (Abraham) know that these (idols) cannot speak!”
21|66|(Abraham) said: “Do you then worship these deities besides Allah, who can neither profit you nor harm you
21|67|Shame on you and on those deities which you worship besides Allah! Don’t you think?”
21|68|They said: “Burn him and help your deity, if you will be doing (any action).”
21|69|(When he was thrown in the fire) We commanded: “O fire! Be cool and safe for Abraham!”
21|70|And they wanted to harm him, but We made them the worst losers
21|71|And We rescued him and (his nephew) Lot to the land which We have blessed for the worlds
21|72|And We bestowed upon him a (son) Isaac and a (grandson) Jacob as an extra. We made each one righteous
21|73|And We made them leaders to guide (mankind) by Our Command, We revealed to them (how to) do good deeds, establish prayer, give obligatory charity, and they were the worshippers of Us
21|74|And (remember) Lot, We gave him right judgment, knowledge, and We saved him from the town (people) who were doing wicked and filthy deeds. Surely, they were people of evil, wicked
21|75|And We admitted him to Our Mercy; surely he was of the righteous
21|76|And (remember) Noah, when he cried (to Us) previously. We answered to him, then saved him, and his family from the great distress
21|77|We helped him against those people who denied Our Verses. Surely they were an evil people. So We drowned (in the great flood) them all
21|78|And (remember) David and Solomon, when they gave judgment in the case of the field in which the sheep of certain people had pastured (at night) and We were witness to their judgment
21|79|so We made Solomon to understand it, We gave right judgment, and knowledge. And We subjected the mountains and the birds to glorify Our Praises along with David. We Who were the doer (of all these things)
21|80|And We taught him to make metal coats of mail (for battles) for you to protect you in your fighting. Yet, are you grateful
21|81|And to Solomon (We subjected) the strongly raging wind, running by his command towards the land which We had blessed. We know everything
21|82|And some of the devils dived for him (into the sea), did other work besides that, and We Who guarded over them (for him)
21|83|And (remember) Job, when he cried to his Lord: “Surely the distress (disease) has seized me and You are the Merciful of all those who show mercy.”
21|84|We answered to him, then We removed the distress that was with him, We restored his family to him (that he lost) and many more with them as a Mercy from Us, and as a reminder for those who worship (Us)
21|85|And (remember) Ishmael, Enoch, and Isaiah: all were from among the patient ones
21|86|And We admitted them to Our Mercy. Surely, they were of the righteous
21|87|And (remember) Jonah, when he departed in anger and thought that We shall not punish him! Then he cried in the darkness (saying): “There is no one worthy of worship but You, You are glorified. Truly, I have been from the wrongdoers.”
21|88|So We answered to him and delivered him from the distress. And thus We deliver the believers
21|89|And (remember) Zachariah, when he cried to his Lord: “O My Lord! Don’t leave me single (childless) and You are the best of the inheritors.”
21|90|So We answered him, We bestowed on him John, and cured his wife (to bear a child) for him. Surely, they used to hasten to do good deeds, they used to call on Us with hope and fear, and they were humble before Us
21|91|And (remember) her (Mary) who guarded her chastity, then We breathed into her through Our spirit (Gabriel), and We made her and her son (Jesus) a sign for the worlds
21|92|Truly! This brotherhood of yours is one religion and I am your Lord, so worship Me (alone)
21|93|But they have broken up their religion (into sects) among all of them. They shall return to Us
21|94|Whoever shall do righteous deeds and is a believer, then those efforts will not be rejected. Surely We record all for him
21|95|And a ban is laid on town (those people) which We have destroyed, they shall not return again
21|96|Until, when Gog and Magog are let loose (from their barrier) and they swiftly swarm down from every mound
21|97|and the true Promise (Day of Resurrection) shall draw near (of fulfillment). Then it will be fixed gazes (staring with horror) of the disbelievers. (They will say): “Woe to us! Indeed we were heedless from this; nay we were wrongdoers.”
21|98|Certainly! You (disbelievers) and your deities whom you worship besides Allah, shall be fuel for hell! You all will enter it
21|99|If these (deities) were worthy of worship, they would not have entered it (hell), and all of them will abide in it
21|100|They will be breathing out with deep sighs and roaring in it. They will not hear (anything else) in it
21|101|Surely, those for whom the good (reward) has preceded from Us, they will be removed far away from it (hell)
21|102|They shall not hear even the slightest sound of it (hell) and they will abide in the middle of what their souls desire
21|103|The greatest terror (on the Day of Resurrection) will not grieve them, and the angels will meet them (with the greeting): “This is your Day which you were promised.”
21|104|And (remember) the Day when We shall roll up the heavens like a rolled up scroll for books, just as We began the first creation, We shall repeat it again, and it is a Promise upon Us. Truly, We shall fulfill it
21|105|And indeed We have written this in the Psalms after the book (Al-Lauh Al-Mahfuz, which is in the heaven with Allah) that My righteous servants shall inherit the land
21|106|Surely, in this (the Qur’an) indeed there is a plain message for people who worship Allah
21|107|And We have not sent you (O Muhammad) but as a Mercy for the worlds
21|108|Say (O Muhammad): “It is revealed only to me that your one worthy of worship is One (Allah). Will you then submit (to His Will and become Muslim)?”
21|109|But if they (disbelievers) turn away (from Islam), then say (to them O Muhammad): “I give you a notice (warning) all alike. I don’t know whether what you are promised (punishment) is near or far
21|110|(Say O Muhammad) Surely, He (Allah) knows from the spoken loud word and knows that which you conceal
21|111|And I don’t know, perhaps it (the delay) may be a trial for you, and an enjoyment for a while.”
21|112|He (Muhammad) said: “My Lord, judge us in truth! (O people) our Lord is the Gracious whose help is sought against that which you attribute!”
22|1|O mankind! Fear your Lord! Surely, the earthquake of the Hour (of judgment) will be a terrible thing
22|2|On that Day, you shall see that every nursing (mother) will forget her nursing, every pregnant woman will drop her load (miscarriage), and you will see people as if in a drunken state, yet they will not be drunken; but the punishment of Allah will be severe
22|3|There are some among people who disputes about Allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil
22|4|it is decreed for him (the devil) that whoever follows him; surely will be mislead, and will be guided by him to the punishment of the fire
22|5|O mankind! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, then remember, We have created you from dust, then from a mixed drops of male and female sexual discharge (sperm), then from a clot (thick coagulated blood), then from a little lump of human flesh formed and unformed (miscarriage), so that We may make it clear to you. And We cause it to remain in the wombs whom We will for an appointed term, then We bring you out as infants, then you may reach your age of full strength. Among you there are some who die (young), and among you there are some who are brought back to the miserable (old) age, so that they don’t know anything after having known. And you see the earth barren, but when We send down water (rain) on it, it is stirred to life; it swells, and puts forth every lovely kind (of growth)
22|6|This is because Allah is the Truth, it is He Who gives life to the dead, and it is He Who is Able to do all things
22|7|And surely, the Hour (of Judgment) is coming, there is no doubt about it, and Allah will resurrect those who are in the graves
22|8|Among people there are those who dispute about Allah, though they have neither knowledge nor guidance, nor a book giving light (from Allah)
22|9|bending things to mislead others from the Way of Allah. For such persons, there is disgrace in this world and We shall make them taste the punishment of burning (fire) on the Day of Resurrection
22|10|that is because of what their hands have sent forth. Surely Allah is not unjust to (His) worshippers
22|11|And among people there are those who worship Allah on the very edge (in doubt). If good befalls him, he is content with it; but if a trial befalls on him, then he turns back on its face (reverts back to disbelief after embracing Islam), thus loses both this world and the Hereafter. That is a clear loss
22|12|Then he calls (other deities) besides Allah which neither hurt, nor profit. That is a deviation far away (from the Right Way)
22|13|He calls those who are more likely to harm than profit; certainly an evil patron and certainly an evil friend (chosen for help)
22|14|Truly, Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds, to the gardens with rivers flow underneath them (Paradise). Surely, Allah does what He wills
22|15|Whoever thinks that Allah will not help him (Muhammad) in this world and in the Hereafter, let them stretch out a rope to the ceiling (sky) and then let them strangle themselves. Then let them see whether their plan will remove what they rage
22|16|Thus We have sent it (this Qur’an) down as clear Verses, and that Allah guides whom He wills
22|17|Surely, those who believe (Muslims), and those who are Jews, the Sabians, the Christians, the Magians, and those who worship others besides Allah, truly Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection. Surely! Allah is witness over everything
22|18|Do you not see that whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth prostrate to Allah, including the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the animals, and many people? But there are many people on whom the punishment is justified. And those whom Allah disgraces, then there is none for them to honor. Allah does what He wills
22|19|These 2 opponents (believers and disbelievers) dispute with each other about their Lord; then those who disbelieve, garments of fire will be cut out for them, boiling water will be poured down over their heads
22|20|which will melt what is in their bellies and skins
22|21|and there will be hooked rods of iron (to punish them)
22|22|Whenever with their anguish, they try to get away from there, they will be driven back in it, and (will be said to them): “Taste the punishment of burning!”
22|23|Truly, Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds, to gardens with rivers flow underneath (Paradise). They will be adorned in them with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments will be of silk
22|24|And (because) they were guided (in this world) to the good words (of Allah) and they were guided to the Way of Allah, who is Praise-Worthy
22|25|Surely! Those who disbelieve, hinder people from the Way of Allah and from the sacred Masjid (at Makkah) which We have made open to all people, the local residents and the visitors (from other countries) as equal, and those who incline to evil actions or do wrong in it, We shall cause them to taste from a painful punishment
22|26|And (remember) when We showed Abraham the site of the sacred house (the Ka’bah at Makkah) (saying) that: “Don’t associate anything with Me, sanctify My House for those who make Tawaf (go around counterclockwise), those who stand up for prayer, those who bow down, and make prostration
22|27|and proclaim the pilgrimage to people. They will come to you on foot and on every lean (camel), they will come from every deep (and distant) mountain highway (to perform Hajj)
22|28|so that they may witness things that benefit them, and mention the Name of Allah on appointed days (10-13th days of Dhul-Hijjah) over whatever He has provided them from the beast of cattle. Then eat and feed the poor from there who have a very hard time
22|29|Then let them complete their prescribed duties (of Hajj such as cut hair, take bath), perform their vows, and go around the ancient house (the Ka’bah at Makkah as Tawaf-e-Ziyarah)
22|30|That (prescribed duties of Hajj is the obligation that mankind owes to Allah) is, and those who honor the sacred rites of Allah, it is better for them with their Lord. The meat of cattle is made lawful to you, except what has already been mentioned to you. So shun the worshipping of idols and shun false statements
22|31|Be upright to Him and don’t associate partners to Him. Those who assign partners to Allah, it is as if they had fallen from the sky, and the birds had snatched them, or the wind had thrown them to a far off place
22|32|and whoever honors the Symbols of Allah, then it is truly from the piety of the heart
22|33|You have in them (cattle for sacrifice) that benefit (such as milk) you for an appointed term, then (afterwards) they are brought for sacrifice to the ancient house (the Ka’bah)
22|34|And for every nation We have appointed religious ceremonies so that they may mention the Name of Allah over the beast of cattle which He has given them (for food). Your one worthy of worship is One (Allah), to Him you submit, and (O Prophet) give glad tidings to those who obey Allah with humility
22|35|those when Allah is mentioned, their hearts are filled with fear; those who are patient on whatever may befall on them (of calamities); who establish prayer, and they spend (in Allah’s Cause) out of what We have provided them
22|36|And the cows, oxen, or camels (offered as sacrifices by the pilgrims), We have made them for you as among the Symbols of Allah; you have much good in them. So mention the Name of Allah over them when they are drawn up in lines (for sacrifice). Then when they are down on their sides (after slaughter), eat from them, and feed the poor people (who does not ask), and the beggar (who asks). Thus We have made these animals to you so that you may be grateful
22|37|Neither their meat nor their blood reaches Allah, but the piety from you reaches Him. Thus We have made these animals to you so that you may magnify Allah for what He has guided you. (O Muhammad) give glad tidings to the doers of good
22|38|Truly, Allah defends those who believe. Surely! Allah does not like any treacherous, ungrateful
22|39|Permission to fight (against disbelievers) is given to those (believers) against whom fighting is waged because they (believers) are oppressed, and surely, Allah is Able to give them (believers) victory
22|40|those who have been expelled from their homes without just cause only because they said: “Our Lord is Allah.” Had it not been that Allah checked one set of people by another; monasteries, churches, synagogues, and Masjids in which the Name of Allah is mentioned, much would surely have been pulled down. Surely, Allah will help those who help His (Cause). Truly, Allah is All-Powerful, All-Mighty
22|41|Those who, if We give them power in the land, will establish prayer, pay the obligatory charity, enjoin good, and forbid evil. And with Allah rests the final decision of all matters
22|42|If they deny you (O Muhammad), surely did deny before them, by the people of Noah, Ad, and Thamud
22|43|and the people of Abraham and the people of Lot
22|44|and the residents of Midian; and Moses were denied. But I granted respite to the disbelievers, then I seized them, and how terrible was My punishment
22|45|And many townships We have destroyed while they were wrong-doing. (Even today) they lie with their roofs in ruins, many deserted wells, and lofty (deserted) castles
22|46|Have they not traveled through the land, and have they no hearts with them to understand or ears to hear (the truth)? Surely, it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the hearts which are in the breasts that grow blind
22|47|And they ask you to hasten on the punishment! And Allah never fails on His Promise. Surely, a Day with your Lord is as a 1,000 years of what you count
22|48|And to many townships I gave respite while they were wrong-doing. Then (in the end) I seized them. And to Me is the final return (of all)
22|49|Say (O Muhammad): “O mankind! Surely I am a plain Warner to you.”
22|50|So those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them is forgiveness and generous provision
22|51|But those who strive against Our Verses to frustrate people, those will be inmates of the fire of hell
22|52|We did not send a Messenger or a prophet before you (O Muhammad), but when he (prophet) did recite the revelation, Satan threw (some falsehood) in his recitation. But Allah abolishes what Satan throws in and then Allah establishes His Revelations. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
22|53|Whatever Satan throws in, Allah may make as a trial for those in whose hearts there is a disease (of hypocrisy and disbelief) and whose hearts are hardened. Certainly, the wrongdoers are in an opposition far-off (from the truth)
22|54|so that those who have been given knowledge (may know) that it (this Qur’an) is the truth from your Lord and thus they may believe in it, and may submit their hearts to it. And surely, Allah is the Guide of those who believe to the Right Way
22|55|And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it (this Qur’an) until the Hour comes suddenly upon them, or there comes to them the punishment of the Day of disaster
22|56|The sovereignty on that Day will be for Allah. He will judge between them. So those who have believed and did righteous deeds will be in the gardens of delight
22|57|but those who disbelieved and denied Our Verses, for them will be a humiliating punishment
22|58|Those who emigrated for the cause of Allah and afterwards were killed or died, surely, Allah will provide a good provision for them. Surely, it is Allah Who indeed is the Best of those Who provide sustenance
22|59|Truly, He will make them enter an entrance with which they shall be well-pleased, and surely, Allah indeed is All-Knower, All-Forbearing
22|60|That is so! And whoever retaliates which is equal to the suffering one received and then (again) one is wronged, Allah will surely help him. Surely! Allah indeed is Lenient, Forgiving
22|61|That is because Allah merges the night into the day, and merges the day into the night. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer
22|62|That is because Allah is the truth, and whatever they (polytheists) invoke besides Him, it is falsehood. And verily Allah is the Supreme, the Great
22|63|Don’t you see that Allah sends down water (rain) from the sky, and then the earth becomes green? Surely, Allah is Kind and Well-Acquainted with all things
22|64|To Him belongs what is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. Surely, Allah is Rich (free of all wants), Praise-Worthy
22|65|Don’t you see that Allah has subjected to you (people) what is on the earth, and the ships that sail through the sea by His Command? He withholds the heaven lest it fall on the earth except by His permission. Surely, Allah is full of Kindness, Merciful for mankind
22|66|It is He, Who has given you life, then will cause you to die, and then will again give you life (on the Day of Resurrection). Surely! People are ungrateful
22|67|For every nation We have ordained religious ceremonies that they follow; so let them (the Pagans) not dispute with you in this matter, and invite them to your Lord. Surely! You (O Muhammad) indeed are on right guidance
22|68|If they argue with you, then say: “Allah knows best of what you do.”
22|69|Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection about which you used to differ
22|70|Don’t you know that Allah knows what is in heaven and the earth? Surely, all are (recorded) in a book. Surely! That is easy for Allah
22|71|And yet, they worship besides Allah what He has not sent down with any authority, they have no knowledge about them, and there is no helper for the wrongdoers
22|72|And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, you will notice denial on the faces of those who disbelieve! They are nearly ready to attack with violence those who recite Our Verses to them. Say: “Shall I tell you something worse than that? It is the fire (of hell) which Allah has promised to those who disbelieve, and worst indeed will be that destination!”
22|73|O mankind! An example has been coined, so listen to it (carefully). Surely! Those whom you call on besides Allah, can not create a fly even if they combine together for it. If a fly snatches away a thing from them, they will have no power to release it from the fly. So weak are (both) the seeker and the sought
22|74|They have not estimated Allah His Rightful Estimate. Surely, Allah is All-Strong, All-Mighty
22|75|Allah chooses Messengers from angels and from human. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer
22|76|He knows what is before them and what is behind them. And to Allah all matters return (for decision)
22|77|O you who believe! Bow down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and do good so that you may be successful
22|78|Strive hard in Allah’s Cause truthfully. He has chosen you (to convey His Message), and has not laid upon you any hardship in religion, it is the religion of your father Abraham. It is He Who has named you Muslims both before and in this (the Qur’an), so that the Messenger (Muhammad) may be a witness over you and you be witnesses over mankind! Establish prayer, give obligatory charity, and hold fast to Allah, He is your Lord, what an excellent Lord and an Excellent Helper
23|1|Indeed successful are the believers
23|2|those who are submissive in their prayers
23|3|and those who turn away from evil vain talk
23|4|and those who are doers of obligatory charity
23|5|and those who guard their chastity
23|6|except from their wives or what their right hands (legally) possess, verily they are free from blame
23|7|But whoever seeks beyond that, and then those are the transgressors
23|8|Those who are true to their trusts and to their covenants
23|9|and those who strictly guard over their prayers
23|10|These are the inheritors
23|11|who will inherit the Paradise. They shall reside in it forever
23|12|And indeed We created human out of extract of clay
23|13|then We made him as a semen drop in a safe (womb of woman) lodging
23|14|then We created the drop into a clot, then We created the clot into a little lump of flesh, then We created the little lump of flesh into bones, then We clothed the bones with flesh, and then We brought it forth as another creation. So blessed be Allah, the Best of creators
23|15|Then after that, surely you will die
23|16|then again, surely you will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection
23|17|And indeed We have created above you 7 heavens, and We are not unaware of the creation
23|18|And We send down water (rain) from the sky in due measure, and We give it lodging in the earth, and surely We are able to take it away
23|19|then We bring forth for you by it gardens of date-palms and grapes, in it is much fruit, and from it you eat
23|20|and a tree (olive) that springs forth from Mount Sinai that grows oil, and it is seasoning for the eaters
23|21|And surely! In the cattle there is indeed a lesson for you. We give you to drink (milk) of that which is in their bellies. There are numerous benefits for you in them, and of them you eat
23|22|and on them and on ships you are carried
23|23|And indeed We sent Noah to his people, and he said: “O my people! You worship Allah! You have no other one worthy of worship but Him. Will you not then be afraid?”
23|24|But the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said: “This is no more but a human being like you, he seeks to make himself superior to you. If Allah willed, He surely could have sent down angels; we did not hear such a thing among our forefathers.”
23|25|(Some of them said): “He is not but a human in whom there is madness, so wait for him until a while.”
23|26|(Noah) said: “O my Lord! Help me because they deny me.”
23|27|So We revealed to him (saying) that: “Construct the ship under Our Eyes and under Our Revelation. Then, when Our Command comes and the water gushes forth from the oven, then take on board of each kind 2 spouses (male and female), and your family, except those of them against whom the word has already gone forth. And don’t address Me in favor of those who have done wrong. Surely, they are to be drowned.”
23|28|When you have embarked on the ship, you and whoever is with you, say: “All the praises are due to Allah, Who has saved us from the people who are oppressors.”
23|29|And say: “My Lord! Cause me to land at a blessed landing place, for You are the best of those who bring to land (safe).”
23|30|Surely, in this there are indeed Verses (lessons); truly We are putting people to test
23|31|Then after them, We created another generation (people of Ad)
23|32|And We sent to them a Messenger from among them (saying): “You worship Allah! You have no other one worthy of worship but Him. Will you not then be afraid?”
23|33|The chiefs of his people, who disbelieved and denied the Meeting in the Hereafter, and whom We had given them luxuries and comforts of this worldly life, said: “This is not but a human being like you, he eats of that which you eat, and he drinks of what you drink
23|34|If you obey a human being like yourself, then surely, you will be losers
23|35|Does he promise you that when you will die and become dust and bones; you shall come out alive (resurrected)
23|36|Far, very far is that which you are promised
23|37|It is not but our life of this world! We die and we live! And we will not be resurrected
23|38|He is not but a man who has invented a lie against Allah, and we are not going to believe in him.”
23|39|He said: “O my Lord! Help me because they deny me.”
23|40|(Allah) said: “In a little while, they are sure to be regretful.”
23|41|So an awful cry overtook them in truth (with justice), and We made them as rubbish of dead plants. So gone is the people who are wrongdoers
23|42|Then, We created other generations after them
23|43|no nation can precede their term nor can they delay it
23|44|then We sent Our Messengers in succession, whenever their Messenger came to a nation, they denied him, so We made some of them follow others (to destruction), and We made them as true stories (for mankind). So gone is the people who don’t believe
23|45|Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our Verses and clear authority
23|46|to Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they behaved arrogantly and they were self-exalting people
23|47|Then they said: “Shall we believe in 2 human beings like ourselves and whose people are our captives?”
23|48|So they denied them (Moses and Aaron) and became of those who were destroyed
23|49|And indeed We gave Moses the Scripture, so that they may be guided
23|50|And We made the son of Mary (Jesus) and his mother as a sign, and We gave them refuge to a high ground, a place of rest, and flowing streams
23|51|O Messengers! Eat of lawful foods and do righteous deeds. Surely! I am Well-Acquainted with what you do
23|52|And surely! This religion is one religion, and I am your Lord, so fear Me
23|53|But they have broken their religion among them into sects, each group rejoices in what is with them
23|54|So leave them in their error for a time
23|55|Do they think what We give them with wealth and children
23|56|We hasten to them with good things? But they don’t perceive
23|57|Surely! Those who live in awe for fear of their Lord
23|58|and those who believe in the Verses of their Lord
23|59|and those who don’t join anyone in worship (as partners) with their Lord
23|60|and those who give charity from whatever they give and their hearts are full of fear, because they are sure to return to their Lord
23|61|It is these who hasten in the good deeds and they are first in (attaining) them
23|62|And We don’t burden any person except according to its capacity, with Us is a record which speaks the truth, and they will not be wronged
23|63|But their hearts are covered from (understanding) this (the Qur’an) and for them are other evil deeds besides what they are doing
23|64|until, when We grasp those of them who lead a luxurious life with punishment, behold! They make humble invocation with a loud voice
23|65|(Allah will say): “Don’t invoke loudly this Day! Certainly, you shall not be helped by Us.”
23|66|Indeed My Verses used to be recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels (denying them)
23|67|in pride, talking evil about it (the Qur’an) by night
23|68|Do they not ponder the word, or has there come to them what had not come to their forefathers
23|69|Or is it that they don’t recognize their Messenger (Muhammad) so they deny him
23|70|Or they say: “There is madness in him?” But he brought them the truth but most of them are reluctant to the truth
23|71|And if the truth had been in accordance with their desires, surely, the heavens and the earth, and whoever is therein would have been corrupted! But We have brought them their reminder, but they turn away from their reminder
23|72|Or is it that you (O Muhammad) ask them for wages? But the recompense of your Lord is better, and He is the Best of the sustainers
23|73|Certainly, you (O Muhammad) call them to the Right Way
23|74|Surely, those who don’t believe in the Hereafter are indeed deviating from the way
23|75|And though We had Mercy on them and removed what distress is on them, still they would stubbornly persist in their transgression, wandering blindly
23|76|Indeed We seized them with punishment, but neither did they humble themselves to their Lord, nor did they invoke with submission to Him
23|77|Until, when We open for them a gate of severe punishment, then lo! They will be plunged into it
23|78|It is He, Who has created for you hearing, sight, and hearts; you give little thanks
23|79|And it is He Who has created you on the earth, and to Him, you shall be gathered back
23|80|And it is He Who gives life and causes death, and in His control is the alternation of night and day. Will you not then understand
23|81|But they say just like what their forefathers said
23|82|They said: “When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we be resurrected indeed
23|83|Surely, we have been promised this, we and our forefathers before us! This is not but the tales of the ancients!”
23|84|Say: “To whom belongs the earth and whatever is in it? If you know!”
23|85|They will say: “(It is) Allah’s!” Say: “Will you not then remember?”
23|86|Say: “Who is the Lord of the 7 heavens and Lord of the Great Throne?”
23|87|They will say: “(It is) for Allah.” Say: “Then will you not fear Allah?”
23|88|Say: “In whose hand is the sovereignty of everything? He protects all, and is there any protector against Him, if you know?”
23|89|They will say: “(It is) for Allah.” Say: “How then are you deceived (from the truth)?”
23|90|But nay, We have brought them the truth, and surely, they (disbelievers) are liars
23|91|Allah did not beget any son, nor is there anyone worthy of worship along with Him. Behold, (if there had been many deities) each would have taken away what each had created, and some of them would have tried to overcome others! Glorified is Allah above all that they attribute to Him
23|92|(Allah is) All-Knower of the unseen and the seen! Exalted is He over all that they associate as partners to Him
23|93|Say (O Muhammad): “My Lord! If You would show me that with which they are being threatened
23|94|my Lord! Then don’t put me amongst the people who are the wrongdoers.”
23|95|And indeed We are able to show you (O Muhammad) that with which We have threatened them
23|96|Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best-Acquainted with what they utter
23|97|And say: “My Lord! I seek refuge with You from the whisperings of the devils
23|98|And I seek refuge with You, My Lord! lest they come near me
23|99|until, when death comes to one of them who says: “My Lord! Send me back
23|100|so that I may do good in that which I have left behind!” No! It is but a word that he speaks, and behind them is a barrier until the Day when they will be resurrected
23|101|Then, when the trumpet is blown, there will be no kinship among them that Day, nor will they ask of one another
23|102|Then those who are heavy in their scales (of good deeds), they are the successful
23|103|Those who are light in their scales, they are those who lost their own selves, in hell they will abide
23|104|The fire will burn their faces, and they will grin (smile broadly) in it with displaced lips (disfigured)
23|105|(Allah will remind): “Were not My Verses (this Qur’an) recited to you, and then you used to deny them?”
23|106|They will say: “Our Lord! Our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we became erring people
23|107|Our Lord! Bring us out of this; then if we ever return to evil, then indeed we shall be wrongdoers.”
23|108|(Allah) will say: “You stay in it with shame! Don’t speak to Me
23|109|Surely! There was a party of My servants who used to say: ‘Our Lord! We believe, so forgive us, and have Mercy on us, for You are the best of those who show mercy!’
23|110|But you took them for a laughing stock, until they made you forget My Remembrance while you used to laugh at them
23|111|Surely! I have rewarded them this Day for what they kept patience, they are indeed the successful.”
23|112|(Allah) will say: “How many years did you stay on the earth?”
23|113|They will say: “We stayed a day or part of a day. So ask of those who keep account (angels).”
23|114|(Allah) will say: “You stayed not but a little, if you had only known
23|115|Did you think that We had created you in play (without purpose), and that you would not be returned to Us?”
23|116|So Exalted is Allah, the True King, there is no one worthy of worship but He, the Lord of the Supreme Throne
23|117|And those who invoke any other one worthy of worship besides Allah, of which there is no proof, and then surely their reckoning is with their Lord. Surely! The disbelievers will not be successful
23|118|And say (O Muhammad): “My Lord! Forgive and have Mercy, and You are the Best of those who show Mercy!”
24|1|This is a chapter (of the Qur’an) which We have sent down, which We have enjoined, and We have revealed in it clear Verses that you may remember
24|2|The woman and the man, who are guilty of illegal sexual intercourse, flog each of them with 100 lashes. Let not pity with them withhold you in the religion of Allah, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a party of the believers witness their punishment
24|3|The adulterer shall not marry any but an adulteress or an idolatress and an adulteress shall not marry but an adulterer or an idolater. Such a thing is forbidden to the believers
24|4|And those who accuse chaste women (of adultery), and can not produce 4 witnesses (to support allegation), then flog them with 80 lashes, and don’t accept their testimony forever, they are indeed the disobedient (to Allah)
24|5|except those who repent thereafter and do righteous deeds; so surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
24|6|Those who accuse their own wives but have no witnesses for them except themselves, then the testimony of each of them is made to swear 4 testimonies by Allah that he is one of those who speaks the truth
24|7|and the 5th (testimony) is that the Curse of Allah is on him, if he is of those who tells a lie (against her)
24|8|But the punishment (of stoning to death) shall avert from her, if she testifies 4 testimonies by Allah that he (her husband) is one of those who tells a lie
24|9|and the 5th (testimony) is that the anger of Allah be upon her if he (her husband) is one of those who speaks the truth
24|10|And had it not been for the Grace of Allah and His Mercy on you (that you have a solution of this situation), and that Allah is the One Who accepts repentance, the All-Wise
24|11|Surely! Those who brought forth the slander (against Aisha, the wife of the Prophet) are a group among you. Consider it is not a bad thing for you but it is a good (lesson) for you. Every person among them (who took part) has earned its sin, and as for the one among them who had the greater share (leading part) in it, shall have a great punishment
24|12|Why then, when you heard it (the slander), did not the believing men and believing women of their own people think good and say: “This (charge) is an obvious lie?”
24|13|Why did they not produce 4 witnesses for it? Since they (the slanderers) have not produced the witnesses, then they are the liars with Allah
24|14|Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His Mercy to you in this world and in the Hereafter, a great punishment would have touched you for what you had spoken
24|15|when you propagated it with your tongues, and uttered with your mouths about which there was no knowledge for you. You took it as a little thing while it was very great (serious offence) with Allah
24|16|And why did you not, when you heard it, say: “It is not right for us to speak of this, glory be to You (O Allah)! This is a great lie.”
24|17|Allah warns you that you never ever repeat (mistake) like this, if you are believers
24|18|Allah has made the Verses clear for you, and Allah is the All-Knower, the All-Wise
24|19|Surely, those who like that (the crime of) slander should be propagated among those who believe, they will have a painful punishment in this world and in the Hereafter. And Allah knows and you don’t know
24|20|And had it not been for the Grace of Allah and His Mercy on you (this slander would have very bad impact). Allah is full of Kindness, Merciful
24|21|O you who believe! Don’t follow the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows the footsteps of Satan, then surely he commands to commit indecency, and evil deeds. Had it not been for the Grace of Allah and His Mercy on you, no one of you would ever have been purified from sins. But Allah purifies whom He wills, and Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
24|22|And let not those among you with blessings and wealth swear to withhold help to their kinsmen, the poor, and the emigrants in the Way of Allah. Let them pardon and forgive. Don’t you love that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
24|23|Surely, those who accuse chaste but careless believing (women), are cursed in this world and in the Hereafter, and there will be a great punishment for them
24|24|On the Day when their tongues, their hands, and their legs will bear witness against them as to what they used to do
24|25|On that Day, Allah will pay them their recompense in full, and they will know that Allah, He is the one who Manifests the Truth
24|26|Bad women are for bad men and bad men are for bad women. Good women are for good men and good men are for good women. Those good people are innocent of what they (slanderers) say; there is forgiveness, and generous provision for them
24|27|O you who believe! Don’t enter houses other than your houses until you have asked permission and greeted by their people in it; that is better for you so that you may remember
24|28|And if you don’t find anyone in it, then don’t enter them (houses) until permission has been given to you. If you are asked to return (go back), then go back; for it is purer for you. Allah is All-Knower of what you do
24|29|There is no sin on you if you enter (without permission) houses not inhabited, in which there is some usefulness for you. And Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal
24|30|Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and protect their private parts. That is purer for them. Surely, Allah is All-Aware of what they do
24|31|And tell the believing women to lower their gazes, protect their private parts, not expose their beauty except what is apparent (like hands or eyes) of it; let them draw their veils over their hearts and not reveal their beauty except to their husbands, their fathers, their husband’s fathers, their sons, their husband’s sons, their brothers or their brother’s sons, or their sister’s sons, or their Muslim women, or the female captives whom their right hands possess, or old male servants who lack vigor of men (sexual desire), or children who have no sense of the sexual parts of women. Don’t let them strike their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their beauty. All of you repent to Allah, O you believers so that you may become successful
24|32|And marry the single (man who has no wife and woman who has no husband) among you and the pious of your male captives and female captives. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them out of His Bounty. Allah is All-Sufficient, All-Knower
24|33|Let those who don’t find (financial means to) marry be chaste until Allah enriches them out of His Bounty. Those captives who seek a writing (of setting free) whom you possesses, give them in writing, if you find good in them, and give them from Allah’s wealth which He has bestowed upon you. Don’t force your maid captives into prostitution in order that you may seek gain of the worldly life, if they desire chastity. If anyone compels them (to prostitution), then surely after their compulsion, Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful (to those who are forced)
24|34|And indeed We have sent down clear Verses to you, examples of those who passed away before you, and an admonition for the pious
24|35|Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His Light is as a niche within it is a lamp, the lamp (is enclosed) in a glass, the glass as if it were a brilliant star, it is lit from oil of a blessed olive tree which is neither of the east nor of the west, its oil would almost glow forth, though no fire touched it. Light upon light! Allah guides to His Light whom He wills. And He sets forth such parables for mankind, and Allah is All-Knower of everything
24|36|(This light is found) in houses (Masjids) which Allah has permitted that they be built, and His Name is remembered in them; glorify Him in them in the mornings and in the evenings
24|37|by such people whom neither trade nor sale diverts them from the remembrance of Allah, nor from establishing the prayer, nor from giving the obligatory charity. They fear the Day when the hearts and the eyes will be overturned
24|38|so that Allah may reward them according to the best of what they have done, and add for them even more out of His Grace. And Allah provides without measure to whom He wills
24|39|As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert. The thirsty one thinks it to be water, until when he comes near it, finds it to be nothing, but finds Allah with him, Who pays (disbeliever’s) due (punishment). And Allah is Swift in taking account
24|40|Or (another parable for a disbeliever) is like the darkness in a vast deep sea, overwhelmed with waves topped by waves, topped by dark clouds, (layers of) darkness upon darkness, if a person stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it! The one for whom Allah has not made light, there is no light for him
24|41|Don’t you (O Muhammad) see that it is Allah Who is glorified by whoever is in the heavens and the earth, and the birds with wings outspread (in flight)? Each one knows its prayer and glorification, and Allah is All-Aware of what they do
24|42|And to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and to Allah is the return (of all)
24|43|Don’t you see that Allah drives the clouds, then joins them together, then makes them into a heap of layers, and you see the rain comes forth from between them? He sends down hail like mountains from the sky, and strikes with them whom He wills, and averts from them whom He wills. The flash of its lightning nearly takes away the sight
24|44|Allah causes to alternate the night and the Day. Truly, there is indeed a lesson in this for those who have insight
24|45|Allah has created every moving living creature from water. Of them there are some who creep on their bellies, of them some who walk on 2 legs, and of them some who walk on 4. Allah creates what He wills. Surely! Allah is powerful over everything
24|46|Indeed We have sent down clarifying Verses (the Qur’an). Allah guides whom He wills to the Right Way
24|47|They (hypocrites) say: “We believe in Allah and the Messenger (Muhammad) and we obey,” then some of them turn away thereafter, and those are not believers
24|48|And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) to judge between them, then some of them turn away
24|49|But if the truth is with them, they come to him (Muhammad) with submission
24|50|Is there a disease in their hearts? Or do they doubt or fear lest Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) should wrong them in judgment? Nay, it is they who are the wrongdoers
24|51|The only saying of the believers, when they are called to Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) to judge between them is that they say: “We hear and we obey.” And such are the successful
24|52|And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), fears Allah, and keeps his duty (to Him), such are the successful
24|53|They swear by Allah their strong oaths if you would order them, they would leave (homes to fight in Allah’s cause). Say (O Muhammad): “Don’t swear; this obedience is better known. Surely, Allah knows well what you do.”
24|54|Say: “Obey Allah and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, then only on him (Muhammad) is what is placed on him (to convey Allah’s message), and on you what is placed on you. If you obey him, you shall be guided. It is not on the Messenger except clear conveying.”
24|55|Allah has promised those among you who believe and do righteous deeds that He will certainly make them vicegerent in the earth as He made vicegerent to those before them, and that He will establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them (Islam), and that He will surely give them a safe security in exchange of their fear provided they worship Me and don’t associate anything with Me. Those who disbelieve after that, they are the disobedient
24|56|And establish prayers, pay obligatory charity, and obey the Messenger (Muhammad) so that you may be treated with Mercy (from Allah)
24|57|Don’t consider those who disbelieve that they can escape in the land. Their abode shall be the fire and worst indeed is that destination
24|58|O you who believe! Let your servants and those among you who have not come to the age of puberty, should ask your permission (before they come to your presence) on 3 occasions: before Fajr (morning) prayer, while you put off your clothes for the noonday (rest) and after the Isha (late-night) prayer. These 3 times are for your privacy. There is no sin on you or on them afterwards to go around visiting one another. Thus Allah makes the Verses clear to you. And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
24|59|And when the children among you attain the age of puberty, let them seek permission as those elders who seek permission. Thus Allah makes clear for you His Verses. Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
24|60|And for the past child-bearing (elderly) women who don’t expect marriage, it is no sin on them if they discard their clothes without showing their beauty. But it is better for them that they refrain (don’t discard their outer clothing). Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower
24|61|There is no restriction on the blind, nor restriction on the lame, nor restriction on the sick, nor on yourselves, to eat from your houses, or houses of your fathers, or houses of your mothers, or houses of your brothers, or houses of your sisters, or houses of your paternal uncles, or houses of your paternal aunts, or houses of your maternal uncles, or houses of your maternal aunts, or that house you hold its keys, or your friend. There is no sin on you that you eat together or apart. But when you enter the houses, then greet one another with a greeting (of peace) from Allah, blessed and good. Thus Allah makes clear the Verses for you so that you may understand
24|62|Only the true believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), and when they are with him on collective matter, they don’t go until they have asked his permission. Surely! Those who ask your permission, they are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger. So if they ask your permission for some of their affairs, give permission to whom you wish from them, and ask Allah for their forgiveness. Truly, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
24|63|Don’t make the calling of the Messenger (Muhammad) among you as your calling of one another. Truly, Allah knows those of you who slip away (hide) under shelter (behind others). Let those be beware who oppose his (Muhammad’s) orders, should an affliction befall them or a painful punishment befall them
24|64|Certainly, all that are in the heavens and the earth belong to Allah. Surely, He knows what you are on it (condition) and the Day when they will be brought back to Him, and then He will inform them of what they did. And Allah is All-Knower of everything
25|1|Blessed is He Who has sent down the criterion (of right and wrong, i.e. this Qur’an) to His servant (Muhammad), so that he may be a Warner to the worlds
25|2|He is the One to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and Who has not begotten a son and has no partner in the dominion. He has created everything, and has measured it exactly according to its due measurements
25|3|Yet they (disbelievers) have taken besides Him ones worthy of worship, who created nothing but are themselves created, and neither they possess harm nor benefit for themselves, nor they possess power to cause death, nor can give life, nor able to raise the dead to life
25|4|Those who disbelieve say: “This (the Qur’an) is nothing but a lie that he (Muhammad) has invented it and other have helped him at it, in fact they have produced a wrong thing and a lie.”
25|5|And they say: “These are the tales of the ancients which he has written down, and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon.”
25|6|Say: “He has sent it (the Qur’an) down who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. Truly, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”
25|7|And they say: “Why does this Messenger (Muhammad) eat food, and walk about in the markets (like ourselves)? Why not an angel is sent down to him to be a Warner with him
25|8|Or why has not a treasure been granted to him, or why has he not a garden from where he could eat?” The wrongdoers say: “You follow none but a man bewitched.”
25|9|See how they apply examples to you! As they have gone astray and they cannot find a Right Way
25|10|Blessed is He Who, if wishes, will assign you better than that: gardens under which rivers flow and will assign you palaces (in Paradise)
25|11|Nay, they deny the Hour (the Day of Resurrection), and We have prepared for those who deny the Hour, a flaming fire (hell)
25|12|When it (hell) shall come in their sight from a far place, they will hear it’s raging and roaring
25|13|When chained together, they will be thrown into a narrow place thereof; they will exclaim in it for destruction (death)
25|14|(They will be told): “You don’t call today for one destruction, but call for many destructions.”
25|15|Say (them O Muhammad): “Is this (punishment in hell) better or the Paradise of Eternity which has been promised to the pious people? It will be for them as a reward and as a final destination
25|16|for them there will be all that they desire in it and they will abide there forever. It is a Promise upon your Lord that must be fulfilled.”
25|17|And on the Day He will gather them and those whom they worshipped besides Allah. He will ask: “Was it you who misled My servants or did they astray (themselves from) the Right Way?”
25|18|They (believing partners) will say: “Glory be to You! It was not proper for us to take any protectors besides You, but You gave them and their forefathers comfort (of the world) until they forgot the warning, and became a lost people.”
25|19|Thus surely, they (believing partners) will deny you (polytheists) regarding what you say today. Then you shall neither avert (the punishment), nor get help. Those among you did wrong; We shall make them taste the great punishment
25|20|And We have never sent before you (O Muhammad) any of the Messengers but surely, they ate food and walked in the markets. And We have made some of you as a trial for others. Now, will you have patience? Your Lord is All-Seer of everything
25|21|And those who don’t expect a meeting with Us (who deny the Day of Resurrection), say: “Why are not the angels sent down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?” Indeed they think arrogantly of themselves and are scornful with great pride
25|22|On the Day they will see the angels; no glad tidings will be for the criminals that Day. Angels will say: “(All glad tidings) are strictly forbidden (for you).”
25|23|And We shall turn to whatever deeds they (disbelievers) did, and We shall make them (deeds) as scattered floating particles of dust for them
25|24|The residents of Paradise on that Day will have the best abode and the finest place to relax
25|25|And (remember) the Day when the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds, and the angels will be sent down with a grand descending
25|26|The sovereignty on that Day will be the true (sovereignty), belongs to the Gracious (Allah), and it will be a hard Day for the disbelievers
25|27|(Remember) the Day when the wrongdoer will bite on his hands saying: “Oh! Would that I had taken a way with the Messenger (Muhammad)
25|28|Oh! Woe to me! Would that I had never taken so-and-so as a friend
25|29|Indeed they led me astray from the reminder (this Qur’an) after when it had come to me.” Satan is ever a deserter to human in the Hour of need
25|30|And the Messenger (Muhammad) will say: “O my Lord! Surely, my people took this Qur’an as deserted (neither learned nor acted upon it).”
25|31|Thus We have made for every Prophet an enemy among the criminals. But your Lord is sufficient as a Guide and Helper
25|32|And those who disbelieve say: “Why is not the Qur’an revealed to him all at once?” Thus (it was sent down in parts) so that We may strengthen your hearts thereby. And We have revealed it to you (gradually in stages). (It was revealed to Muhammad in 23 years)
25|33|And they don’t bring to you example (to oppose or find fault in you or in this Qur’an), but We reveal to you the truth, and better explanation
25|34|Those who will be gathered on their faces to hell, they will be in an evil state, for they had lost the Right Way
25|35|And indeed We gave Moses the Scripture (the Torah), and placed his brother Aaron with him as a helper
25|36|and We said: “Go you both to the people who have denied Our Verses.” Then We destroyed them with complete destruction
25|37|And the people of Noah, when they denied the Messengers, We drowned them, and We made them an example for mankind. And We have prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers
25|38|And (also) Ad and Thamud, and the residents of Ar-Rass, and many generations in between (were destroyed)
25|39|And for each of them, We have put forward examples, and each of them We have brought to ruin destruction
25|40|And indeed they (disbelievers) have passed by the town (of Prophet Lot) on which the evil rain was rained. Did they not see it (with their own eyes)? But they were not used to expect (believed) any Resurrection
25|41|And when they see you (O Muhammad), they treat you not but in mockery (saying): “Is this the one whom Allah has sent as a Messenger
25|42|He (Muhammad) would have nearly misled us from our deities, had it not been that we were patient and constant in our (worship)!” They will know when they see the punishment; they will realize who actually is most astray from the Right Way
25|43|Have you (O Muhammad) seen him taken his own desire as worthy of worship? Would you then be a Guide to him
25|44|Or do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are nothing but like cattle; nay they are even farther astray from the way
25|45|Have you not seen how your Lord spread the shadow? If He willed, He could have made it still. Then We have made the sun a guide over it
25|46|then We withdraw it to Us with a gradual withdrawal
25|47|And it is He Who makes the night a covering for you, and the sleep as rest, and makes the day to get up
25|48|And it is He Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings before His Mercy, and We send down pure water (rain) from the sky
25|49|so that We may give life thereby to a dead land, and We give to drink thereof many cattle and men that We have created
25|50|And indeed We have distributed it (water) amongst them in order that they may remember (the Grace of Allah), yet most people refuse except disbelief (ingratitude)
25|51|And had We willed, We could have raised a Warner in every town
25|52|so don’t obey the disbelievers, but strive against them with it (the Qur’an), with utmost endeavor
25|53|And it is He Who has let the 2 seas merge, one palatable and sweet, and the other salt and bitter; and He has set a barrier and a suppressed partition between them
25|54|And it is He Who has created human from water, and has appointed for them blood relationships and marriage relationships. And your Lord is All-Powerful
25|55|And yet they (disbelievers) worship besides Allah which can neither benefit them nor harm them, and the disbelievers are helpers (of the Satan) against their Lord
25|56|And We have not sent you (O Muhammad) but as a bearer of glad tidings and a Warner
25|57|Say: “I don’t ask you any reward for this (that I have brought the Qur’an from my Lord and its preaching, etc) except that whoever wills, may take a way to his Lord.”
25|58|And put your trust (O Muhammad) in the Ever-Living (Allah) who does not die, glorify His Praises, and He alone is the All-Knower of the sins of His servants
25|59|Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in 6 days. Then He rose over the Throne (that suits His Majesty). The Gracious! Ask Him (O Muhammad), as He is All-Knower of everything
25|60|And when it is said to them: “Prostrate yourself to the Gracious (Allah),” they ask: “What is the Gracious? Shall we fall down in prostration because you (O Muhammad) command us?" It increases dislike in them
25|61|Blessed is He Who has placed big stars in the sky, has placed therein a great lamp (sun) and a moon giving light
25|62|And it is He Who has put the night and the day in succession, for those who desire to remember or desire to show their gratitude
25|63|And the servants of the Gracious (Allah) are those who walk on the earth in humility, and when the foolish address them, they say: “peace,”
25|64|and those who spend the night before their Lord, prostrating and standing
25|65|and those who say: “Our Lord! Avert from us the punishment of hell. Surely! Its punishment is an inseparable, permanent punishment
25|66|indeed it (hell) is evil as an abode and as a place to reside,”
25|67|and those who, when they spend, neither are extravagant nor stingy, but there is a medium (way) between those (extremes)
25|68|and those who neither invoke with Allah another one worthy of worship, nor kill the soul which Allah has forbidden, except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexual intercourse. Those who do this shall receive the punishment
25|69|the punishment will be doubled for them (on the) Day of Resurrection, and they will abide in it in disgrace
25|70|except those who repent, believe, and do righteous deeds; for them Allah will change their sins into good deeds, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
25|71|And those who repent and do righteous deeds, then surely they repent to Allah (with true) repentance
25|72|And those who don’t bear witness to falsehood, and if they pass by some evil play or evil talk, they pass by with dignity
25|73|And those who, when they are reminded of the Verses of their Lord, they don’t fall deaf and blind upon them
25|74|And those who say: “Our Lord! Bestow on us from our wives and our offspring comfort of our eyes, and make us leaders for the pious.”
25|75|Those will be rewarded with the highest place (in Paradise) because they kept patience. They shall meet with greetings in it and the word of peace
25|76|(They shall) abide therein; excellent it is as an abode, and as a place to reside
25|77|Say (O Muhammad to the disbelievers): “My Lord pays no attention to you except for your invocation (to Him). But indeed you have denied (Him), so the punishment will be necessary.”
26|1|Ta-Seen-Mim
26|2|These are the Verses of the clear book (the Qur’an)
26|3|It may be that you (O Muhammad) are going to kill yourself (with grief) because they don’t become believers
26|4|If We will, We could send down a Verse to them from the heaven so their necks would bend to it in humility
26|5|And never comes to them any reminder from the Gracious (Allah) as a recent revelation, but they have been turning away from it
26|6|So they have denied (this Qur’an), then the news will come to them of what they were mocking at
26|7|Don’t they observe the earth to see how much We have caused every good kind to grow in it
26|8|Surely, in this is a Sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|9|And surely, your Lord! He is truly the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|10|And (remember) when your Lord called Moses (saying): “You go to the people who are wrongdoers
26|11|the people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear Allah?”
26|12|He said: “My Lord! Surely, I fear that they will deny me
26|13|and my breast straitens, and my tongue does not express well. So send Aaron
26|14|And they have a charge of crime (man-slaughter) against me, and I fear they will kill me.”
26|15|(Allah) said: “Nay! Go you both with Our Signs. Surely! We shall be with you, listening
26|16|And go to Pharaoh both of you and say: We are the Messengers of the Lord of the worlds
26|17|So (send to go) with us the children of Israel.”
26|18|(Pharaoh) said (to Moses): “Did we not bring you up among us as a child? You stayed with us many years of your life
26|19|And you did what you did (crime of killing a man). You are one of the ungrateful.”
26|20|Moses said: “I did it then when I was from the misguided
26|21|So I fled from you when I feared you. But my Lord has granted me right judgment, and made me one of the Messengers
26|22|And this is a favor with which you admonish me, that you have enslaved the children of Israel.”
26|23|Pharaoh said: “And who is the Lord of the worlds?”
26|24|(Moses) said: “Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, if you are seeking to be convinced with certainty.”
26|25|(Pharaoh) said to those around him: “Don’t you hear (what he says)?”
26|26|(Moses) said: “(Allah is) your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers!”
26|27|(Pharaoh) said: “Surely, your Messenger who has been sent to you is a madman!”
26|28|(Moses) said: “Lord of the east and the west, and all that is between them, if you did but understand!”
26|29|(Pharaoh) said: “If you choose one worthy of worship other than me, I will certainly put you among the prisoners.”
26|30|(Moses) said: “Even if I bring you something clear?”
26|31|(Pharaoh) said: “Bring it forth, if you are from the truthful!”
26|32|So (Moses) threw his stick, and behold, it was a clear serpent
26|33|And then he drew out his hand, and behold, it became white (bright) to all beholders
26|34|(Pharaoh) said to the chiefs around him: “Surely! This is indeed a well-Versed sorcerer
26|35|he wants to drive you out of your land by his sorcery. Now what is it that you advice?”
26|36|They said: “Put him off and his brother (for a while), and send callers to the cities
26|37|they will bring to you every well-Versed sorcerer.”
26|38|So the sorcerers were assembled at a fixed time on an appointed Day
26|39|And it was said to the people: “Will you assemble
26|40|So that we may follow the sorcerers if they are the winners.”
26|41|When the sorcerers arrived, they said to Pharaoh: “Is there a reward for us if we are the winners?”
26|42|(Pharaoh) said: “Yes, and surely then you will be of those brought near (to me).”
26|43|Moses said to them: “Throw what you are going to throw!”
26|44|So they threw their ropes and their sticks, and said: “By the might of Pharaoh, it is we who will be the winners!”
26|45|Then Moses threw his stick, and behold, it swallowed up all that they falsely showed
26|46|And the sorcerers fell down prostrate
26|47|saying: “We believe in the Lord of the worlds
26|48|the Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
26|49|(Pharaoh) said: “You have believed in him before I give permission to you. Surely, he is your chief who has taught you magic! So surely, you shall come to know. I will cut off your hands and your legs on opposite sides, and I will crucify you all.”
26|50|They said: “No harm (don’t care)! Surely, we are going to return to our Lord (anyway)
26|51|Surely! We hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, as we are the first of the believers (in Moses).”
26|52|And We revealed to Moses saying: “Depart by night with My servants, surely, you will be pursued.”
26|53|Then Pharaoh sent callers to the cities
26|54|(saying): “Surely! These are (indeed but) a small band
26|55|and surely, they have enraged us
26|56|and surely we are all assembled, well prepared.”
26|57|So, We made them leave from their gardens, water springs
26|58|treasures, and honorable places
26|59|Thus We caused the children of Israel to inherit such things
26|60|So they (people of Pharaoh) pursued them at sunrise
26|61|And when the 2 hosts saw (each other), the companions of Moses said: “Surely we are to be overtaken.”
26|62|(Moses) said: “Nay, surely! With me is my Lord, He will guide me.”
26|63|Then We revealed to Moses (saying): “Strike the sea with your stick.” It parted, and each part (of the sea water) became like the huge mountain
26|64|Then We brought near (to that sea) the others (Pharaoh and his army)
26|65|and We saved Moses and all those with him
26|66|then We drowned the others
26|67|Surely! In this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|68|and surely, your Lord! He is truly the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|69|And recite to them the story of Abraham
26|70|when he (Abraham) said his father and his people: “What do you worship?”
26|71|They said: “We worship idols, and we remain devoted to them.”
26|72|He said: “Do they hear you when you call (on them)
26|73|Or do they benefit you or do they harm you?”
26|74|They said: “Nay, but we found our forefathers doing so.”
26|75|He said: “Do you observe which you have been worshipping
26|76|you and your forefathers
26|77|Surely! They are enemies to me, except the Lord of the worlds
26|78|who has created me, and it is He who guides me
26|79|And it is He Who feeds me and gives me to drink
26|80|and when I am ill, it is He Who cures me
26|81|Who will cause me to die, then will bring me to life (again)
26|82|and Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of Recompense.”
26|83|(Abraham prayed): “My Lord! Bestow wisdom on me, join me with the righteous
26|84|and grant me an honorable mention in later generations
26|85|and make me one of the inheritors of the Paradise of Delight
26|86|and forgive my father, surely he is of the erring
26|87|and don’t disgrace me on the Day when all creatures will be resurrected
26|88|the Day when neither wealth nor sons will avail
26|89|except the one who will bring a clean heart to Allah
26|90|and Paradise will be brought near to the pious
26|91|and the hellfire will be placed in full view for the erring
26|92|and it will be said to them: “Where are those (false deities) that you used to worship
26|93|instead of Allah? Can they help you or help themselves?”
26|94|Then they will be thrown on their faces into it (fire), they are those who were in error
26|95|and the hosts (soldiers) of Satan together
26|96|they will say while they argue in it
26|97|(saying): “by Allah, we were truly in a clear error
26|98|when We held you (false deities) as equals (in worship) with the Lord of the worlds
26|99|And none has brought us into error except the criminals
26|100|Now we have no intercessors
26|101|nor a close friend (to help us)
26|102|If we had a chance (to return to the world), we would be among the believers!”
26|103|Surely! In this narration there is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|104|And surely, your Lord, He is truly the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|105|The people of Noah denied the Messengers
26|106|When their brother Noah said to them: “Will you not fear Allah
26|107|Surely I am a trustworthy Messenger to you
26|108|so fear Allah, and obey me
26|109|I don’t ask you any reward for it (my message), my reward is not but from the Lord of the worlds
26|110|so fear Allah and obey me.”
26|111|They said: “Shall we believe in you, when the lowest (of the people) follow you?”
26|112|He said: “And what knowledge have I of what they used to do
26|113|Their account is with my Lord, if you could know
26|114|And I am not going to drive away the believers
26|115|I am not but a plain Warner.”
26|116|They said: “If you don’t cease, O Noah! You will surely be among those stoned (to death).”
26|117|He said: “My Lord! Surely, my people have denied me
26|118|Therefore judge between me and them with fair judgment, and save me and those of the believers who are with me.”
26|119|And We saved him and those with him in the laden ship
26|120|then We drowned the rest (disbelievers) thereafter
26|121|Surely, in this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|122|And surely! Your Lord, He is indeed the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|123|Ad (people) denied the Messengers
26|124|When their brother Hud said to them: “Will you not fear Allah
26|125|Surely! I am a trustworthy Messenger to you
26|126|So fear Allah, and obey me
26|127|I don’t ask you any reward for it, my reward is from the Lord of the worlds
26|128|Do you build landmark on every high palace to play for fun
26|129|And do you take for yourselves palaces (fine buildings) as if you will reside therein forever
26|130|And when you seize anyone, you seize him as tyrants
26|131|So fear Allah, and obey me
26|132|And Fear Him Who has aided you with all (good things) that you know
26|133|He has aided you with cattle, children
26|134|and gardens, and springs
26|135|Surely, I fear for you the punishment of a Great Day.”
26|136|They said: “It is the same to us whether you preach or you are not of those who preach
26|137|This is nothing but the customs of the ancients
26|138|And we are not going to be punished.”
26|139|So they denied him, and We destroyed them. Surely! In this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|140|And surely! Your Lord, He is indeed the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|141|Thamud (people) denied the Messengers
26|142|When their brother Saleh said to them: “Will you not fear Allah
26|143|Surely I am a trustworthy Messenger to you
26|144|So fear Allah, and obey me
26|145|I don’t ask any reward for it (my message); my reward is from the Lord of the worlds
26|146|Will you be left secure in that which you have here (forever)
26|147|In gardens, springs
26|148|and cornfields, and date-palms with its soft flowering branches
26|149|and you carve houses in the mountains skillfully
26|150|So fear Allah, and obey me
26|151|And don’t follow the command of the wasters
26|152|who make mischief in the land, and don’t reform.”
26|153|They said: “Surely you are only of those bewitched
26|154|You are not but a human being like us. Then bring us a sign if you are of the truthful.”
26|155|He (Saleh) said: “This is a she-camel (Allah sent as you asked); it has a right to drink water and you have a right to drink water on a known day
26|156|And don’t touch her with harm, lest the punishment of a great Day may seize you.”
26|157|But they killed her, and then they became regretful
26|158|so the punishment overtook them. Surely, in this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|159|And surely! Your Lord, He is indeed the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|160|The people of Lot denied the Messengers
26|161|When their brother Lot said to them: “Will you not fear Allah
26|162|Surely! I am a trustworthy Messenger to you
26|163|So fear Allah, and obey me
26|164|I don’t ask of you any reward for it (my message), my reward is from the Lord of the worlds
26|165|And will you go into the males (to fornicate) of the mankind
26|166|and leave those whom Allah has created for you to be your wives? Nay, you are a transgressing people!”
26|167|They said: “If you don’t cease, O Lot! Surely, you will be one of those who are expelled!”
26|168|He said: “I am, indeed of those who disapprove with severe anger and fury
26|169|My Lord! Save me and my family from what they do.”
26|170|So We saved him and all his family
26|171|except an old woman (his wife) among those who remained behind
26|172|Then afterward We destroyed the others
26|173|And We rained on them a rain (of punishment). Evil was the rain which fell on those who had been warned
26|174|Surely, in this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|175|And surely! Your Lord, He is indeed the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|176|The residents of Al-Aiyka (a garden with thick trees near Midian) denied the Messengers
26|177|When Shuaib said to them: “Will you not fear Allah
26|178|I am a trustworthy Messenger to you
26|179|So fear Allah, and obey me
26|180|I don’t ask of you any reward for it (my message), my reward is from the Lord of the worlds
26|181|Give full measure, and don’t be among those who cause loss (to others by fraud)
26|182|And weigh with the just straight balance
26|183|and neither defraud people by reducing their things, nor do evil in the land making corruption
26|184|And fear Him Who created you and the generations before you.”
26|185|They said: “Surely you are one of those bewitched
26|186|You are not but a human being like us and surely, we think that indeed you are one of the liars
26|187|So cause a piece of the heaven to fall on us, if you are of the truthful!”
26|188|He said: “My Lord is Best Knower of what you do.”
26|189|But they denied him, so the punishment of the Day of shadow (cloud carrying Allah’s punishment) seized them, indeed that was the punishment of a great Day
26|190|Surely, in this is indeed a sign, yet most of them are not believers
26|191|And surely! Your Lord, He is indeed the All-Mighty, the Merciful
26|192|And truly, this (the Qur’an) is a revelation of the Lord of the worlds
26|193|The trustworthy spirit (Gabriel) has brought down
26|194|upon your heart (O Muhammad) so that you may be one of the warners
26|195|in the plain Arabic language
26|196|And surely, it (the Qur’an) has the Scriptures of former people
26|197|Is it not a sign to them that the learned scholars knew it of the children of Israel
26|198|And if We had revealed it (this Qur’an) to any of the non-Arabs
26|199|and who had recited it (in Arabic) to them, they would still not have believed in it
26|200|We have caused it (disbelief) to enter in the hearts of the criminals
26|201|They will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment
26|202|it will come to them suddenly while they don’t perceive it
26|203|Then they will say: “Can we be given respite?”
26|204|Do they wish to hasten on Our Punishment
26|205|Have you thought if We do let them enjoy for years
26|206|and afterwards comes to them what (punishment) they are promised
26|207|all that which their past enjoyment be to them
26|208|And We never destroyed a township without sending its warners
26|209|by way of reminder (in advance), and We have never been unjust
26|210|And it is not the devils who have brought it (this Qur’an) down
26|211|neither it would suit them, nor they can produce it
26|212|Surely, they have been removed far from hearing it
26|213|So don’t invoke with Allah another one worthy of worship lest you be among those who receive punishment
26|214|And warn your tribe (O Muhammad) of near relatives
26|215|and lower or put down your wing (be kind and humble) to those of the believers who follow you
26|216|if they disobey you, say: “Verily, I am not responsible for what you do.”
26|217|And put your trust in the Mighty, the Merciful
26|218|Who sees you (O Muhammad) when you stand up (at night in prayers)
26|219|and see your movements among those who fall prostrate
26|220|Surely! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
26|221|Shall I inform you (O people!) upon whom the devils descend
26|222|They descend on every liar, sinner
26|223|who gives ear (to the devils), most of them are liars
26|224|as for the poets, the erring ones follow them
26|225|Don’t you see how aimlessly they wander in every valley
26|226|and say what they don’t do
26|227|Except those who believe, do righteous deeds, remember Allah much, and vindicate themselves after they have wronged. Those who do wrong (will know) what overturning they will be overturned
27|1|Ta-Seen. These are Verses of the Qur’an, a clear book
27|2|a guide, and glad tidings for the believers
27|3|those who establish the prayer, give the obligatory charity, and believe with certainty in the Hereafter
27|4|Surely, those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, We have made their deeds seem fair to them, so that they wander about blindly
27|5|They are those for them there will be an evil punishment (in this world). They will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter
27|6|And surely, you (O Muhammad) are being taught the Qur’an from the One Who is All-Wise, All-Knower
27|7|(Remember) when Moses said to his family: “Surely! I have seen a fire, I will bring you some information from it, or I will bring you a burning brand so that you may warm yourselves.”
27|8|But when he came to it, he was called (by a voice) that: “Blessed is (Allah) Who is in the fire, and whoever is around it! And glory be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds
27|9|O Moses! Surely! It is I, Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
27|10|Throw down your stick!” But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he turned in flight, and did not even look back. (It was said): “O Moses! Don’t fear, surely! The Messengers don’t fear in front of Me
27|11|except the one who has done wrong and afterwards even if he changes evil for good, then surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
27|12|And now put your hand into your bosom, it will come out (shining) white without any harm. These are among the 9 Verses (you will take) to Pharaoh and his people, and surely, they are not pious people.”
27|13|But when Our Verses came to them, clear to see, they said: “This is a clear magic.”
27|14|They rejected them (Verses) wrongfully and arrogantly, though their own selves were convinced of them. So see how was the end of the evil-doers
27|15|And indeed We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they said: “All the praises are to Allah, Who has preferred us above many of His believing servants!”
27|16|Solomon inherited (the knowledge of) David. He said: “O mankind! We have been taught the language of birds and on us has been bestowed from every thing. Surely, this indeed is grace evident (from Allah).”
27|17|And Solomon gathered his hosts of jinns, people, birds, and they were set in battle order
27|18|till, when they came to the valley of the ants, one ant said: “O ants! Enter your residences, lest Solomon and his hosts crush you (by their feet) while they don’t perceive.”
27|19|So he (Solomon) smiled laughing at its speech and said: “My Lord! Bestow upon me power that I may thank You for Favors, which You have bestowed on me and on my parents, so that I may do righteous deeds that will please You, and admit me by Your Mercy among Your righteous servants.”
27|20|He inspected the birds, and said: “What is the matter that I don’t see the hoopoe (old world bird) or is he among the absentees
27|21|I will surely punish him with severe punishment, or slaughter him, unless he brings me a clear reason (for absence).”
27|22|But he (the hoopoe) did not stay long, he (came up and) said: “I have just found (the knowledge of a thing) which you have not found. I have come to you from Sheba with true news
27|23|Surely I found a woman ruling over them, and she has been given from every thing, and she has a great throne
27|24|I found her and her people prostrating themselves before the sun instead of Allah, Satan has made their deeds seem fair to them, and has barred them from (Allah’s) Way, so they are not guided
27|25|they don’t prostrate themselves before Allah, Who brings out the hidden thing in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you conceal and what you reveal
27|26|Allah, there is no one worthy of worship but He, the Lord of the Supreme Throne!”
27|27|(Solomon) said: “We shall see whether you speak the truth or you are of the liars
27|28|Go with this letter of mine, and deliver it to them, then bring back from them, and see what answer they return.”
27|29|She (the queen) said: “O chiefs! Surely! A noble letter has been delivered to me
27|30|surely it is from Solomon, and surely it reads: In the name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful
27|31|(It reads) Don’t be exalted against me, but come to me as Muslims.”
27|32|She said: "O chiefs! Advise me in my case. I don’t decide any case till you are present.”
27|33|They said: “We have power and great strength, and the matter is for you to command; so think what you will command.”
27|34|She said: “Surely! When the kings enter a town, they spoil it, and make the most honorable of its people the lowest. And thus they always do
27|35|But surely I will send them a present, and see with what answer the Messengers return.”
27|36|So when (the envoys of the Queen with the present) came to Solomon, he said: “Will you help me in wealth? What Allah has given me is better than that which He has given you! Nay, you rejoice in your gift
27|37|(Solomon said to the chief of her messengers who brought the present): Go back to them (your people). (If your people don’t submit) surely we shall come to them with army which they will never be able to resist, we shall drive them out from there (land) in disgrace, and they will be humiliated.”
27|38|(When Solomon heard that the Queen of Sheba was coming in submission) he said: “O chiefs! Which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me as Muslims?”
27|39|A strong one from the jinns said: “I will bring it to you before you rise from your place (council). Surely, I am indeed strong, trustworthy for such work.”
27|40|One with whom was the knowledge of the Scripture said: “I will bring it to you before your eyesight returns to you (within twinkling of an eye)!” Then when he (Solomon) saw it placed before him, he said: “This is from the Grace of my Lord to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful! Whoever is grateful, indeed is grateful for oneself, and whoever is ungrateful (should know that) certainly, my Lord is Rich, Bountiful.”
27|41|Then he said: “Disguise for her throne so that we may see whether she will be guided (able to recognize her throne), or she will be of those who are not guided.”
27|42|So when she came, it was said (to her): “Is your throne like this?” She said: “(It is) as though it were the same. Knowledge was bestowed on us in advance of this, and we have become Muslims (submitted to Allah).”
27|43|Other deities which she used to worship besides Allah has prevented her (from Islam), indeed she was of a disbelieving people
27|44|It was said to her: “Enter the palace.” (The floor was glass surface with water underneath it). But when she saw it, she thought it was a pool, and she (pulled up her clothes) uncovering her legs. Solomon said: “Surely, it is a palace (with a glass surface and water underneath it) traced smooth with glass.” She said: “My Lord! Surely, I have wronged myself, and I submit (accept Islam) with Solomon to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”
27|45|And indeed We sent to Thamud their brother Saleh, saying: “Worship Allah.” Then look! They became 2 parties (believers and disbelievers) quarreling with each other
27|46|He said: “O my people! Why do you seek to hasten the evil (Allah’s punishment) before the good (Allah’s Mercy)? Why don’t you seek the forgiveness of Allah, so that you may be treated with mercy?”
27|47|They said: “We consider bad luck from you and those with you.” He said: “Your luck is with Allah; in fact, you are a people that are being tested.”
27|48|There were in the city 9 men (leaders) who made mischief in the land, and they would not reform
27|49|They said: “Swear one to another by Allah so that we shall surely make a night attack on him and his family, and afterwards we will surely say to his near relatives: we did not witness the destruction of his family, and surely! We are truthful.”
27|50|So they plotted a plot, and We planned a plan, while they did not perceive
27|51|Thus see how the end of their plot was! Surely! We destroyed them and their nation, all together
27|52|These are their houses in ruin, for what they did wrong. Surely, in this is indeed a sign for people who know
27|53|And We saved those who believed, and used to fear Allah
27|54|And (remember) Lot! When he said to his people: “Do you commit indecency while you see
27|55|Why do you come to men with lust instead of women? Nay, but you are a people who are ignorant.”
27|56|There was no answer by his people except that they said: “Drive out the family of Lot from your city. Surely, they are a people who are clean!”
27|57|So We saved him and his family, except his wife. We destined her to be of those who remained behind
27|58|And We rained down on them a rain (of stones). So evil was the rain of those who were warned
27|59|Say (O Muhammad): “All praise is to Allah, and peace be on His servants whom He has chosen! Is Allah better, or that you ascribe as partners (to Him)?”
27|60|Is not He (better than false deities) Who has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down from the sky water (rain) for you and We cause to grow gardens with it full of beauty and delight? It is not in your ability that you cause their trees to grow. Is there any one worthy of worship besides Allah? Nay, but they are a people who ascribe equals (to Him)
27|61|Is not He Who has made the earth as a fixed abode, has placed rivers in its midst, has placed firm mountains for it, and has set a barrier between the 2 seas (of salt and sweet water)? Is there any one worthy of worship besides Allah? Nay, but most of them don’t know
27|62|Is not He Who responds to the distressed one when one calls Him, Who removes the evil, and makes you inheritors of the earth (generations after generations)? Is there any one worthy of worship besides Allah? Little is that you remember
27|63|Is not He Who guides you in the darkness of the land, the sea, and Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings before His Mercy? Is there any one worthy of worship besides Allah? High exalted is Allah above all that they associate as partners (to Him)
27|64|Is not He Who originates creation, then repeats it, and Who provides you from heaven and earth? Is there any one worthy of worship besides Allah? Say: “Bring your proofs if you are truthful.”
27|65|Say: “No one in the heavens and the earth has the knowledge of the unseen except Allah, nor can they perceive when they shall be resurrected.”
27|66|Nay, their knowledge does not reach to the Hereafter. Nay, they are in doubt about it. Nay, they are blind about it
27|67|And those who disbelieve say: “When we and our forefathers have become dust, shall we really be brought forth (again from dead)
27|68|Indeed we were promised this to us and our forefathers before. Surely, this is nothing but tales of the ancient people.”
27|69|Say to them (O Muhammad): “Travel in the land and see what has been the end of the criminals (who disobeyed Allah).”
27|70|Neither grieve over them, nor be in distress because of what they plot
27|71|And they (disbelievers) say: “When will this Promise (be fulfilled), if you are truthful?”
27|72|Say: “Perhaps that which you wish to hasten on, may be close behind you.”
27|73|Surely, your Lord is full of Grace for mankind, yet most of them don’t give thanks
27|74|Surely, your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal
27|75|There is nothing hidden in the heaven and the earth, but is recorded in a clear book
27|76|Surely, this Qur’an narrates to the children of Israel most of that in which they differ
27|77|And truly, it (this Qur’an) is guidance and a Mercy for the believers
27|78|Surely, your Lord will decide between them (various sects) by His judgment. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Knower
27|79|Put your trust in Allah; surely, you (O Muhammad) are on the clear truth
27|80|Surely, you can neither make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they flee turning their backs
27|81|nor can you lead the blind out of their error; you can not make to hear except those who believe in Our Verses, and who have submitted as Muslims
27|82|And when the Word (of punishment) is fulfilled against them, We shall bring out for them a beast from the earth, which will speak to them because people did not believe in Our Verses
27|83|And (remember) the Day when We shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied Our Verses, and they shall be driven (to the place of reckoning)
27|84|until when they all come (before their Lord), He will say: “Did you deny My Verses when you did not comprehend them by knowledge? Or what you used to do?”
27|85|And the Word (of punishment) will be fulfilled against them, because they have done wrong, and they will not be able to speak (to defend themselves)
27|86|Don’t they see that We have made the night for them to rest in it, and the day to give them light? Surely, in this are Verses for people who believe
27|87|And (remember) the Day on which the trumpet will be blown in and all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth, will be terrified except the one whom Allah wills. And all shall come to Him humbled
27|88|You will see the mountains and think them solid, but they shall pass away as the passing away of the clouds. Such is the Work of Allah, Who perfected all things; surely, Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do
27|89|Those who bring good deeds shall be rewarded with better than it, and they will be safe from the terror on that Day
27|90|And those who brings an evil deed, they will be cast down on their faces in the fire. (It will be said to them): “Are you being recompensed except what you used to do?”
27|91|Indeed I (Muhammad) have been commanded to worship the Lord of this city (Makkah), Who has made it sacred and to Whom belongs everything. And I have been commanded to be from among the Muslims
27|92|and to recite the Qur’an. So whoever receives guidance then surely will receive it for his own good, and whoever goes astray, say: “Surely, I am one of the warners.”
27|93|And say (O Muhammad): “All the praises are to Allah. He will show you His Verses, and you shall recognize them. And your Lord is not unaware of what you do.”
28|1|Ta-Seen-Meem
28|2|These are the Verses of the clear book
28|3|We recite to you of the news of Moses and Pharaoh in truth, for the people who believe
28|4|Surely, Pharaoh exalted himself in the land, divided its people into sects, oppressed one group among them, killed their sons, and spared their females. Surely, he was of those who committed great sins
28|5|And We wished to do a Favor to those who were oppressed in the land, to make them rulers, to make them the inheritors
28|6|and to establish them in the land, and to let Pharaoh, Haman, and their hosts receive from them that which they feared
28|7|And We inspired to the mother of Moses, (saying): “Suckle him (Moses), but if you fear for him, then cast him into the river, and don’t fear or grieve. Surely! We shall bring him back to you and will make him one of the Messengers.”
28|8|Then the family of Pharaoh picked him up (from river), that he might become an enemy for them and (a cause of) grief. Surely! Pharaoh, Haman and their hosts were sinners
28|9|And the wife of Pharaoh said: “(This is) a comfort of the eye for me and for you. Don’t kill him, perhaps that he may be of benefit to us, or we may adopt him as a son.” They did not perceive (the result of that)
28|10|And the heart of the mother of Moses became empty (from worry, except the thought of Moses). Surely, she was very near to disclose him (that the child was her son), had We not strengthened her heart with faith so that she might remain as one of the believers
28|11|And she said to his (Moses’) sister: “Follow him.” So she watched him from a far place, while they did not perceive
28|12|And We had already forbidden for him other suckling mothers, until she (sister came and) said: “Shall I direct you to the people of a family who will care for him for you, and they will look after him in a good manner?”
28|13|Thus We restored him to his mother so that her eye might be delighted, not grieved and that she might know that the Promise of Allah is true. But most of them don’t know
28|14|And when he attained his full strength and became perfect (in manhood), We bestowed on him judgment and knowledge. And thus We reward the good doers
28|15|And he entered the city at a time when its people were unaware, and he found 2 men fighting – one was of his party (from the children of Israel), and the other one was of his foes. (The man) of his party asked him for help against the one who was of his foe, so Moses struck him with his fist and killed him. He said: “This is the work of Satan; surely, he is a plain misleading enemy.”
28|16|He said: “My Lord! Surely, I have wronged myself, so forgive me.” Then We forgave him. Surely, He is the Forgiving, the Merciful
28|17|He said: “My Lord! After this with which You have favored me, I shall never be a helper for the criminals!”
28|18|So he became afraid in the city (waiting for his punishment) and was looking around, when suddenly the man who had sought his help yesterday, called him for his help again. Moses said to him: “Surely, you are a plain misguided person!”
28|19|Then when he decided to seize the man who was an enemy to both of them, the man said: “O Moses! Do you want to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? You only want to become a tyrant in the land, and you don’t want to be of those who do right.”
28|20|And then a man came running from the farthest end of the city. He said: “O Moses! Surely, the chiefs are taking counsel together about you to kill you, so escape. Truly, I am one of the good advisers to you.”
28|21|So he escaped from there with fear to look around. He said: “My Lord! Save me from the wrongdoers!”
28|22|When he went towards (the city of) Midian, he said: “It may be that my Lord will guide me to the Right Way.”
28|23|And when he arrived at the water well of Midian, he found a group of men watering (their flocks), and he found 2 women besides them who were keeping back (their flocks). He said: “What is the matter with you?” They said: “We cannot water (our flocks) until the shepherds take away (their flocks). Our father is a very old man.”
28|24|He watered (their flocks) for them, he turned back to shade, and said: “My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good You bestow on me!”
28|25|Then one of the 2 women came to him walking with shy. She said: “Surely, my father is calling you so that he may reward you for that you watered for us.” When he came to him and narrated the story to him, he said: “Don’t fear. You have escaped from the wrongdoers.”
28|26|One of them (2 women) said: “O my father! Hire him! Surely, the best that you can hire who is strong, the trustworthy.”
28|27|He said (to Moses): “Surely, I intend to wed to you one of these 2 daughters of mine with the condition that you serve me for 8 years, but if you complete 10 years, then it will be a favor from you. I don’t want to make it difficult for you. You will find me, if Allah wills, one of the righteous.”
28|28|He (Moses) said: ‘That (is settled) between me and you. Whichever of the 2 terms I fulfill, let there be no injustice on me. Allah is the Surety over what we say.”
28|29|When Moses fulfilled the term and was traveling with his family, he saw a fire in the direction of the mount Tur. He said to his family: “Wait, I have seen a fire; perhaps I may bring from there some information to you, or a burning brand of fire that you may warm yourselves.”
28|30|So when he reached there (the fire), he was called from the right side of the valley, in the blessed place from the tree, (saying): “O Moses! Surely! I am Allah, the Lord of the worlds
28|31|Throw your stick!” But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he turned in flight and did not look back. (Allah said): “O Moses! Draw near and don’t fear. Surely, you are of those who are secure
28|32|Put your hand in your bosom, it will come out (shinning) white without any harm, and draw your hand to you (whenever needed to be free) from fear. These are 2 evidences from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs. Surely, they are rebellious people
28|33|He said: “My Lord! Surely, I have killed a man from them and I fear that they will kill me
28|34|My brother Aaron, he is more eloquent in speech than me, so send him with me as a helper to confirm me. Surely! I fear that they will deny me.”
28|35|Allah said: “I will strengthen your arm with your brother and give power to both of you so that they shall not reach you. (Proceed) with Our signs. You 2 and those who follow you will be the victors.”
28|36|When Moses came to them (Pharaoh and his chiefs) with Our clear signs, they said: “This is nothing but invented magic. We never heard this from our forefathers.”
28|37|Moses said: “My Lord knows the one best who comes with guidance from Him, and who will have the happy end in the Hereafter. Surely, the wrongdoers will not be successful.”
28|38|Pharaoh said: “O chiefs! I don’t know that you have any one worthy of worship other than me. O Haman! Kindle for me (a fire) on clay (to bake bricks) and set up a lofty tower for me so that I may look at the deity of Moses; and surely, I think that he (Moses) is one of the liars.”
28|39|And he and his soldiers were arrogant in the land without right, and they thought that they would not return to Us
28|40|So We seized him and his soldiers, and We threw them in the sea (and drowned them). So behold (O Muhammad) how was the end of the wrongdoers
28|41|And We made them leaders who invite (people) to the fire, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will not be helped
28|42|And We made a curse to follow them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will be among the despised
28|43|And indeed We gave Moses the Scripture (the Torah) after We had destroyed the previous generations as enlightenment for people, guidance, and a mercy so that they may remember
28|44|And you (O Muhammad) were not present on the western side (of the mount) when We made the commandment clear to Moses and you were not among the witnesses
28|45|But We created many generations (after Moses) and long time has passed over them. You (O Muhammad) were not a resident among the people of Midian, reciting Our Verses to them. But it is We Who is sending (messengers)
28|46|And you (O Muhammad) were not at the side of the Tur mount when We called (Moses); but (provided you with news) as a Mercy from your Lord so that you may warn the people to whom no Warner had come before you, in order that they may remember
28|47|so that if a calamity seizes them (people of Makkah) for what their hands have sent (the deeds), they may not be able to say: “Our Lord! Why You did not send us a Messenger? Then we would have followed Your Verses and would have been among the believers.”
28|48|Now that the truth (Muhammad with his message) has come to them from Us, they say: “Why he is not given the like of what was given to Moses? Did they not disbelieve in what was given to Moses before? They say: “2 kinds of magic (the Torah and the Qur’an) are helping each other!” They say: “Surely! We disbelieve in both.”
28|49|Say (to them, O Muhammad): “Then bring a book from Allah which is better guide than these 2 (the Torah and the Qur’an), I will follow it, if you are truthful.”
28|50|But if they don’t answer to you, then know that they only follow their own desires. Who is more astray than the one who follows own desires without guidance from Allah? Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
28|51|And indeed We have conveyed to them the Word (this Qur’an) in order that they may remember
28|52|Those to whom We gave Scriptures before it, they believe in it (the Qur’an)
28|53|And when it is recited to them, they say: “We believe in it. Surely, it is the truth from our Lord. Indeed we were from those who submit to Allah (as Muslims) before it (like Abdullah bin Salam, Salman Al-Farsi).”
28|54|They will be given their reward twice; because they are patient, repel evil with good, and spend (in charity) out of what We have provided them
28|55|And when they hear evil vain talk, they withdraw from it and say: “To us are our deeds and to you are your deeds. Peace be on to you. We don’t seek the (way of the) ignorant.”
28|56|Surely! You (O Muhammad) cannot guide whom you like, but Allah guides whom He wills. He knows the best of those who are guided
28|57|And they say: “If we follow the guidance with you, we shall be snatched away from our land.” Have We not established a secure sanctuary (Makkah) for them where all kinds of fruits are brought as a provision from Ourselves? But most of them don’t know
28|58|And how many towns We have destroyed which were thankless for their means of livelihood? Those residences of theirs have not been inhabited after them except a little. Surely! Allah is the Inheritor
28|59|And your Lord would never destroy the towns until He had sent a Messenger to their mother town, reciting to them Our Verses. We would never destroy the towns unless their people had become wrongdoers
28|60|And whatever you have been given from things are enjoyments and adornments of the worldly life; and that which is with Allah is better and will remain forever. Don’t you have sense
28|61|Is it he whom We have promised an excellent Promise (Paradise) which he will find true, be like the one whom We have given to enjoy the luxuries of the worldly life and then on the Day of Resurrection, he will be among those who are brought up (for punishment)
28|62|And (remember) the Day when He will call them and say: “Where are My partners (so-called) whom you used to assert?”
28|63|Those about whom the Word will come true (to be punished), will say: "Our Lord! These are they whom we led astray. We led them astray, as we were astray ourselves. We declare our innocence before You. It was not us that they worshipped.”
28|64|And it will be said (to them): “Call upon your partners (of Allah).” So they will call upon them but they will not answer to them and they will see the punishment. They will wish if they had been guided
28|65|And (remember) the Day (when Allah) will call them and says: “How did you answer the Messengers?”
28|66|The news (of good answer) will be obscured to them on that Day and they will not be able to ask one another
28|67|But as for him who repented, believed, and did righteous deeds, then hopefully he will be among those who are successful
28|68|Your Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses. They don’t have any choice. Glory be to Allah, and exalted about all that they associate (as partners with Him)
28|69|And your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal
28|70|And He is Allah: there is no one worthy of worship but He. Praise belongs to Him in the first (world) and in the Last (Hereafter). The decision is with Him and to Him you all shall return
28|71|Say (O Muhammad): “Do you see if Allah makes the night continuous for you till the Day of Resurrection, which deity besides Allah could bring you light? Will you not then hear?”
28|72|Say (O Muhammad): “Do you see if Allah makes the Day continuous for you till the Day of Resurrection, which deity besides Allah could bring you night in which you could rest? Will you not then see?”
28|73|It is out of His Mercy that He has made for you the night so that you may rest in it, and the day so that you may seek His Bounty, in order that you may be grateful
28|74|And (remember) the Day when He will call them (worshipped other than Allah) and say: “Where are My (so-called) partners whom you used to assert?”
28|75|And We will take out a witness from every nation and say: “Bring your proof (of other deities).” Then they shall know that the truth is with Allah and (false deities) will disappear from them which they invented
28|76|Surely, Korah was one of the people of Moses, but he behaved arrogantly towards them. And We gave him such treasures that indeed their keys were a burden to a group of strong men. When his people said to him: “Don’t be glad. Surely! Allah does not like those who exult (jubilant with riches and ungrateful)
28|77|Rather seek, with that (wealth) which Allah has given you, the home of the Hereafter, and don’t forget your portion of this world. Do good (to others) as Allah has been good to you and don’t seek mischief in the land. Surely, Allah does not like the mischief-makers.”
28|78|He said: “This has been given to me only because of the knowledge that I possess.” Did he (Korah) not know that Allah had destroyed many generations before him, who were stronger in might and greater in collecting (money) than him? But the criminals will not be questioned of their sins (because Allah knows well)
28|79|So (one day) he went out before his people in his pomp (worldly glitter). Those who were desirous of the worldly life, said: “Ah, would that we had the like of what Korah has been given! Surely! He is the owner of a great fortune.”
28|80|But those who had been given the knowledge (of truth) said: “Woe to you! The reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better for those who believe and do righteous deeds; and none shall attain it except those who are patient.”
28|81|Then We caused the earth to swallow him along with his residing place. He had no group to help him against Allah, nor was he of those who could save themselves
28|82|And those who had desired his position (of wealth) the day before began to say: “You don’t know that Allah enlarges the provision to whoever He pleases of His servants. If Allah had not been gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us also! You don’t know that the disbelievers will never be successful
28|83|As for the last home (of Paradise), We shall assign to those who neither want pride nor do mischief in the land. The good end is for the pious
28|84|Whoever brings a good deed, shall have the better from it. Whoever brings an evil deed, then those who do evil deeds, will be punished only for what they did
28|85|Surely, He Who has enjoined on you (O Muhammad) the Qur’an, will surely bring you to the best place of return. Say (O Muhammad): “My Lord is aware of the one who brings guidance and of the one who is in clear error.”
28|86|And you (O Muhammad) never expected that the book (this Qur’an) would be sent down to you, but it is a Mercy from your Lord. So never be a supporter of the disbelievers
28|87|And let them not turn you (O Muhammad) away from the Verses of Allah after when they have been sent down to you. Invite (people) to your Lord and be not of the polytheists
28|88|And don’t call Allah with any other one worthy of worship. There is no one worthy of worship but He. Everything will perish except Him. To Him belongs the decision and to Him you shall be returned
29|1|Alif-Lam-Meem
29|2|Do the people think that they will be left alone on saying: “We believe,” and that they will not be tested
29|3|And indeed We tested those who were before them. And Allah will certainly make it known those who are telling the truth and will certainly make it known those who are liars
29|4|Or do those who do evil deeds think that they can escape from Our reach? Evil is that which they judge
29|5|Whoever hopes for the meeting with Allah, and then surely Allah’s term is coming. Allah is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
29|6|And whoever strives, then strives only for oneself. Surely, Allah is Rich (not in any need) from all mankind and jinns
29|7|Those who believe and do righteous deeds, surely We shall remit their evil deeds from them and will reward them the best according to their deeds
29|8|And We have enjoined on people to be good to their parents; but if they (parents) strive against you to make you join (partners in worship) with Me of which you have no knowledge, then don’t obey them. To Me is your return and I shall tell you what you did
29|9|And those who believe and do righteous deeds, surely We shall make them enter among the righteous (in Paradise)
29|10|Some people are those who say: “We believe in Allah,” but if they are made to suffer in the cause of Allah, they confuse the trial of people as the punishment of Allah. But if victory comes from your Lord, they say: “Surely! We were with you.” Is not Allah fully aware of what is in the hearts (of the people) of the worlds
29|11|Surely, Allah knows those who believe, and surely, He knows the hypocrites
29|12|And those who disbelieve say to those who believe: “Follow our way and we will surely bear your sins.” They will not bear anything from their sins. Surely, they are liars
29|13|And surely, they shall bear their own loads and other loads with their own loads, and surely, they shall be questioned on the Day of Resurrection about their fabricated lies
29|14|And indeed Allah sent Noah to his people and he stayed among them a 1,000 years less 50 years. The flood overtook them as they were wrongdoers
29|15|Then We saved him and the people of the ship, and made it (the ship) a sign for the worlds
29|16|And (remember) Abraham when he said to his people: “Worship Allah and fear Him, that is better for you if you understand
29|17|You worship only idols besides Allah and you invent falsehood. Surely, those whom you worship besides Allah, don’t possess any power to give you any provision, so seek provision from Allah, worship Him, and be grateful to Him. To Him you will be brought back
29|18|And if you deny, then truly nations have denied before you. The duty of the Messenger is not but to convey (the message) plainly.”
29|19|Don’t they see how Allah originates the creation, and then repeats it? Surely, it is easy for Allah
29|20|Say: “Travel in the land and see how (Allah) originated the creation, then Allah will bring forth the creation last (of the Hereafter). Surely, Allah has power over everything
29|21|He punishes whom He wills, shows Mercy to whom He wills, and to Him you will be returned
29|22|And you cannot escape in the earth or in the heaven. And besides Allah you have neither any protector nor any helper
29|23|And those who disbelieve in the Verses of Allah and the meeting with Him, they have no hope of My Mercy and there will be a painful punishment for them
29|24|There was no answer of his (Abraham’s) people except that they said: “Kill him or burn him.” But Allah saved him from the fire. Surely, in this, there are signs for people who believe
29|25|And (Abraham) said: “You have taken (for worship) idols instead of Allah. The love between you is only in the worldly life; but on the Day of Resurrection, you shall disown each other, curse each other, your abode will be the fire, and you shall have no helper.”
29|26|So Lot believed in him (Abraham). (Abraham) said: “Surely, I will emigrate for the sake of my Lord. He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.”
29|27|We bestowed on him (Abraham), Isaac (son) and Jacob (grandson), and ordained Prophethood and the book in his offspring. We granted him his reward in this world, and in the Hereafter he will be among the righteous
29|28|And (remember) Lot, when he said to his people: “Surely you are committing the worst sin; no one has preceded you in committing it in the worlds
29|29|Surely, do you commit (sodomy) with men, rob travelers in the road, and practice every kind of evil deed in your gatherings?” But his people gave no answer except that they said: “Bring punishment of Allah upon us if you are one of the truthful.”
29|30|He (Lot) said: “My Lord! Help me against the corrupt people.”
29|31|And when Our Messengers (angels) came to Abraham with the glad tidings, they said: “Surely, we are going to destroy the people of this town, truly its people are wrongdoers.”
29|32|(Abraham) said: “But Lot is in there.” They (angels) said: “We know better who is in there, we will surely save him and his family, except his wife, she will be of those who remain behind.”
29|33|And when Our Messengers (angels) came to Lot, he was grieved because of them, felt distressed for them, and was unable (to protect them). They said: “Do no fear and don’t grieve! Truly, we shall save you and your family, except your wife, she will be of those who remain behind
29|34|Surely, we are about to bring down a great punishment from the sky on the people of this town because of what they have been acting immorally.”
29|35|And indeed Allah has left in it a Sign (the Dead Sea in Palestine) evident for people who understand
29|36|And to (the people of) Midian, (We sent) their brother Shuaib. He said: “O my people! Worship Allah, hope (reward of good deeds) for the Last Day, and don’t commit mischief on the earth as corrupt.”
29|37|But they denied him (Shuaib), so the earthquake seized them, and they became dead in their residences
29|38|And Ad and Thamud (people)! Indeed (their destruction) is clearly apparent to you from their (ruined) residences. Satan made their deeds seem fair to them, and turned them away from the Right Way, though they were intelligent
29|39|And (We destroyed) Korah, Pharaoh, and Haman. Indeed Moses came to them with clear evidences but they were arrogant in the land, and they could not escape Us
29|40|So We seized all of them for their sins, against some of them We sent a violent wind with shower of stones (the people of Lot), some of them were overtaken by awful cry (Thamud or Shuaib’s people), some of them We caused the earth to swallow (like Korah), and some of them We drowned (the people of Noah or Pharaoh and his people). It was not Allah Who wronged them, but they were doing wrong to themselves
29|41|The example of those who take protectors other than Allah is the example of a spider who builds (for itself) a house, but surely, the weakest of houses is the house of the spider; if they but knew
29|42|Surely, Allah knows what things they invoke instead of Him. He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
29|43|And these examples We put them forward for people, but none will grasp them except those who have knowledge
29|44|Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth. Surely! In that there is a sign for those who believe
29|45|Recite (O Muhammad) what has been revealed to you of the book (the Qur’an) and establish the prayer. Surely the prayer prevents from great sins and evil wicked deed, and surely the Remembrance of Allah is greater. And Allah knows what you do
29|46|And don’t argue with the people of the book except (in a way it is) better, except those of them who do wrong, and say (to them): “We believe in that which has been revealed to us and revealed to you; and our one worthy of worship and your one worthy of worship is One (Allah), and to Him we have submitted (as Muslims).”
29|47|And thus We have sent down to you (O Muhammad) the book (this Qur’an) (same way as the book to Moses and Jesus). So those whom We gave the Scripture believe in it, and some of those who believe in it, and none but the disbelievers reject Our Verses
29|48|Neither you (O Muhammad) have read any book before it (this Qur’an), nor have you written with your right hand. In that case, indeed, the followers of falsehood might have doubted
29|49|Nay, but these are clear signs in the hearts of those who are given the knowledge. None but the wrongdoers deny and reject Our Verses
29|50|And they say: “Why have the Verses not sent down to him from his Lord? Say: “The Verses are only with Allah, and verily I am only a plain Warner.”
29|51|Is it not sufficient for them that We have sent the book (the Qur’an) down to you which is recited to them? Surely, in that there is a Mercy and a reminder for people who believe
29|52|Say (to them O Muhammad): “Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and on earth. Those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in Allah, they are the losers.”
29|53|And they ask you to hasten on the punishment for them. Had it not been for a term appointed, the punishment would certainly have come to them. Surely, it will come upon them suddenly while they don’t perceive
29|54|They ask you to hasten on the punishment. Surely! Hell will surely encompass the disbelievers
29|55|On the Day when the punishment (hellfire) shall cover them from above and from underneath their feet, and a voice shall say: “Taste what you used to do.”
29|56|O My devotees who believe! Certainly, My earth is spacious (to migrate). Therefore worship Me
29|57|Every person shall taste the death. Then to Us you shall be returned
29|58|And those who believe and do righteous deeds, to them We shall surely give a lofty residing place from Paradise, underneath it rivers flow, to reside in it forever. Excellent is the reward of the workers
29|59|those who are patient and put their trust in their Lord
29|60|So many from living creatures don’t carry their own provisions! Allah provides for them and for you. He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
29|61|And if you were to ask them (disbelievers): “Who has created the heavens and the earth, and subjected the sun and the moon?” They will surely reply: “Allah.” How then are they deviating (from truth)
29|62|Allah enlarges the provision for whom He wills of His servants, and straitens it for whom (He wills). Surely, Allah is the All-Knower of everything
29|63|And if you were to ask them: “Who sends down water (rain) from the sky and gives life thereby to the earth after its death?” They will surely reply: “Allah.” Say: “All the praises are to Allah!” But most of them have no sense
29|64|This worldly life is nothing but amusement and play! Surely, the home of the Hereafter is indeed the life (that will never end), if they but knew
29|65|When they embark on a ship, they invoke Allah (during trouble) making their religion pure for Him only. But when He brings them safely to land, behold, they join (give credit to) others in worship (besides Allah)
29|66|so that they become ungrateful for that which We have given them, and that they take enjoyment. But they will come to know
29|67|Do they not see that We have made (Makkah) a secure sanctuary while the people from all around them are being snatched away? Then do they (still) believe in false deities, and deny the Graces of Allah
29|68|And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a residence in hell for the disbelievers
29|69|As for those who strive hard in Our Cause, We will surely guide them to Allah’s ways. And surely, Allah is with the good doers
30|1|Alif-Lam-Meem
30|2|The Romans (Christians) have been defeated (by the Persians - idol worshippers)
30|3|in the nearest land (of Syria), but after their defeat, they (Allah revealed to Muhammad that Romans) will be victorious
30|4|within a few years. Allah is in command with the matter before (the defeat of the Romans by Persians in 615 CE) and after (the defeat of Persians by Romans in 625 CE). On that day, the believers will rejoice (for victory)
30|5|with the help of Allah. He helps whom He wills, and He is the Mighty, the Merciful
30|6|(It is) the Promise of Allah and Allah does not fail in His Promise, but most people don’t know
30|7|They only know the outside appearance of the life of the world, and they are heedless of the Hereafter
30|8|Don’t they think in their own minds that Allah has created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them with truth and for an appointed term? Indeed many of mankind denies the meeting with their Lord (on the Day of Resurrection)
30|9|Don’t they travel in the land and see how the end of those before them was? They were superior to them in strength, they tilled the earth and populated it in greater numbers than what these (pagans) have populated, and there came to them their Messengers with clear signs. Surely, Allah did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves
30|10|Then evil was the end of those who did evil because they denied the Verses of Allah and made a mockery of them
30|11|Allah (alone) originates the creation, then He repeats it, then to Him you will be returned
30|12|And on the Day when the Hour (of Judgment) will be established, the criminals will be plunged into destruction with deep regret
30|13|No intercessor they will have from their partners (whom they made equal with Allah) and they (themselves) will reject their partners
30|14|And on the Day when the Hour (of Judgment) will be established, people will be separated that Day (believers will be separated from the disbelievers)
30|15|Then as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, they shall be honored and made to enjoy luxurious life forever in a garden of delight (Paradise)
30|16|As for those who disbelieved, denied Our Verses, and the meeting of the Hereafter, they will be brought forth for punishment (of hell fire)
30|17|So glorify Allah when you come up to the evening and when you enter the morning
30|18|And all praises and thanks are to Him in the heavens and the earth, so glorify Him in the afternoon and when you come up to the time, when the day begins to decline
30|19|Allah brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living. And He revives the earth after its death. And thus you shall be brought out (resurrected)
30|20|And among His signs, one is that He created you from dust, then behold you are human beings scattered (in the world)
30|21|And among His signs, another one is that He created for you wives from among yourselves so that you may find comfort with them and He has put affection and mercy between you. Surely, there are signs for a people who think
30|22|And among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the difference of your languages and colors. Surely, there are signs for people of sound knowledge
30|23|And among His signs is the sleep (you take) by night and your seeking of His Bounty by day. Surely, there are signs for a people who listen
30|24|And among His signs is that He shows you the lightning by way of fear and hope, He sends down water (rain) from the sky, and with it revives (gives life) the earth after its death. Surely, there are signs for a people who understand
30|25|And among His signs are that the heaven and the earth stand by His Command, then when He will call you by single call, behold, you will come out from the earth (from your graves for reckoning)
30|26|To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. All are obedient to Him
30|27|And it is He Who originates the creation, then repeats it, and this is easy for Him. To Him belongs the highest example in the heavens and in the earth. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
30|28|He sets forth an example for you from your own lives. Do you let those whom your right hands possess (your captives) be as partners in (to share your wealth equally) what We have bestowed on you? Then do you fear them in it (possession) as you fear each other? Thus We explain the Verses in details to a people who have sense
30|29|Nay, but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge. Then who will guide them whom Allah has sent astray? They will have no helpers
30|30|So set (O Muhammad) your face towards the religion being upright nature of Allah with which He has created mankind, there is no change in the creation (of laws) of Allah. That is the right religion, but most of mankind don’t know
30|31|Turn (in repentance) to Him, fear Him, establish the prayer, and don’t be of the polytheists
30|32|those who split up their religion and become sects, each party rejoicing in its own circle
30|33|And when a harm touches people, they cry to their Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But when He gives them a taste of His Mercy, behold! a party of them associate (partners in worship) with their Lord
30|34|be ungrateful for what We have bestowed on them. Then enjoy (your short life); soon you will come to know
30|35|Or have We revealed to them a Scripture, which speaks of that which they have been associating with Him
30|36|And when We cause mankind to taste of Mercy, they rejoice in it, but when an evil afflicts them because of (evil deeds) what their hands have sent forth, then they are in despair
30|37|Don’t they see that Allah enlarges the provision for whom He wills and straitens (for whom He wills). Surely, there are signs for a people who believe
30|38|(O believers) give what is due to your relative, the poor, and the wayfarer. That is best for those who seek the pleasure of Allah and it is they who will be successful
30|39|And that interest which you give in order that it may increase in wealth of other people, does not increase with Allah; but that which you give as obligatory charity seeking the pleasure of Allah, shall have manifold increase
30|40|It is Allah Who has created you, then provides (sustenance) for you, then will cause you to die, then He will give you life (on the Day of Resurrection). Is there any of your partners (of Allah) who can do any of these things? Glory be to Him! Exalted is He above all that evil they associate (with Him)
30|41|Evil (sins and disobedience of Allah) has appeared in the land and the sea because of what the hands of people (have earned). He may make them taste a part of that which they have done in order that they may return (from evil)
30|42|Say (O Muhammad): “Travel in the land and see how was the end of those before you! Most of them were polytheists.”
30|43|So you (O Muhammad) set your face to the right religion before there comes a Day from Allah which none can avert it. On that Day they (people) shall be divided (in 2 groups - a group in Paradise and a group in hell)
30|44|Those who disbelieved will suffer from their disbelief, and those who have done righteous deeds will prepare a good place (in Paradise) for themselves
30|45|so that He may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds, out of His Bounty. Surely, He does not like the disbelievers
30|46|And among His Signs is that He sends the winds as glad tidings, give you a taste of His Mercy, the ships may sail at His Command, and that you may seek of His Bounty, in order that you may be thankful
30|47|And indeed We did send Messengers before you (O Muhammad) to their own people. They came to them with clear proofs. Then We took revenge on those who committed crimes and it was incumbent upon Us to help the believers
30|48|It is Allah Who sends the winds to raise the clouds, then spreads them in the sky as He wills, then breaks them into fragments, until you see (rain) drops come forth from their midst! And when He makes them fall with it on whom He wills of His servants, lo! They rejoice
30|49|surely before that (rain) is sent down upon them, they were in despair
30|50|Look at the effects of Mercy of Allah, how He revives (gives life) the earth after its death. Surely! That is He who will raise the dead (on the Day of Resurrection), and He is Able (has power) on every thing
30|51|And if We send a wind and they see (their crops) turn yellow, behold, then they disbelieve (more) after it
30|52|So surely you (O Muhammad) can neither make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they (disbelievers) turn their backs and turn away
30|53|nor you can guide the blind from their straying. None will hear you except those who believe in Our Signs and submit to Allah in Islam (as Muslims)
30|54|It is Allah Who has created you in weakness (as a baby), then gave you strength after weakness (in youth), then gave after strength weakness and grey hair (in old age). He creates what He wills. And He is All-Knower, the All-Mighty
30|55|On the Day when the Hour (of Judgment) will be established, the criminals will swear that they did not stay (in the world) but an Hour, thus they are ever deluded (away from truth)
30|56|And those who are bestowed with knowledge and faith will say: “Indeed you have stayed in the decree of Allah, until the Day of Resurrection, so this is the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know.”
30|57|So on that Day, no excuse of theirs will benefit those who did wrong nor will they be allowed to return to seek Allah’s pleasure
30|58|Indeed We have set forth every example for mankind in this Qur’an. But if you (O Muhammad) bring any sign to them, those who disbelieve will say (to the believers): “Surely you are nothing but preaching falsehood.”
30|59|Thus Allah has set a seal on the hearts of those who don’t know
30|60|So be patient (O Muhammad). Surely, the Promise of Allah is true, and let not those who have no certainty of faith discourage you (from conveying Allah’s message)
31|1|Alif-Lam-Meem
31|2|These are the Verses of the wise book (the Qur’an)
31|3|a guide and a Mercy for the righteous
31|4|those who establish the prayer, give obligatory charity, and have firm faith in the Hereafter
31|5|These are on guidance from their Lord, and such are they who will the successful
31|6|And of mankind there are some who purchase idle talks to mislead from the Way of Allah without knowledge, and takes it (the Way of Allah) as a mockery. For such people there will be a humiliating punishment
31|7|And when Our Verses (of the Qur’an) are recited to such people, they turn away in pride, as if they did not hear them, as if there is deafness in their ear. So announce to them a painful punishment
31|8|Surely, those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them are gardens of delight (Paradise)
31|9|to abide forever in it. It is a Promise of Allah in truth. And He is the Mighty, the Wise
31|10|He has created the heavens without any pillars that you see, has set firm mountains on the earth lest it should shake with you. And He has scattered in it all kinds of animals. And We send down water (rain) from the sky and We cause plants of every noble kind to grow in it
31|11|This is the creation of Allah. So show Me which those (false deities) besides Him have created? Nay, the wrongdoers are in plain error
31|12|And indeed We bestowed upon Luqman the wisdom (saying): “Give thanks to Allah,” and those who give thanks, they only give thanks for their own self. And whoever is ungrateful (should know that) surely Allah is Rich, Praise-Worthy
31|13|And (remember) when Luqman was advising his son, said to him: “O my son! Don’t join in worship others with Allah. Surely! Joining others in worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed.”
31|14|And We have enjoined on people (to be dutiful) to their parents. Each mother carries her child in her womb while suffering in weakness and hardship upon weakness and hardship, and then weans the child in 2 years that: “You give thanks to Me and to your parents, to Me is the final destination
31|15|If they both strive against you to make you join in worship others with Me of which you have no knowledge, then don’t obey them; but behave with them kindly in this world, and follow the way of those who turn to Me in repentance and in obedience. To Me will be your return, and I shall tell you what you have done.”
31|16|(Luqman said): “O my son! Indeed if it (anything) is equal to the weight of a grain of mustard seed, and though it is in a rock, or in the heavens or in the earth, Allah will bring it out. Surely, Allah is Subtle (able to make fine distinction), Well-Aware (of all things)
31|17|O my son! Establish the prayer, enjoin good, forbid evil, and bear with patience whatever befalls you. Surely! These are some of the important commandments
31|18|And don’t turn your face away (with pride) from people, nor walk in pride on the earth. Surely, Allah does not like any arrogant boaster
31|19|And be moderate (no pride) in your walking and lower your voice. Surely, the harshest of all voices is indeed the voice of the donkey.”
31|20|Don’t you see that Allah has subjected for you whatever is in the heavens and in the earth, and has completed His Graces upon you, (both) apparent (seen) and hidden (unseen)? Yet, there are some people who dispute about Allah without knowledge or guidance or a book giving light
31|21|When it is said to them: “Follow that which Allah has sent down,” they say: “Nay, we shall follow which we found our forefathers following.” (They will follow) even if Satan invites them to punishment of the fire
31|22|And those who submit their faces to Allah while they are righteous people, then indeed they have grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold. And to Allah all matters return
31|23|Those who disbelieve, let their disbelief not grieve you (O Muhammad). To Us is their return and We shall inform them what they have done. Surely, Allah is the All-Knower of what are in the hearts (of people)
31|24|We let them enjoy for a little while (in this world), then We shall oblige them to enter a great punishment (in the Hereafter)
31|25|And if you (O Muhammad) ask them: “Who has created the heavens and the earth?” They will certainly say: “Allah.” Say: “All the praises and thanks are to Allah!” But most of them don’t know
31|26|To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, Allah is the One Who is Rich (free of all wants), Praise-Worthy
31|27|And if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea (were ink to write) with 7 more seas behind it (supply), yet (the writing of the) Words of Allah would not be exhausted. Surely, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
31|28|Neither your creation nor your Resurrection is anything but as that of a single person. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer
31|29|Don’t you (O Muhammad) see that Allah merges the night into the day and merges the day into the night, and has subjected the sun and the moon (to follow the commandment of Allah), each running (its course) for an appointed term; and that Allah is All-Aware of all that you do
31|30|That is because Allah is the Truth and all those which they invoke besides Him are false, and He is the High, the Great
31|31|Don’t you see how the ships sail through the sea by the Grace of Allah so that He may show you His Signs? Surely, there are signs for every patient, grateful (person)
31|32|When a wave covers them like a shade, they invoke Allah with sincerity in faith to Him only. But when He brings them safe to land, there are some among them who stop in the middle (between belief and disbelief). But none denies Our Signs except every ungrateful traitor
31|33|O mankind! Be afraid and dutiful to your Lord and fear a Day when no father shall avail for his son or a son shall avail for his father anything. Surely, the Promise of Allah is true. Let not the worldly life deceives you, nor let the chief deceiver (Satan) deceive you about Allah
31|34|Surely, with Allah is the knowledge of the Hour, He sends down the rain, and knows what is in the wombs. No one knows what he will earn tomorrow, and no one knows in what land he will die. Surely, Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware of everything
32|1|Alif-Lam-Meem
32|2|The book (the Qur’an) in which there is no doubt, is revealed from the Lord of the worlds
32|3|Or do they say: “He (Muhammad) has fabricated it?” Nay, it is the truth from your Lord so that you (O Muhammad) may warn people to whom no Warner has come before you, in order that they may be guided
32|4|It is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them in 6 days. Then He rose over the Throne (to suit Majesty). You (people) have no protector or intercessor besides Him. Will you not then remember
32|5|He manages every affair from the heavens to the earth; then each affair goes up to Him in one day, the period of which is 1,000 years of what you count (as worldly time)
32|6|That is He, the All-Knower of all the unseen and the seen, the All-Mighty, the Merciful
32|7|It is He Who has made everything good that He has created. He began the creation of human from clay
32|8|then He made human’s offspring from semen of worthless water
32|9|then He fashioned human in due proportion, and breathed into human the soul (created by Allah). He gave you hearing (ears), sight (eyes) and hearts. Little is what thanks you give
32|10|And they say: “When we are (dead and become) lost in the earth, shall we be created new?” Nay, but they deny the Meeting with their Lord
32|11|Say: “The angel of death (Izra’il) who is set over you, will take your souls and then you will be returned to your Lord.”
32|12|And if only you could see when the criminals will hang their heads before their Lord (saying): “Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back (to the world) and we will do righteous deeds. Surely! We now believe with certainty.”
32|13|And it will be said: “If We had willed, surely! We could have given every one its guidance. But the Word from Me took effect (about evil-doers) that I will fill hell with jinn and mankind together
32|14|Now you taste (the punishment of the fire) because of your forgetting the meeting of this Day, surely! We too have forgotten you; you taste the continuous punishment for what you did.”
32|15|Only those who believe in Our Signs, when they are reminded of them, fall down prostrate, glorify the praises of their Lord, and are not proud
32|16|Their sides forsake their beds, they invoke their Lord in fear and hope, and they spend (in Our Cause) out of what We have bestowed on them
32|17|No one knows what is kept hidden for them of the joy of their eyes as a reward for what (good) they did
32|18|Can the one who is a believer be like the one who is a sinner? They are not equal
32|19|As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them are gardens (Paradise) as shelter to reside for what they did
32|20|But those who have sinned, their abode will be the fire. Every time they wish to get away from it, they will be put back in it, and it will be said to them: “You taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny.”
32|21|And surely, We will make them taste the lighter punishment (in this life) before the greater punishment (in the Hereafter), so that they may return (to the Right Way)
32|22|And who does more wrong than the one who is reminded of the Verses of his Lord and then he turns aside from them? Surely, We shall take retribution from the criminals
32|23|And indeed, We gave Moses the Scripture (the Torah). So don’t be in doubt of his receiving it. And We made it (the Torah) a guide for the children of Israel
32|24|And We made leaders from among them (children of Israel) giving guidance under Our Command as long as they were patient and used to believe with certainty in Our Verses
32|25|Surely, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning what they differed
32|26|Is it not guidance for them of how many previous generations We have destroyed before them in whose residences they walk about? Surely, there are signs. Would they not listen
32|27|Don’t they see how We drive water (rain) to the dry land without any vegetation and bring forth crops with it which they and their cattle eat? Will they not then see
32|28|They say: “When will this decision (Judgment) happen if you are telling the truth?”
32|29|Say (O Muhammad): “On the Day of decision, no benefit will be to the disbelievers, nor they will be granted respite.”
32|30|So turn aside from them (O Muhammad) and await, surely they are waiting
33|1|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Fear Allah; don’t obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Surely! Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
33|2|Follow that which is revealed to you from your Lord. Surely, Allah is well acquainted with what you do
33|3|And put your trust in Allah, and Allah is sufficient as a trustee
33|4|Allah has not put 2 hearts in one person’s body. Neither has He made your wives whom you declare (divorce) through Zihar to be like your mother’s backs, (Zihar is the saying of a husband to his wife: "you are to me like the back of my mother" i.e. you are unlawful for me to approach, deprive her rights and keep her like a captive and don’t let her marry anyone else) as your real mothers, nor has He made your adopted sons your real sons. That is your saying with your mouths. But Allah says the truth, and He guides to the Right Way
33|5|Call them (adopted sons) by (the names of) their fathers, that is more just with Allah. But if you don’t know their fathers, (call them) your brothers in the religion and your friends. There is no sin on you if you make a mistake in it, except what your hearts deliberately intend. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
33|6|The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves, and his wives are their (believers’) mothers. Those who are blood relations, some of them are closer to each other in the Decree of Allah (regarding inheritance) than (the brotherhood of) the believers and the emigrants (from Makkah to Madinah), except that you do kindness to your brothers. This has been written in the book (of divine Decrees)
33|7|And (remember) when We took the covenant from the prophets, from you (O Muhammad), from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, son of Mary. We took from them a strong covenant
33|8|so that He may ask the truthful (Messengers) about their truth. And He has prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers
33|9|O you who believe! Remember the Favor of Allah to you, when hosts (enemy) came against you and We sent winds and forces (invisible angels) against them that you did not see (during the battle of Trench). And Allah is All-Seer of what you do
33|10|When they (enemy) came upon you from above and from below; when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached the throats, and you were entertaining all doubts about Allah
33|11|there, the believers were tested and shaken with a mighty shake
33|12|And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts there was a disease (doubt) said: “Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion (deception)!”
33|13|And a party of them said: “O people of Madinah! There is no stand for you (against the enemy attack!). Therefore go back!” Another band of them asked permission of the prophet saying: “Truly, our homes lie open (to the enemy),” they were not secure. They wished nothing but to flee (from battle)
33|14|And if (the enemy) had entered on them from all its (the city) sides and they had been exhorted to trial (renegade from Islam to polytheism), they would have committed it and would not have little hesitation in it
33|15|And indeed they had already made a covenant with Allah not to turn their backs, and a covenant with Allah must be answered for
33|16|Say (O Muhammad to these hypocrites who ask your permission to run away from you): “Flight (run away) will not avail you if you flee from death or killing, and you will enjoy a little (while in this world)!”
33|17|Say: “Who can protect you from Allah if He intends to harm you, or intends to show you Mercy?” They will not find for themselves other than Allah, a protector or a helper
33|18|Allah already knows those from among you who keep back (people) from fighting (in Allah’s cause), and those who say to their brothers: “Come here towards us,” while they (themselves) don’t come to the battle except a few
33|19|they are miserly towards you (to help in Allah’s cause). When fear comes (to them), you will see them looking to you, revolving their eyes as if their deaths hover over them, but when the fear departs, they will smite you with sharp tongues, become miserly towards (spending on) good. Such people have not believed. Therefore Allah makes their deeds fruitless, and that is very easy for Allah
33|20|They thought that the confederates would not withdraw. If the confederates should come again, they would wish if they were in the deserts (wandering) among the Bedouins and ask about your news (from a safe distance); and if they happen to be among you, they would not fight but a little
33|21|Indeed, you have in the Messenger of Allah (Muhammad) the ‘best example’ (to follow) for those who hope to (meet with) Allah, the Last Day, and remember Allah much
33|22|And when the believers saw the confederates, they said: “This is what Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) had promised us, and Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad) had spoken the truth.” It increased them in faith and obedience (to Allah)
33|23|Among the believers there are people who have been true to their covenant with Allah, some of them have fulfilled their obligations (sacrificed their lives), and some of them are still waiting, but they have never changed (their covenant) in the least
33|24|Allah may reward the people of truth for their truth, and punish the hypocrites if He wills or forgive them. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
33|25|And Allah drove back those who disbelieved in their rage; they did not gain any advantage. Allah is sufficient for the believers in the fighting. And Allah is All-Strong, All-Mighty
33|26|Those people of the Scripture (Jews of Bani Quraizah) who backed them (the invaders); Allah brought them down from their forts and cast fear into their hearts. So a group you killed and a group you made captives
33|27|And thus He made you to inherit their lands, their houses, their riches, and the land (Khaibar) which you had not frequented (before). Allah is Able to do all things
33|28|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Say to your wives: “If you desire the worldly life and its glitter, then come, I shall make you a provision and set you free (divorce) in an honorable way.”
33|29|But if you desire Allah and His Messenger, and the home of the Hereafter; then surely, Allah has prepared a great reward for the righteous people amongst you
33|30|O wives of the prophet! Whoever of you commits an open illegal sexual intercourse, her punishment will be doubled and that is easy for Allah
33|31|Whoever of you (wives of the Prophet) is obedient to Allah and His Messenger, and does righteous deeds, We shall grant her double reward, and We have prepared a noble provision for her
33|32|O wives of the prophet! You are not like any other women. If you fear Allah, then don’t be soft in speech (to men not related), lest the one in whose heart there is a disease (of hypocrisy, or evil desire) may be moved with desire in his heart, but speak good words
33|33|Stay in your homes and don’t display yourselves like that of the times of the first ignorance (pre-Islamic days); establish prayer, give obligatory charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. O members of the family (of the prophet), Allah only wishes to remove evil deeds from you and to purify you perfectly
33|34|And remember the Verses of Allah and the wisdom (Prophet’s sayings) which are recited in your houses, surely, Allah is Courteous, Well-Acquainted
33|35|Surely, the Muslim men and the Muslim women, the believing men and the believing women, the obedient men and the obedient women, the truthful men and the truthful women, the patient men and the patient women, the humble men and the humble women, the charitable men and the charitable women, the fasting men and the fasting women, the men who guard their chastity and the women who guard it, the men who remember Allah much and the women who remember Allah - for all of them, Allah has prepared forgiveness and a great reward (Paradise)
33|36|It is not proper for a believing man or a believing woman to have any option for them in their decision when Allah and His Messenger have decreed a matter. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, has indeed strayed into clear error
33|37|And (remember) when you (Muhammad) said to him (Zaid, prophet’s adopted son) on whom Allah has bestowed Grace (by guiding to Islam) and you too have done favor (by freeing from captivity): “Keep your wife to yourself and fear Allah.” But you did hide in yourself what (Allah has already made known to you that He will give her (Zaid’s wife) to you in marriage) Allah will make it clear and you did fear the people (that Muhammad married the divorced wife of his captive) whereas Allah had a better right that you should fear Him. So when Zaid had performed the necessary formality (divorced her), We gave her to you in marriage, so that (in future) there may be no blame on the believers in respect of the wives of their adopted sons, when the latter have performed the necessary formality (divorced) from them. And the Command of Allah must be fulfilled
33|38|There is no blame on the prophet in that which Allah has made legal for him. That is the Way of Allah with those who have passed away before. And the Command of Allah is a decree preordained
33|39|Those who convey the message of Allah and fear Him, don’t fear anyone except Allah. Allah is sufficient as a Reckoner (to take account)
33|40|Muhammad is not the father of any of your men (he will not leave any son), but he is the Messenger of Allah and the Last of the prophets. Allah is All-Aware of everything
33|41|O you who believe! Remember Allah with much remembrance
33|42|and glorify His Praises morning and afternoon
33|43|It is Allah Who sends blessings on you (believers), and (also) His angels, so that He may bring you out from darkness into light. And He is Merciful to the believers
33|44|Their greeting on the Day they shall meet Allah will be: “Peace!” And Allah has prepared for them a generous reward (Paradise)
33|45|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Surely, We have sent you as a witness and a bearer of good news and a Warner
33|46|and a caller to Allah by His permission, and as a lamp spreading light (guidance)
33|47|And give glad tidings to the believers that there is a great Bounty for them from Allah
33|48|And don’t obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites and disregard their harm. Put your trust in Allah and Allah is sufficient as a Trustee
33|49|O you who believe! When you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have sexual intercourse with them, you don’t count on them Iddah (waiting period after divorce) in respect of them. So give them a present and set them free (divorce) in an honorable way
33|50|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Surely, We have made lawful to you: your wives to whom you have paid their bridal money (given by husband to wife at the time of marriage); those (captives) whom your right hand possesses - whom Allah has given to you; the daughters of your paternal uncles and aunts, the daughters of your maternal uncles and aunts who have migrated (from Makkah) with you; a believing woman if she offers herself to the prophet and if the Prophet wishes to marry her - a privilege for you (only) other than the believers. Indeed We know what We have enjoined upon them (believers) about their wives and those (captives) whom their right hands possess, in order that there should be no difficulty on you. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
33|51|You (O Muhammad) can postpone (the turn for your company) whom you will of them (your wives), and you may receive to you whom you will. There is no sin on you if you desire any of those whom you have set aside (temporarily). It is better that their eyes may be cooled and they don’t grieve, and may be pleased with what you give all of them. And Allah knows what is in your hearts. Allah is All-Knowing, Forbearing
33|52|It is not lawful for you (O Muhammad) to marry more women after this, or to change them (present wives) for other wives even though their beauty attracts you, except those (captives) whom your right hand possesses. Allah is a Watcher over all things
33|53|O you who believe! Don’t enter the houses of the prophet, except when permission is given to you for a meal, and then don’t wait for its preparation. But when you are invited, then enter and when you have taken your meal, then disperse, without sitting for a talk. Surely, such behavior annoys the prophet, he is shy in asking you to leave, but Allah is not shy of telling you the truth. When you ask them (his wives) for anything, ask them from behind a curtain. This is purer for your hearts and for their hearts. It is not proper for you to annoy the Messenger of Allah, nor that you should ever marry his wives after him (his death). Surely! With Allah that would be a grievous offence
33|54|Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, surely, Allah is All-Knower of everything
33|55|There is no sin on them (Prophet’s wives, if they appear unveiled) before their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brother’s sons, their sister’s sons, their own (believing) women, those whom their right hand possesses (their female captives), fear Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Witness over everything
33|56|Indeed Allah and His angels send blessings on the prophet (Muhammad). O you who believe! Send your blessings on him (Muhammad) and greet him with greetings (Assalamu Alaikum)
33|57|Surely, those who annoy Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and in the Hereafter and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment
33|58|Those who annoy believing men and believing women without any fault of theirs, then indeed they shall bear the crime of slander and plain sin
33|59|O Prophet! Tell your wives, your daughters, and the believing women to draw their veils over them. That is better so that they will be recognized and not annoyed. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
33|60|If the hypocrites, those in whose hearts there is a disease (of evil desires), and those who spread false news among the people in Madinah, don’t desist, We shall let you overpower them, then they will not be able to stay in the city as your neighbors but for a little while
33|61|They shall be cursed wherever they are found; they shall be seized, and killed with a (terrible) slaughter
33|62|This has been the Way of Allah in the case of those who passed away before and you will never find a change in the Way of Allah
33|63|People ask you about the Hour (of Judgment), say: “The knowledge of it is with Allah. What do you know? It may be that the Hour is near!”
33|64|Surely, Allah has cursed the disbelievers and has prepared for them a flaming fire (hell)
33|65|They will abide in it forever. Neither will they find a protector nor a helper
33|66|On the Day when their faces will be turned over in the fire, they will say: “Oh, would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger (Muhammad).”
33|67|And they will also say: “Our Lord! Surely, we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones, and they misled us from the Right Way
33|68|Our Lord! Give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse!”
33|69|O you who believe! Be not like those who annoyed Moses, but Allah cleared him of that which they alleged, and he was honorable with Allah
33|70|O you who believe! Fear Him and speak the truth
33|71|He will bless your deeds and forgive your sins. Those who obey Allah and His Messenger, they have indeed won a great victory
33|72|Truly, We did offer the trust (of moral responsibility, honesty, and all duties which Allah has ordained) to the heavens, the earth, and the mountains, but they declined to undertake it and were afraid of (punishment) it. But human undertook it. Surely, human was unjust (to themselves) and ignorant (of results)
33|73|Allah will punish the hypocrites, men and women, and those men and women who associate partners with Allah. And Allah will pardon the believing men and the believing women. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
34|1|All the praises be to Allah to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. To Whom be all the praises and thanks in the Hereafter. And He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware
34|2|He knows that which goes into the earth and that which comes out from it, and that which comes down from the heaven and that which goes up to it. And He is the Merciful, the Forgiving
34|3|Those who disbelieve say: “The Hour (of Judgment) will not come to us.” Say: “Yes, by my Lord, it will surely come to you. He knows all the unseen, not even the weight of an atom escapes from His knowledge in the heavens or in the earth; nor there is anything smaller or greater than that, but is recorded in the clear book.”
34|4|He will reward those who believe and do righteous deeds. They are those for whom there is forgiveness and a generous provision
34|5|But those who strive against Our Revelations to frustrate them, there will be a severe painful punishment for them
34|6|And those who have been given the knowledge can see that the revelations sent to you (O Muhammad) from your Lord are the truth, and it guides to the Way of the Exalted in Might, Owner of all praise
34|7|Those who disbelieve say: “Shall we direct you to a man (Muhammad) who will tell you that when you will become fully disintegrated (after death into dust) with full dispersion, then surely you will be created new (again)?”
34|8|Has he (Muhammad) invented a lie against Allah, or is there madness in him? Nay, but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are in punishment, and in gross error
34|9|Don’t they see what is before them and what is behind them in the heaven and the earth? If We will, We can sink the earth with them, or cause a piece of the heaven to fall upon them. Surely, there is a sign for every believer who turns to Allah in repentance
34|10|Indeed We bestowed grace on David (saying): “O mountains! Glorify (Allah) with him!” The birds also! And We made the iron soft for him
34|11|(saying) that: “You make perfect coats of mail armor and balance well (the rings) of chain armor, and you do righteous deeds. Truly, I am All-Seer of what you do.”
34|12|And to Solomon (We subjected) the wind, its morning (sunrise to mid noon) was a month’s (journey), and its afternoon (midday to sunset) was a month’s (journey). And We caused a spring of (molten) brass to flow for him, the jinn worked in front of him by the permission of his Lord, and if any of them turned aside from Our Command; We caused him to taste the punishment of the blazing fire
34|13|They worked for him what he desired of making high rooms, images, basins as large as reservoirs, and cooking fixed (in their places) vat. (We said): “O family of David! You work with thanks!” But few of My devotees are grateful
34|14|When We decreed death for him (Solomon was leaning on his stick), no one informed the jinns of his death until a little termite of the earth chew away his stick and he fell down. The jinns saw clearly that if they had known the unseen, they would not have stayed in the humiliating punishment (of their task)
34|15|Indeed for the people of Sheba (a town in Yemen) there was a sign in their residing place: 2 gardens - one on the right and one on the left. (It was said to them): “Eat of the provision of your Lord and be grateful to Him, a fair land and a Forgiving Lord.”
34|16|But they turned away (from Allah). So We sent against them a flood of Arim (released water from the dam), and We converted their 2 gardens into gardens producing bitter fruits, shrubs, and some few lote-trees
34|17|This is how We punished them because they were ungrateful (disbelievers). And We never punish except those who are ungrateful
34|18|And We placed between them and between the towns which We had blessed, towns easy to be seen, and We made easy stages of journey between them (saying): “Travel in them safely night and day.”
34|19|But they said: “Our Lord! Make the stages longer between our journeys.” They wronged themselves, so We made them (in the land) as tales, and We dispersed them in a total scattering. Surely, there are signs for every patient, grateful person
34|20|And indeed Satan did prove its thought true about them and they all followed him except a group of believers
34|21|And there was no authority for him (Satan) over them except that We might test him who believes in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt about it. Your Lord is watching over everything
34|22|Say (O Muhammad to those polytheists): “Call upon those (deities) whom you assert besides Allah, they don’t possess even the weight of an atom in the heavens or on the earth, nor they have any share in either, nor there is any supporter from among them for Him.”
34|23|No intercession with Him profits anyone except for the one whom He permits. Until when the fear will be removed from their hearts, they (angels) shall say: “What your Lord has said?” They say: “The Truth.” Allah is the High, the Great
34|24|Say (O Muhammad to these polytheists): “Who gives you provision from the heavens and the earth?” Say: “Allah, and surely, (either) we or you are on guidance or in a plain error.”
34|25|Say (O Muhammad to these polytheists): “You will not be asked about our sins, nor we will be asked about your deeds.”
34|26|Say: “Our Lord will assemble us all together (on the Day of Resurrection), then He will judge between us with truth. And He is the Trust-worthy judge, All-Knower of everything.”
34|27|Say (O Muhammad to these polytheists): “Show me those whom you have joined with Him as partners. Nay! But He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.”
34|28|And We have sent you (O Muhammad) as a giver of glad tidings and a Warner for all mankind, but most of people don’t know
34|29|And they say: “When is this Promise (the Day of Resurrection will be fulfilled) if you are truthful?”
34|30|Say (O Muhammad): “The appointment Day is fixed, which you can neither put back from it for an Hour nor put forward.”
34|31|And those who disbelieve say: “We don’t believe in this Qur’an nor in that which came before it.” If you could see when the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, how they will refer the blaming word some of them to others! Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: “Had it not been for you, we would certainly have been believers!”
34|32|And those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak: “Did we keep you back from guidance after when it had come to you? Nay, but you yourself were sinners.”
34|33|Those who were deemed weak will say to those who were arrogant: “Nay, but it was you who plotted night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him!” They will conceal their own regret (for disobeying Allah in this world) when they will see the punishment. And We shall put iron collars round the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they rewarded exactly for what they did
34|34|And whenever We have sent a Warner to a town, its wealthy people said: “Surely we don’t believe in (the message) what you are sent with.”
34|35|And they say: “We have more wealth and children (our deities are happy), and we shall not be punished.”
34|36|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, my Lord enlarges and restricts the provision to whom He wills, but most people don’t know.”
34|37|It is neither your wealth, nor your children that bring you nearer to Us. But those who believe, and do righteous deeds; for such, they will have double reward for what they did, and they will reside in the high residences (Paradise) in peace and security
34|38|And those who strive against Our Verses to frustrate them, the punishment will be brought to them
34|39|Say: “Truly, my Lord enlarges the provision for whom He wills of His servants, and also restricts it for some. Whatever you spend of anything (for Allah), He will replace it. And He is the best of providers.”
34|40|And (remember) the Day when He will gather them all together and then will say to the angels: “Was it you that these people used to worship?”
34|41|They (angels) will say: “Glory be to You! You are our Lord instead of them. Nay, but they used to worship the jinns; most of them were believers in them.”
34|42|So today (the Day of Resurrection) none of you has power to profit or harm one another. And We shall say to those who did wrong: “Taste the punishment of the fire which you denied.”
34|43|And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, they say: “This man (Muhammad) wishes to hinder you from that which your forefathers used to worship.” Others say: “This is nothing but an invented lie.” Those who disbelieve in the truth when it has come to them say: “This is nothing but plain magic!”
34|44|And We had neither given them Scriptures to study, nor sent to them any Warner (Messenger) before you (O Muhammad)
34|45|And those who were before them denied; they have not received 1/10th of what We had granted to them, yet they denied My Messengers, then see how was My punishment
34|46|Say (O Muhammad to them): “I urge you on one thing only that you stand up for Allah’s sake in pairs and individually, and then ponder (yourself the history of Muhammad), is there any madness in your companion (Muhammad)? He is only a Warner to you before a severe punishment.”
34|47|Say (O Muhammad): “Whatever reward I might have asked of you is for you. My reward is only from Allah and He is witness over every thing.”
34|48|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely! My Lord sends down the truth, the All-Knower of the unseen.”
34|49|Say (O Muhammad): “The truth (the Qur’an) has come, and neither falsehood can create anything nor resurrect (anything).”
34|50|Say: “(Even) if I go astray, surely, I shall stray only to myself. But if I remain guided, it is for what my Lord has revealed to me. Truly, Allah is All-Hearer, Ever Near (to all).”
34|51|And if you could only see when they (disbelievers on the Day of Judgment) will be terrified with no escape, and they will be seized from a nearby place
34|52|And they will say (in the Hereafter): “We do believe now in it;” but how could they receive faith from a place so far off
34|53|Indeed they did disbelieve in it before (in the world), and they used to guess about the unseen (the Hereafter) from a far place
34|54|And a barrier will be placed between them and what they desired (turning to Allah in repentance), as was done before with the people of their kind. Surely, they were in grave doubt
35|1|All the praise be to Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, Who has made the angels with 2, 3 or 4 (pairs of) wings as Messengers. He adds to creation as He wills. Surely, Allah has power over every thing
35|2|Whatever Mercy Allah grants to mankind, none can withhold it; and whatever He withholds, none can grant it thereafter. Allah is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
35|3|O mankind! Remember the Grace of Allah upon you! Is there any creator other than Allah who provides for you from the heaven and the earth? There is no one worthy of worship but He. How then are you being deceived
35|4|And if they deny you (O Muhammad), so surely Messengers were denied before you. And to Allah all matters return (for decision)
35|5|O mankind! Surely, the Promise of Allah is true. So don’t let the worldly life deceive you, and don’t let the chief deceiver (Satan) deceive you about Allah
35|6|Surely, Satan is an enemy to you, so take him as an enemy. He only invites his followers so that they may become the inmates of the blazing fire
35|7|Those who disbelieve, there will be a severe punishment for them; and those who believe and do righteous deeds, there will be forgiveness and a great reward for them
35|8|Can those (be guided), to whom their evil deeds made fair seeming, so that they consider them good? Surely, Allah sends astray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. So don’t destroy yourself (O Muhammad) for them in sorrow. Truly, Allah is the All-Knower of what they do
35|9|And it is Allah Who sends the winds to rise up the clouds, then We drive them to a dead land, and therewith revives the earth after its death. Such will be the Resurrection (of the dead)
35|10|Whoever desires the honor, (should know that) all honor belongs to Allah alone. Good Words ascend to Allah and the righteous deeds are exalted by Allah. But those who plot evils, they will have severe punishment and their plots will perish
35|11|And Allah has created you from dust, then from a drop of semen, and then He made you pairs. No female conceives or gives birth without His Knowledge. No aged human is granted a long life or the life is cut short but is written in a book. Surely, that is easy for Allah
35|12|And the 2 seas are not alike - one is fresh sweet and pleasant to drink; and the other is salty and bitter. Yet, from each of them you eat fresh meat (fish) and get ornaments to wear. You see the ships sailing through them, that you may seek His Bounty, and that you may give thanks
35|13|He merges the night into the day and the day into the night. And He has subjected the sun and the moon (to serve you), each runs (its course) for an appointed term. Such is Allah, your Lord; His is the kingdom. Those to whom you pray instead of Him, don’t even own a thin membrane of a date-stone
35|14|If you pray to them, they don’t hear your call, and even if they hear you, they can not answer you. On the Day of Resurrection, they will disown your worshipping them. None can inform you (O mankind) like the One Who is the All-Knower
35|15|O mankind! It is you who stands in need of Allah, but Allah is Rich, Praise-Worthy
35|16|If He wills, He can destroy you and replace with a new creation
35|17|and that is not difficult for Allah
35|18|And no bearer of burdens shall bear another’s burden, and if one heavily laden calls another to carry it (load), nothing will be lifted from it even though he is a close relative. You (O Muhammad) can only warn those who fear their unseen Lord, and establish prayers. Those who purify themselves, and then they purify only for their own selves. To Allah is the final return
35|19|The blind (disbelievers) and the seeing (believers) are not alike
35|20|nor the darkness (disbelief) and the light (belief)
35|21|nor the shade and the sun’s heat
35|22|nor the living and the dead. Surely, Allah can make hear whom He wills, but you (O Muhammad) cannot make those hear who are in graves
35|23|You (O Muhammad) are not but a Warner
35|24|Surely! We have sent you (O Muhammad) with the truth as a bearer of good news, and as a Warner. And there was not a nation which did not have a Warner
35|25|And if they deny you, so surely were those who came before. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs, with the Scriptures, and the light-giving book
35|26|Then I seized those who disbelieved, and how terrible was My denial (punishment)
35|27|Don’t you see that Allah sends down rain from the sky and We produce therewith fruits of varying colors? Among the mountains there are streaks (paths) white and red of varying colors and very black
35|28|And likewise, men, beasts, and cattle have various colors. It is only those among His servants who have knowledge that fear Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Mighty, Forgiving
35|29|Surely, those who recite the book of Allah (this Qur’an), establish prayer, and spend (in charity) out of what We have provided for them, secretly and openly, may hope for business (gain) that will never perish
35|30|That He may pay them their rewards in full and give them more out of His Grace. Surely! He is forgiving, ready to appreciate (good deeds)
35|31|And that which We have revealed in you (O Muhammad) of the book (the Qur’an), it is the truth which confirms what was revealed before. Surely! Allah is indeed All-Aware, and All-Seer of His servants
35|32|Then We gave the book (the Qur’an) as an inheritance to those of Our servants (Muslims) whom We have chosen. Among them there are some who wrong their own selves, some of them follow a middle course, and some of them are foremost in good deeds by the permission of Allah. That is the great grace
35|33|They will enter the gardens of Eden where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls and their garments will be silk therein
35|34|They will say: “All the praise be to Allah Who has removed all grief from us. Surely, our Lord is indeed Forgiving, Ready to appreciate (good deeds)
35|35|Who has admitted us in a home (in Paradise) that will last forever out of His Grace; where no toil will touch us nor any weariness.”
35|36|But those who disbelieve, there will be fire of hell for them. Neither it (fire) will be completed on them so that they die, nor shall its punishment be lightened for them. Thus We do pay back every disbeliever
35|37|They will cry therein: “Our Lord! Get us out, (from now) we shall do righteous deeds and shall not repeat that (evil deeds) which we used to do.” (Allah will reply): “Did We not give you lives long enough so that whoever would, could receive warning therein? And the Warner came to you. So taste (the evil of your deeds), there is no helper for the wrongdoers.”
35|38|Surely, Allah is the All-Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. Surely! He is the All-Knower of what is in the hearts
35|39|It is He Who has made you vicegerent in the earth. Whoever disbelieves, bears the burden of disbelief. And their disbelief of the disbelievers does not add anything except the Wrath of their Lord. And the disbelief of the disbelievers adds nothing but loss
35|40|Say (O Muhammad): “What do you think about your partner to whom you call upon besides Allah? Show me, what they have created in the earth? Or do they have any share in the heavens? Or have We given them a book so that they act on clear proof from there? Nay, the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but delusions.”
35|41|Surely! Allah grasps the heavens and the earth lest they move away (from their places). Even if they were to move away (from their places), there is none who could grasp them besides Him. Truly, He is ever Forbearing, Forgiving
35|42|And they swore by Allah their most binding oath that if a Warner ever come to them, they would be more guided than any of the nations (before them). Yet, when a Warner (Muhammad) has come to them, it increased nothing in them but flight (from the truth)
35|43|(because of their) arrogance in the land and their plotting of evil. The evil plotting encompasses only those who make it. Can they expect anything but the way of former peoples? So you will not find any change in the Way of Allah and will not find any alternation in the Way of Allah
35|44|Have they not traveled in the land and seen how terrible was the end of those who were before them, who were greater in power than them? There is nothing in the heavens or in the earth which can escape Him. Surely, Allah is the All-Knower, All-Powerful
35|45|And if Allah were to punish people for their evil deeds, He would not leave any creature on the surface (of the earth), but He is giving them respite for an appointed term, and when their term will come, they surely will realize that Allah is All-Seer of His servants
36|1|Ya-Seen
36|2|By the Qur’an, full of wisdom
36|3|truly, you (O Muhammad) are one of the Messengers
36|4|on a Right Way
36|5|This is sent down by the Mighty, the Merciful
36|6|to warn a people whose forefathers were not warned, so they are heedless
36|7|Indeed the Word has proved true against most of them, so they don’t believe
36|8|Surely! We have put on their necks iron collars up to the chins so that their heads are made raised up
36|9|and We have put a barrier in front of them, and a barrier behind them, and then We have covered them up so they cannot see
36|10|It is the same to them whether you warn them or you warn them not, they will not believe
36|11|You can only warn those who follow the reminder (the Qur’an) and fear the Gracious (Allah) unseen. So give them good news of forgiveness and a generous reward
36|12|Surely, We will give life to the dead; We are recording all that which they are sending before death and their traces of deeds. We have recorded everything in a clear book
36|13|And put forward to them an example; the story of the residents of the town (Antakiya, Turkey) to whom the Messengers came
36|14|When We sent to them 2 Messengers, they denied them both, so We reinforced them with a 3rd, and they said: “Surely! We have been sent to you as Messengers.”
36|15|They (people of the town) said: “You are but humans like us. The Gracious (Allah) has revealed nothing, you are telling lies.”
36|16|They (Messengers) said: “Our Lord knows that we have been sent as Messengers to you
36|17|and our duty is to convey the message clearly.”
36|18|They (people) said: “Surely, we see an evil omen (sign) from you. If you don’t stop, we will surely stone you and a painful punishment will touch you from us.”
36|19|They (Messengers) said: “Your evil omens be with you! (Do you call it ‘evil omen’) because you are admonished? Nay, but you are a transgressing people.”
36|20|And there came a man running from the farthest part of the town and said: “O my people! Follow the Messengers
36|21|Follow those who don’t ask of you any wages and they are rightly guided
36|22|Why should I not worship Him Who has created me and to Whom you shall be returned
36|23|Shall I take another worthy of worship besides Him? If the Gracious (Allah) intends me no harm, their intercession will avail me nothing, nor can they save me
36|24|Then surely, I would be in plain error
36|25|Surely! I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me!”
36|26|It was said (to him when the disbelievers killed him): “Enter Paradise.” He said: “Would that my people knew (what I know)
36|27|That my Lord has forgiven me and made me among the honored ones!”
36|28|And We did not send down against his people after him a host from heaven, nor do We send (such a thing)
36|29|It was only one shout and then they all were dead silent
36|30|Alas for the mankind! Whenever a Messenger came to them, they used to mock at him
36|31|Don’t they see how many generations We have destroyed before them who will not return to them
36|32|And surely, all of them will be brought before Us
36|33|And the dead land is a sign for them. We give it life and brings forth grain from it so that they eat from there
36|34|And We produces in it gardens of date-palms and grapes, and We cause springs of water to gush forth from it
36|35|so that they may eat the fruits thereof. Their hands did not make it. Should they not give thanks
36|36|Glory be to Him Who has created all things in pairs which the earth produces, as well as their own (human) kind, and other things which they don’t know
36|37|And a sign for them is the night, when We withdraw the daylight from it, and behold, they are in darkness
36|38|And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term (appointed) for it. That is the Decree of the All-Mighty, the All-Knower
36|39|And the moon, We have measured its positions (phases) for it till it returns like the old dried curved date stalk
36|40|The sun is neither permitted to overtake the moon nor does the night outstrip the day. They all each float in its own orbit
36|41|And a sign for them is that We carried their offspring in the laden ship (of Noah)
36|42|And We have created for them similar (vessels) on which they ride
36|43|And if We will, We can drown them, and there will be no helper for them, nor will they be saved
36|44|except through the Mercy from Us and as an enjoyment for a while
36|45|And when it is said to them: “Beware of that which is before you (worldly punishments) and that which is behind you (punishments in the Hereafter) so that you may receive Mercy.”
36|46|And whenever a sign of the Verses of their Lord comes to them, they turn away from it
36|47|Whenever it is said to them:“Spend out of what Allah has provided you.” Those who disbelieve say to those who believe: “Should we feed those whom, if Allah wills, He (Himself) can feed? You are in plain error.”
36|48|And they say: “When will this Promise (Resurrection) be fulfilled if you are truthful?”
36|49|They are waiting for a single shout, which will seize them while they are disputing (among themselves)
36|50|Then, they will neither be able to make a will, nor they will be able to return to their family
36|51|And the trumpet will be blown in and behold! They will come out quickly from the graves to their Lord
36|52|They will say: “Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our place of sleep?” (It will be said to them): “This is what the Gracious (Allah) had promised and the Messengers spoke the truth!”
36|53|It will only be a single shout, so behold! They all will be brought up before Us
36|54|This Day (of Resurrection), no soul will be wronged in anything and you will be rewarded for your deeds
36|55|Surely, on that Day, the residents of the Paradise will be busy in joyful things
36|56|they and their wives will be in pleasant shade reclining on thrones
36|57|They will have all kinds of fruits in it and they will get whatever they ask for
36|58|(it will be said to them): “Peace,” a Word from the Lord, Merciful
36|59|(It will be said to sinners): “You get apart this Day, you criminals (from the believers)
36|60|O Children of Adam! Did I not command you that you should not worship Satan? Surely, he is a plain enemy to you
36|61|and you should worship Me. That is the Right Way
36|62|And indeed he (Satan) has led a great number of you astray. Didn’t you understand
36|63|This is hell which you were warned
36|64|Now burn in it this Day for what you used to disbelieve.”
36|65|This Day, We shall seal up their mouths, their hands will speak to Us, and their legs will bear witness to what they used to earn
36|66|And (if it had been) Our will, We could surely have wiped out (blinded) over their eyes so that they would struggle for the way, how then could they see
36|67|And if it had been Our will, We could have transformed them (into animals or lifeless objects) in their places. Then neither they could have been able to go forward nor they could have turned back
36|68|And those to whom We grant long life, We reverse them in creation (weakness after strength). Will they not then understand
36|69|And We have not taught him (Muhammad) poetry, nor is it suitable for him. This is only a reminder and a plain Qur’an
36|70|to warn those who are living and to establish the charge against the disbelievers
36|71|Don’t they see that We have created for them of what Our Hands have fashioned the cattle, which are under their dominion
36|72|And We have subdued them (animals) to them so that they have some of them for riding and some of them they eat
36|73|and there are other benefits in them and drinks (milk) for them. Should they not then be grateful
36|74|Yet, they have taken others (worthy of worship) besides Allah hoping to get their help
36|75|They cannot help them, yet, they will be brought forward as troops against those who worshipped them (at the time of Reckoning)
36|76|So let not their speech grieves you (O Muhammad). Surely, We know what they conceal and what they reveal
36|77|Don’t people see that We have created them from a sperm? Yet, they (stands up) as open opponent
36|78|And they put an example for Us and forget their own creations. He says: “Who will give life to these bones when they have rotten away and became dust?”
36|79|Say (O Muhammad): “He Who has created them for the first time, will give life to them again! And He is the All-Knower of every creation!”
36|80|It is He Who produces for you fire from the green tree, then behold, you kindle fire therewith
36|81|Is not He Who has created the heavens and the earth, able to create the like of them? Yes, indeed! He knows everything, supreme Creator
36|82|Surely, when He intends a thing, it is only that He says: “Be!” and it is
36|83|So glory be to Him in Whose hands (authority) is the dominion of every thing, and to Him you shall be returned
37|1|By those (angels) arranged in rows
37|2|by those (angels) who are strong in repelling (evil)
37|3|by those (angels) who bring the book (the Qur’an)
37|4|surely your one worthy of worship is indeed One (Allah)
37|5|the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that lies between them, and Lord of every point of the sun’s risings
37|6|Surely! We have adorned the lower heaven with beautiful stars
37|7|and has guarded against all rebellious devils
37|8|They cannot even listen to the higher group (angels) for they are pelted from every side
37|9|repulsed and they are under a constant punishment
37|10|Except such as snatch away something by stealing and they are pursued by a flaming fire of piercing brightness
37|11|Ask them (polytheists, O Muhammad): “Are they stronger as creation, or those whom We have created?” Surely, We created them of sticky clay
37|12|Nay, you (Muhammad) wonder while they mock (at you and the Qur’an)
37|13|When they are reminded, they don’t pay attention
37|14|and when they see a Verse (from Allah), they mock at it
37|15|and say: “This is nothing but clear magic
37|16|When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then surely be resurrected
37|17|Also our forefathers of old times?”
37|18|Say (O Muhammad): “Yes and you shall then be humiliated.”
37|19|It will be only a single shout and they will be staring
37|20|They will say: “Woe to us! This is the Day of recompense!”
37|21|(It will be said): “This is the Day of judgment which you used to deny.”
37|22|(It will be said to the angels): “Assemble those who did wrong, together with their companions whom they used to worship
37|23|besides Allah, and lead them to the way of flaming fire (hell).”
37|24|(When they will be gathered, Allah will say): “Stop them, surely they are to be questioned
37|25|What is the matter with you? Why don’t you help one another (as you used to do in the world)?”
37|26|Nay, but that Day they shall surrender
37|27|Some of them will face others to question one another
37|28|They will say (to their leaders): “Surely, you used to come to us from the right (with authority to beautify every evil, enjoin polytheism, and stop us from the truth).”
37|29|They will reply: “Nay, you were not believers
37|30|We had no authority over you. Nay! You were transgressing people
37|31|now the Word of our Lord has become justified against us, and indeed we shall taste (the punishment)
37|32|So we led you astray because we were ourselves astray.”
37|33|Then surely on that Day, they will share in the punishment
37|34|Certainly, that is how We shall deal with sinners
37|35|surely, when it was said to them: “There is no one worthy of worship but Allah,” they used to puff themselves up with pride
37|36|and say: “Are we going to abandon our one worthy of worship for the sake of a mad poet?”
37|37|Nay! He (Muhammad) has come with the truth and he has confirmed the (previous) Messengers
37|38|(It will be said): “Surely, you (polytheists) are going to taste the painful punishment
37|39|and you will be requited nothing except for what you had done (evil deeds).”
37|40|Except the chosen (faithful) devotees of Allah
37|41|those for them will have known provision
37|42|fruits, and they shall be honored
37|43|in the gardens of delight (Paradise)
37|44|on the thrones facing one another
37|45|served around (them) with a cup of pure wine
37|46|crystal-white, delicious to the drinkers
37|47|Neither they will have any kind of hurt, headache or sin in that, nor will they suffer intoxication from that
37|48|With them will be chaste females restraining their glances (for husbands only) with wide and beautiful eyes
37|49|as if they were preserved eggs
37|50|Some of them will turn to others, questioning each others
37|51|One of them will say: “Surely, I had a companion for me (in the world)
37|52|who used to say: ‘Are you among those who believe (in Resurrection after death)
37|53|When we die and become dust and bones, shall we indeed (be raised up) to receive reward or punishment (according to deeds)?”’
37|54|It will be said (to him): “Will you look down (to see the friend)?”
37|55|So the person looked down and saw friend in the midst of the fire
37|56|The person said: “By Allah! You have nearly ruined me
37|57|Had it not been for the Grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those brought forth (to hell)
37|58|(The believer in the heaven will say): “Are we then not to die (any more)
37|59|after our first death and we shall not be punished?”
37|60|Truly, this is the supreme success
37|61|For such an end, let everyone strive who wishes to strive
37|62|Is this (Paradise) a better entertainment or the tree of the Zaqqum (a horrible tree in hell)
37|63|Truly, We have made it a trail for the wrongdoers
37|64|Surely, it is a tree that grows in the bottom of hellfire
37|65|the shoots of its fruit-stalks are like the heads of devils
37|66|so truly, they will eat from it and fill their bellies from it
37|67|Then surely, on top of that, they will be given a mixture of boiling water (to drink)
37|68|Then surely, their return is to the flaming fire of hell
37|69|In fact, they found their fathers on the wrong way
37|70|so they are too haste to follow their footsteps
37|71|and indeed most of the ancient people went astray before them
37|72|and indeed We had sent warners (Messengers) among them
37|73|Then see how was the end of those who were warned (all perished)
37|74|except the chosen (faithful) devotees of Allah
37|75|And indeed Noah prayed to Us, and indeed We are the Best to answer (the prayer)
37|76|And We rescued him and his family from the great distress (drowning)
37|77|and made his progeny to be the only survivors
37|78|and left for him (a good name) among generations to come in later times
37|79|Peace be upon Noah (from Us) among the (people of) worlds
37|80|Surely, thus We reward the righteous people
37|81|Surely, he (Noah) was one of Our believing devotees
37|82|Then We drowned the others (disbelievers)
37|83|Surely, among those who followed his (Noah’s) way was Abraham
37|84|when he came to his Lord with a pure heart
37|85|When he said to his father and to his people: “What is it you worship
37|86|Is it a falsehood worthy of worship other than Allah that you seek
37|87|Then what do you think about the Lord of the worlds?”
37|88|Then he looked a glance at the stars
37|89|and said: “Surely, I am sick (he did this trick to stay in their temple of idols to destroy them and not to accompany them to the pagan’s feast).”
37|90|So they turned away from him, and departed
37|91|Then he turned to their idols and said: “Why don’t you eat (from food offered)
37|92|What is the matter with you that you don’t speak?”
37|93|Then he turned upon them, striking with his right hand
37|94|They (idol worshippers) came running towards him
37|95|He said: ”Do you worship what you carve
37|96|while Allah has created you and what you have make?”
37|97|They said: “Build for him a building (like a furnace) and throw him into the blazing fire!”
37|98|So they plotted against him, but We made them the lowest (humiliated)
37|99|He said (after his rescue from fire): “Surely, I am going to my Lord. He will guide me
37|100|My Lord! Grant me (offspring) from the righteous.”
37|101|So We gave him the glad tidings of a gentle boy
37|102|When he (son) was old enough to walk with him, he said: “O my son! Surely, I have seen in the sleep (dream) that I am slaughtering you (sacrifice to Allah), so what do you think!” He said: “O my father! Do what you are commanded (by Allah), you shall find me of the patient.”
37|103|Then, when they had both submitted themselves (to Allah), and he laid his son prostrate on his forehead (for sacrifice)
37|104|and Allah called out to him: “O Abraham
37|105|Surely, you have fulfilled the dream!” Surely! Thus We reward the righteous people
37|106|Surely, that was indeed a clear trial
37|107|We ransomed his son for a great sacrifice
37|108|and We left for him (good name) among the later generations (to come)
37|109|Peace be upon Abraham
37|110|Thus indeed We reward the righteous people
37|111|Surely, he was one of Our believing devotees
37|112|And We gave him the glad tidings of (his son) Isaac, a prophet from the righteous
37|113|We blessed him and Isaac. Of their progeny, there are some who do right, and some plainly wrong themselves
37|114|Indeed We gave Our Grace to Moses and Aaron
37|115|We saved them and their people from the great distress
37|116|and helped them, so they became victorious
37|117|We gave them the clear Scripture (Torah)
37|118|and guided them to the Right Way
37|119|We left for them (a good name) among later generations (to come)
37|120|Peace be upon Moses and Aaron
37|121|Surely, thus We do reward the righteous people
37|122|Surely! They were of Our believing devotees
37|123|Surely, Elias was one of the Messengers
37|124|When he said to his people: “Will you not fear (Allah)
37|125|Will you call upon Bal (idol) and forsake the best of creators
37|126|Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?”
37|127|But they denied him (Elias), so they will certainly be brought forth (to the punishment)
37|128|except the chosen (faithful) devotees of Allah
37|129|We left for him (a good name) among later generations (to come)
37|130|Peace be upon Elias
37|131|Surely, thus We reward the righteous people
37|132|Surely, he was one of Our believing devotees
37|133|Surely, Lot was one of the Messengers
37|134|When We saved him and all his family
37|135|except an old woman (who was) among those who remained behind
37|136|then We destroyed the rest (the towns of Sodom at the Dead Sea in Jordan)
37|137|Surely, you pass by them in the morning
37|138|and at night; will you not then reflect (think)
37|139|Surely, Jonah was one of the Messengers
37|140|When he ran to the laden ship
37|141|he (agreed to) cast lots, and he was among the losers
37|142|Then a (big) fish swallowed him while he had done an act worthy of blame
37|143|Had it not been that he was of those who glorify (Allah)
37|144|he would have indeed remained in its belly (the fish) till the Day of Resurrection
37|145|Then We cast him out on the naked shore while he was sick
37|146|and We caused a plant of gourd (squash) to grow over him
37|147|Then We had sent him to a nation of 100,000 people or even more
37|148|They believed; so We gave them enjoyment for a while
37|149|Now ask them (disbelievers, O Muhammad): (Does it make sense that) your Lord should have only daughters while they choose to have sons
37|150|Or did We create the angels as females while they were witnesses
37|151|Surely, they invent a lie when they say
37|152|“Allah has begotten (children). Surely, they are liars!”
37|153|Has He chosen daughters (rather than) sons
37|154|What is the matter with you? How do you decide
37|155|Will you not then remember
37|156|Or is there any plain authority for you
37|157|Then bring your book if you are truthful
37|158|They have invented a kinship between Him and the jinns, but indeed the jinns know quite well that they will be brought for account (before Allah)
37|159|Glory be to Allah! (He is free) from what they attribute to Him
37|160|except the chosen (faithful) devotees of Allah
37|161|So, neither you nor those whom you worship (idols)
37|162|can lead (anyone) astray
37|163|except those who are destined to burn in hell
37|164|(The angels say): “There is one known place for us
37|165|Surely, we stand in rows (for prayers)
37|166|surely, we are those who glorify (Allah).”
37|167|Indeed they (disbelievers) used to say
37|168|“If we had a reminder like the people of old received (before the coming of Muhammad)
37|169|we would have indeed been the chosen devotees of Allah!”
37|170|But (since the Qur’an has come) they disbelieve in it (the Qur’an), and they will come to know (the consequence soon)
37|171|Surely, Our Word has gone forth for Our devotees, the Messengers
37|172|that surely they would be victorious
37|173|and verily, Our hosts (soldiers) will be victorious
37|174|So turn away (O Muhammad) from them for a while
37|175|and watch them, and they shall see (your victory)
37|176|Do they seek to hasten on Our Punishment
37|177|Then, when it descends into their court-yard (near them), then evil will be the morning for those who had been warned
37|178|So turn (O Muhammad) away from them for a while
37|179|and watch (their downfall) and they shall see (your victory)
37|180|Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of honor and power, (He is free) from what they attribute to Him
37|181|Peace be upon the Messengers
37|182|and all the praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds
38|1|Sad. By the Qur’an full of reminding
38|2|Surely, those who disbelieve are in false pride and opposition
38|3|How many generations have We destroyed before them? They cried out when there was no longer time for escape
38|4|They wonder that a Warner (Muhammad) has come to them from among themselves! The disbelievers say: “This (Muhammad) is a sorcerer, a liar
38|5|Has he made all ones worthy of worship into one worthy of worship (Allah)? Surely, this is a strange thing!”
38|6|The leaders among them went about (saying): “Go on, and remain firm to your one worthy of worship! Surely, this is a thing designed (against you)
38|7|We have not heard like this in the religion of the Last days. This is nothing but an invention
38|8|Has the reminder been sent down to him alone from among us?” Nay! but they are in doubt about My Reminder (this Qur’an)! Nay, but they have not tasted (My) punishment
38|9|Or do they have the treasures of the Mercy of your Lord, the All-Mighty, the Real Bestower
38|10|Or is the dominion of the heavens and the earth for them and what is between them? If so, let them ascend up with their means
38|11|They will be like a defeated army of the confederates (who were defeated)
38|12|Before them the people of Noah, Ad, Pharaoh, and the people of stakes, denied (Messengers)
38|13|and Thamud, and the people of Lot, and the residents of the wood (Median); such were the confederates
38|14|each of them denied the Messengers, therefore My punishment was justified
38|15|These people wait nothing but only for a single shout; it has no pause of ending
38|16|They say: “Our Lord! Hasten to us our account (of deeds) before the Day of reckoning!”
38|17|Be patient (O Muhammad) on what they say, and remember Our servant David, gifted with power. Surely, he was often turning in repentance (toward Allah)
38|18|Surely, We made the mountains to glorify Our praises with him (David) in the evening and after sunrise
38|19|All the birds too assembled with him (David)
38|20|We made his kingdom strong and gave him wisdom and sound judgment in speech (decision)
38|21|Has the news of the 2 litigants (engaged in lawsuit) reached you when they climbed over the chamber (into his praying place)
38|22|When they entered in upon David, he was terrified of them. They said: “Don’t fear! We are 2 litigants; one of us has wronged on the other, therefore judge between us with truth, and not be unjust, and guide us to the Right Way
38|23|Surely, this is my brother (in religion), he has 99 ewes (female sheep), while I have only one ewe. Yet he says: ‘Hand it over to me, and he overpowered me in speech.’”
38|24|(David) said (without listening to the opponent): “He indeed has wronged you in demanding your ewe to his ewes. Surely, many partners oppress one on another, except those who believe and do righteous deeds, and they are few.” (While saying this) David realized that We have tested him, he sought forgiveness of his Lord, he fell down prostrate, and turned (to Allah) in repentance
38|25|So We forgave him. Surely, for him is a near access to Us and a good place of return (Paradise)
38|26|(Allah said): “O David! Surely! We have placed you as a vicegerent on the earth, so judge between people with justice and don’t follow your desire, for it will mislead you from the Way of Allah. Surely! Those who wander astray from the Way of Allah, they shall have a severe punishment, because they forgot the Day of Reckoning
38|27|And We did not create the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose! That is the consideration of those who disbelieve! Then woe to those who disbelieve from the fire
38|28|Or should We treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who are mischief-makers on earth? Or should We treat the pious as criminals
38|29|This is a book (the Qur’an) which We have sent down to you (O Muhammad), full of blessings so that they may ponder over its Verses and men of understanding may learn
38|30|And We granted Solomon to David. How excellent a devotee! Surely, he was often turning in repentance (to Us)
38|31|When the well-trained horses of the highest breed (for Allah’s Cause) were displayed before him in one evening
38|32|and he said: “Surely I did love the good (of these horses) instead of remembering my Lord (in my Asr prayer),” till the time was over, and the sun had hidden in the veil (of night)
38|33|(then he said): “Bring them (horses) back to me.” Then he began to pass his hand over their legs and their necks (with affection)
38|34|And indeed, We did test Solomon and We placed on his throne a body (a devil, so he lost his kingdom for a while), then he did return (to Allah with repentance, and to his throne by the Grace of Allah)
38|35|He said: “My Lord! Forgive me, and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not be given to anyone after me. Surely, You are the Bestower.”
38|36|So, We (accepted his prayer and) subjected to him the wind, it blew gently to his order wherever he willed
38|37|and also the devils from the jinns with every kind of builder and diver
38|38|and also others bound in fetters
38|39|(Allah said to Solomon): “This is Our gift, so you spend or withhold, no account will be asked.”
38|40|Surely, he has a place of nearness to Us and will have a good final return (Paradise)
38|41|And remember Our devotee Job, when he invoked his Lord (saying): “Surely! Satan has afflicted me with distress (by losing my health) and suffering (by losing my wealth).”
38|42|(Allah said to him): “Strike (the ground) with your foot: This is (a spring of water) to wash in, cool and drink.”
38|43|And We gave him back his family, and the like thereof along with them as a Mercy from Us, and a reminder for those who understand
38|44|(Allah said): “Take a bundle of branches (thin grass) in your hand and strike with it (your wife to fulfill your oath of 100 strikes which was made during sickness), and don’t break your oath.” Truly! We found him patient. How excellent is the devotee! Surely, he was often turning in repentance (to Us)
38|45|And remember Our devotees, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all owners of strength (in worship) and also of religious understanding
38|46|Surely, We chose them by granting them a good thing, the remembrance of the home (of Hereafter)
38|47|Surely, they are with Us, of those chosen and the best
38|48|Remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Isaiah, and all were among the best
38|49|This is a reminder (the Qur’an), and surely, for those pious people there is a good final return (Paradise)
38|50|The everlasting (Eden) gardens whose doors will be open for them
38|51|They will recline in it, they will call for fruits in abundance and drinks
38|52|and with them will be chaste females (virgins) restraining their glances (only for their husbands), equal in age
38|53|This is what you (the pious) are promised for the Day of reckoning
38|54|surely, this is Our Provision which will never finish
38|55|This is so! Surely for the transgressors, an evil will be return
38|56|hell! where they will burn, and worst is that place to rest
38|57|This is so! Then let them taste it, a boiling fluid and dirty wound discharges
38|58|and other (punishments) of similar kind, (all together) in pairs
38|59|(The misguided leaders will be told): “This is a troop entering with you (in hell), no welcome for them! Surely, they will burn in the fire!”
38|60|(The followers of the misguided leaders will say): “Nay, you too! No welcome for you! It is you (leaders) who brought this upon us. Such an evil is this place to stay in!”
38|61|They will say: “Our Lord! Those who brought this upon us, add to them double punishment in the fire!”
38|62|They will say (to each other): “What is the matter with us that we don’t see those people whom we used to count among the bad ones
38|63|Did we take them as an object of mockery, or our eyes failed to perceive them?”
38|64|Surely, that is the very truth: the people of the fire will have mutual dispute (common habit)
38|65|Say (O Muhammad): “I am only a Warner and there is no one worthy of worship except Allah, the One, the Irresistible
38|66|the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the Mighty, the Forgiving.”
38|67|Say: “That (the Qur’an) is a great news
38|68|from which you turn away!”
38|69|(Say): “I had no knowledge of the exalted chiefs (angels) when they disputed (about the creation of Adam)
38|70|This is inspired to me with that I am only a plain Warner.”
38|71|(Remember) when your Lord said to the angels: “Surely, I am going to create a man from clay
38|72|so when I have fashioned him and breathed into him (his soul) from me, then you fall down to him and prostrate.”
38|73|So the angels prostrated, all of them together
38|74|except Satan, he was proud and was one of the disbelievers
38|75|(Allah) said: “O Satan! What prevents you from prostrating to one whom I have created with My own hands? Are you too proud or are you of the high exalted?”
38|76|(Satan) said: “I am better than he, You created me from fire, and You created him from clay.”
38|77|(Allah) said: “Then get out from here, for surely, you are accursed
38|78|and surely! My curse shall be on you till the Day of recompense.”
38|79|(Satan) said: “My Lord! Then give me respite till the Day is resurrected.”
38|80|(Allah) said: “Surely! You are of those allowed respite
38|81|till the Day of the time appointed.”
38|82|(Satan) said: “By Your might, I will surely mislead them all
38|83|except Your chosen (faithful) devotees amongst them.”
38|84|(Allah) said: “Then the truth, and the truth I say
38|85|that I will fill hell with you (Satan) and those of them (mankind) who follow you, all.”
38|86|Say (O Muhammad): “I ask you no wage for this (the Qur’an), nor am I one of the fakers (imposters)
38|87|It (this Qur’an) is nothing but a reminder for all (worlds)
38|88|and you shall certainly know its news after a while.”
39|1|The revelation of this book (the Qur’an) is from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
39|2|Surely, We have sent down the book to you (O Muhammad) in truth. So worship Allah (alone) sincerely, the religion is for Allah
39|3|Surely, the religion is completely for Allah (alone). Those who take protectors besides Him (say): “We worship them only so that they may bring us near to Allah.” Surely, Allah will judge between them concerning that in which they differ. Truly, Allah does not guide the one who is a liar, and a disbeliever
39|4|Had Allah willed to take a son, He could have chosen anyone of those whom He has created and with whom He is pleased. But glory be to Him! Allah is the One, the Irresistible
39|5|He has created the heavens and the earth with the truth. He makes the night overtake the day and makes the day overtake the night. He has subjected the sun and the moon, each is running for an appointed term. Surely, He is the All-Mighty, the Forgiving
39|6|He has created you all from a single person (Adam); then made his wife (Eve) from him. He has sent down for you of cattle 8 in pairs. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation in 3 layers of darkness. Such is Allah, your Lord. The kingdom belongs to Him; there is no one worthy of worship but He. How can you then turn away
39|7|If you disbelieve, then surely (know that), Allah does not need you. He does not like disbelief from His servants. If you are grateful (believer), He is pleased with you. No bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another. Then your return is to your Lord. So He will inform you what you did. Surely, He is the All-Knower of that which is in the hearts
39|8|And when some trouble touches people, they cry to their Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But when He bestows a Favor upon them from Him, they forget what they had supplicated (cried) to Him before, and they set up rivals to Allah in order to mislead others from His Way. Say: “Take pleasure in your disbelief for a while. Surely, you will be one of the inmates of the fire!”
39|9|Can the one who is obedient to Allah, prostrating or standing (in prayer) during the Hours of the night, fearing the Hereafter and hoping for the Mercy of the Lord (be compared with a disbeliever)? Say: “Are those who know equal to those who don’t know?” It is only people of understanding who will remember
39|10|Say (O Muhammad): “O My servants who believe, be afraid of your Lord and keep your duty (to Him). Good reward is for those who do good in this world, and Allah’s earth is spacious (if you cannot worship Allah at a place, then go to another)! Only those who are patient shall receive their rewards without reckoning.”
39|11|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, I am commanded to worship Allah sincerely doing the religious deeds for Him
39|12|and I am commanded in order to be the first of those who submit themselves to Allah as Muslims.”
39|13|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, if I disobey my Lord, I am afraid of the punishment of a great Day.”
39|14|Say (O Muhammad): “I worship by doing my religion sincerely for His sake.”
39|15|So worship what you like besides Him. Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Surely, that will be a clear loss!”
39|16|They shall have coverings of fire from above them and coverings (of fire) beneath them; so that with this Allah frightens His servants: “O My servants, therefore, fear Me!”
39|17|Those who avoid false deities by not worshipping them and turn to Allah in repentance, there are glad tidings for them. So announce (O Muhammad) the good news to My servants
39|18|those who listen to the Word (to worship Allah) and follow the best thereof. Such are the ones whom Allah has guided and such are the people of understanding
39|19|Is the one against whom the word of punishment is justified (equal to the one who avoids evil)? Can you rescue the one who is in the fire
39|20|But those who fear their Lord, for them lofty rooms are built one above another, with flowing rivers under them (Paradise). This is the Promise of Allah and Allah does not fail in (His) Promise
39|21|Don’t you see that Allah sends down water (rain) from the sky, and it penetrates in the earth and comes out as water-springs? Afterwards produces crops of different colors, then they wither and you see them turn yellow, and then He makes them dry and broken pieces. Surely, in this, there is a reminder for people of understanding
39|22|Is the one whose heart Allah has opened to Islam and is in light from its Lord (same as one who disbelieves)? So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of Allah! They are in plain error
39|23|Allah has sent down the best statement, a book (this Qur’an), its parts resemble each other, often repeated. The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from it. Then their skins and their hearts soften to the remembrance of Allah. Such is the guidance of Allah. He guides whom He pleases and whomever He sends astray, there is no guide for him
39|24|Is the one who will confront with the awful punishment on the Day of Resurrection (same as one who enters peacefully into Paradise)? It will be said to the wrongdoers: “Taste what you earned!”
39|25|Those who also denied before them, the punishment came on them from where they did not perceive
39|26|So Allah made them to taste the disgrace in the present life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is greater if they only knew
39|27|And indeed We have put forth every kind of example for mankind in this Qur’an in order that they may remember
39|28|It is an Arabic Qur’an without any crookedness (flaw) in it in order that they may avoid all evil
39|29|Allah puts forth an example: a captive belongs to many partners disputing with one another (like one who believes in many false deities), and a captive belongs entirely to one master (like one believes in one Allah). Are these 2 equal in comparison? All the praise be to Allah! But most of them don’t know
39|30|Surely, you (O Muhammad) will die and surely, they too will die
39|31|Then surely on the Day of Resurrection, you will dispute (to settle) before your Lord
39|32|Who is worse than one who utters a lie against Allah, and denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not an abode in hell for the disbelievers
39|33|And the one who brings the truth and believes in it - they are those who are the pious people
39|34|They shall have all that they will desire from their Lord. That is the reward of the righteous people
39|35|Allah will expiate their evil deeds from them and give them the reward according to their best deeds
39|36|Is Allah not sufficient for His servants? Yet they try to frighten you with those besides Him! The one whom Allah sends astray, there is no guide for him
39|37|And the one whom Allah guides, there is none to mislead him. Is not Allah the Mighty, the Possessor of Retribution
39|38|And surely, if you ask them: “Who created the heavens and the earth?” Surely, they will say: “Allah.” Say: “Do you see the things that you invoke besides Allah, if Allah intends some harm for me, could they remove His harm, or if He intends some Mercy for me, could they withhold His Mercy?" Say: “Allah is sufficient for me. Those who trust in Him, must put their trust.”
39|39|Say: (O Muhammad): “O my people! Work according to your way, surely I am working (according to my way). Then you will come to know
39|40|to whom a disgracing punishment will come, and on whom an everlasting punishment will descend.”
39|41|Surely, We have sent down to you (O Muhammad) the book (this Qur’an) for mankind in truth. So those who accept the guidance, it is only for their own self, and those who go astray, they go astray only to their own loss. You (O Muhammad) are not a trustee over them
39|42|It is Allah who takes away the souls at the time of their death, and those that don’t die during their sleep. He keeps those souls for which He has ordained death and sends the rest for an appointed term. Surely, in that there are signs for people who think deeply
39|43|Have they taken others besides Allah as intercessors? Ask: “(How can they intercede) if they don’t possess anything and have no intelligence?”
39|44|Say: “All intercession belongs to Allah. The sovereignty of the heavens and the earth is with Him, and to Him you all shall be brought back.”
39|45|And when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who don’t believe in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and when those (whom they worship) besides Him are mentioned, behold, they rejoice
39|46|Say (O Muhammad): “O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth, All-Knower of the unseen and the seen! You will judge between your servants about which they differed.”
39|47|Those who did wrong (disbelievers) possessed all that is in earth and as much again with it, they surely would offer it to ransom with it (to save) from the evil punishment on the Day of Resurrection. It will become apparent to them from Allah what they would never have imagined
39|48|And the evils of their deeds will become apparent to them and they will be encircled with them by that which they used to mock at
39|49|When harm touches people, they call to Us (for help), then when We grant them a Favor from Us, they say: “Only because we were given this knowledge.” Nay, it is only a trial, but most of them don’t know
39|50|Surely, those before them said it, yet all that they had earned did not avail them
39|51|So, the evil of that which they earned overtook them. Those who did wrong, will be overtaken by the evil results (punishment) of that which they earned, and they will never be able to escape
39|52|Don’t they know that Allah enlarges the provision for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills)? Surely, there are signs in this for those who believe
39|53|(Allah) says: “O My servants who have transgressed against themselves (by evil deeds)! Don’t despair of the Mercy of Allah, surely Allah forgives all sins. Truly, He is Forgiving, Merciful
39|54|And turn in repentance to your Lord and submit to Him before the punishment comes upon you, then you will not be helped
39|55|Follow the best way which is sent down (the Qur’an) to you from your Lord before the punishment comes on you suddenly while you don’t perceive
39|56|Lest a person should say: ‘Alas, my grief is that I neglected my duty to Allah, and I was indeed among those who mocked (the truth).’
39|57|Or lest a person should say: ‘If only Allah had guided me, indeed I would have been among the righteous.’
39|58|Or lest a person should say when sees the punishment: ‘If I had only another chance (to return to the world) then I would be among the righteous people.’”
39|59|(Allah will say): “Yes! Surely, My Verses did come to you, you denied them, and you were proud and were among the disbelievers.”
39|60|On the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against Allah, their faces will be black. Is there not an abode for the arrogant in hell
39|61|And Allah will deliver those who are the pious to their places of success (Paradise). Evil shall not touch them, nor shall they grieve
39|62|Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the Trustee over all things
39|63|To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. Those who disbelieve in the Verses of Allah, those are they who will be the losers
39|64|Say (O Muhammad to the polytheists): “Do you order me to worship other than Allah? O you fools!”
39|65|And indeed it has been revealed to you (O Muhammad), and to those before you: “If you join others with Allah, then surely your deeds will be in vain, and you will certainly be among the losers.”
39|66|So worship Allah, and be among the grateful
39|67|They have not made a just estimate (worth) of Allah such as is due to Him. On the Day of Resurrection, the whole earth will be grasped by His Authority and the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand (authority). Glory be to Him, and high is He above all that they associate as partners with Him
39|68|The trumpet will be blown in, all who are in the heavens and the earth will fall dead, except those whom Allah wills. Then the trumpet will blow for a 2nd time and they all will be standing, looking on (waiting)
39|69|The earth will shine with the light of its Lord, the book (of records) will be placed open, the prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward, it will be judged between people with truth, they will not be wronged
39|70|And each person will be rewarded in full of what it did; and He is Best Aware of what they did
39|71|And those who disbelieved will be driven to hell in groups. When they reach it, the gates will be opened. Its keepers will say to them: “Did not the Messengers come to you from yourselves, reciting to you the Verses of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?” They will say: “Yes.” But the word of punishment has already been justified against the disbelievers
39|72|It will be said (to them): “Enter the gates of hell to abide in it, and an evil abode of the arrogant!”
39|73|And those who kept their duty to their Lord, will be driven to Paradise in groups. When they reach it, its gates will be opened to them, and its keepers will say: “Peace be upon you! You have done well, so enter it to abide in it.”
39|74|And they (believers) will say: “All the praises are due to Allah who has fulfilled His Promise and has made us inherit the land. We can reside in Paradise wherever we will.” How excellent a reward for the pious
39|75|And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne (of Allah) from all round, glorifying the praise of their Lord. They (people) will be judged with truth, and it will be said: “All praises are due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds!”
40|1|Ha-Mim
40|2|The revelation of this book (this Qur’an) is from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Knower
40|3|the Forgiver of sin, and the Acceptor of repentance, the Severe in punishment, the Bestower (of Favors), no one worthy of worship except Allah, to Allah is the final return
40|4|None disputes in the Verses of Allah but those who disbelieve, so let not their ability of going about here and there through the land deceive you (O Muhammad)
40|5|Before them the people of Noah and the confederates after them denied (their Messengers). Every (disbelieving) nation plotted against their Messenger to seize him, and disputed by means of falsehood to refute therewith the truth. So I seized them (with punishment), and how terrible was My Punishment
40|6|Thus the Word of your Lord has been justified against those who disbelieved; they will be the inmates of the fire
40|7|Those (angels) who bear the Throne (of Allah) and those who are around it glorify the praises of their Lord, and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe (saying): “Our Lord! You comprehend all things in Mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who repent and follow Your Way, and save them from the punishment of the blazing fire
40|8|Our Lord! Make them enter the gardens of (everlasting) Eden (Paradise) which You have promised them, and who was righteous among their fathers, their wives, and their offspring! Surely, You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
40|9|And save them from (the punishment) of the sins, and whomever You save from (the punishment of) the sins (excuse them) that Day, surely, You gave them Mercy.” That is the supreme success
40|10|Truly those who disbelieve will be addressed (at the entry time to the fire): “Allah’s dislike towards you was greater (in the world when you used to reject the faith) than your dislike towards one another (now you are enemies to one another in the hellfire), when you were called to the faith but you used to refuse.”
40|11|They will say: “Our Lord! You have made us die twice (dead in the loins of our fathers and dead in this world), and You have given us life twice (when born and when resurrected)! Now we confess our sins, then is there any way to get out (of the fire)?”
40|12|(It will be replied): “This is because, when Allah alone was invoked (in worship) you disbelieved, but when partners were joined to Him, you believed! So the judgment is only with Allah, the High, the Great!”
40|13|It is He Who shows you His Verses and sends down provision for you from the sky. None remembers but those who turn (to Allah)
40|14|You (O Muhammad and the believers) call upon Allah making your worship pure to Him, however much the disbelievers may hate the it
40|15|(Allah is the) Owner of High Ranks and Degrees, the Owner of the Throne. He sends the inspiration by His Command to any of His servants whom He wills, that he (the prophet who receives inspiration) warns people of the Day of mutual meeting (Resurrection)
40|16|The Day when they all will come out, nothing of them will be hidden from Allah. (It will be asked): “Whose kingdom is this Day?” (Allah will reply to His question): “It is to Allah, the One, the Irresistible
40|17|This Day every person shall be recompensed for what it has earned. Today no injustice (shall be done to anybody). Truly, Allah is Swift in reckoning.”
40|18|And warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day that is drawing near (the Day of Resurrection), when the hearts will be choking the throats (with grief), and they can neither return them (hearts) to their chests nor they can throw them out. The wrongdoers will have neither friend nor intercessor who could be given attention
40|19|Allah knows the fraud of the eyes, and all that the hearts conceal
40|20|Allah will judge the truth, while those whom they invoke besides Him, cannot judge anything. Certainly, Allah is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer
40|21|Have they not traveled in the land and seen what was the end of those who were before them? They were superior to them in strength and in traces (they left) in the land. But Allah seized them for their sins. They had none to protect them from Allah
40|22|That was because there came to them their Messengers with clear evidences. But they disbelieved. So Allah seized them. Surely, He is Strong, Severe in punishment
40|23|And indeed We sent Moses with Our Verses, and a clear authority
40|24|to Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah; they called (Moses): “A sorcerer, a liar!”
40|25|Then, when he brought the truth from Us to them, they said: “Kill the sons of those who believe with him and let their women live.” But the plots of disbelievers (were nothing) but in errors
40|26|Pharaoh said: “Let me kill Moses, and let him call his Lord (to stop me)! Surely, I fear that he may change your religion or that he may cause mischief to appear in the land!”
40|27|Moses said: “Surely, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant who don’t believe in the Day of reckoning!”
40|28|And a believer from Pharaoh’s family, who hid his faith, said: “Will you kill a man because he says: ‘My Lord is Allah,’ especially when Moses has come to you with clear signs from your Lord? If he is a liar, his sin will lie upon him; but if he is telling the truth, then some of that (calamity) which he threatens you will befall on you. Surely, Allah does not guide the one who is a polytheist, a liar
40|29|O my people! You are the ruler today and you are uppermost in the land. But who will save us from the punishment of Allah, if it comes to us?” Pharaoh said: “I show you what I see correct and I guide you to the way of right policy!”
40|30|And he (who believed) said: “O my people! Surely, I fear for you a fate like that Day (disaster) of the confederates
40|31|like the fate of the people of Noah, Ad, Thamud, and those who came after them. Allah wants no injustice for (His) servants
40|32|And O my people! Surely! I fear for you the Day when there will be mutual calling (between the people of hell and Paradise)
40|33|a Day when you will turn your backs and you have no protector from Allah. Whomever Allah sends astray, there is no guide for him
40|34|And indeed Joseph did come to you before with clear signs, but you were always in doubt concerning what he did bring to you, till when he died with it, you said: ‘Allah will never send a Messenger after him.’ Thus Allah leaves those astray who are the doubtful polytheists
40|35|who dispute in Allah’s Verses without any authority that has come to them. It is greatly hateful to Allah and to those who believe. Thus Allah seals up every heart of arrogant, tyrant.”
40|36|And Pharaoh said: “O Haman! Build a tower for me so that I may arrive at the ways
40|37|the ways to the heavens, and I may look upon the one worthy of worship of Moses but surely, I think him to be a liar.” Thus it was made seem fair in Pharaoh’s eyes, the evil of his deeds, and he was hindered from the Right Way. The plot of Pharaoh led to nothing but in loss
40|38|And the man who believed, said: “O my people! Follow me; I will guide you to the way of right conduct
40|39|O my people! Truly, this life of the world is nothing but an enjoyment, and surely, the Hereafter is the home that will remain forever
40|40|Whoever does an evil deed, will be requited the like thereof; and whoever is a true believer and does a righteous deed, whether male or female, such one will enter Paradise where they will be provided in it (all things) without limit
40|41|And O my people! How is it that I call you to salvation and you call me to the fire
40|42|You invite me to disbelieve in Allah and to join (partners) with Allah about which I have no knowledge; while I invite you to the All-Mighty, the Forgiving
40|43|No doubt that you call me to worship it which can neither grant a claim (request) in this world nor in the Hereafter. Our return will be to Allah; and the polytheists will be the inmates of the fire
40|44|And you will remember what I am telling you and I leave all my matters to Allah. Surely, Allah is the All-Seer of everything of the servants.”
40|45|So Allah saved him (believer) from the evils what they plotted (against him), and encompassed Pharaoh’s people with an evil punishment
40|46|They are exposed to the fire morning and afternoon, and on the Day when the Hour will be established (angels will be told): “Cause Pharaoh’s people to enter the severest punishment!”
40|47|And when they will dispute in the fire, the weak will say to those who were arrogant: “Surely! We were your followers, so can you save us from a portion of the fire?”
40|48|Those who were arrogant will say: “Surely we are all together in it (fire)! Verily, Allah has judged between His servants!”
40|49|And those in the fire will say to the keepers (angels) of hell: “Call upon your Lord to lighten the punishment for us for a day!”
40|50|They (keepers) will say: “Did there not come to you Messengers with clear evidences? They will say: “Yes.” They will reply: “Then pray (as you like)!” But the invocation of the disbelievers is nothing but in error
40|51|Surely, We will make Our Messengers victorious and those who believe in worldly life and on the Day when the witnesses will stand
40|52|The Day when their excuses will not benefit the wrongdoers. The curse will be for them and for them will be evil abode (painful punishment)
40|53|And indeed We gave Moses the guidance, and We caused the children of Israel to inherit the Scripture (the Torah)
40|54|a guide and a reminder for people of understanding
40|55|So be patient (O Muhammad). Surely, the Promise of Allah is true, ask forgiveness for your fault, and glorify the praises of your Lord in the early evening Hours and in the early morning Hours
40|56|Surely, those who dispute about Allah’s Verses without any authority bestowed to them, there is nothing else in their hearts except arrogance. They will never have it (Prophethood which Allah has bestowed upon you). So seek refuge with Allah. Surely, He is the All-Hearer, All-Seer
40|57|The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed a greater task than the creation of mankind, yet most of mankind does not know
40|58|And not equal are the blind and those who see; nor are equal those who believe and do righteous deeds, and those who do evil. Little do you think
40|59|Surely, the Hour (Day of Judgment) is coming and there is no doubt about it, yet most people don’t believe
40|60|And your Lord said: “Invoke Me, I will respond to you. Surely! Those who are arrogant about My worship, they will surely enter hell in humiliation!”
40|61|It is Allah who has made the night for you so that you may rest in it and the day for you to see. Truly, Allah is Bountiful to mankind, yet most people don’t give thanks
40|62|That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, there is no one worthy of worship but He, how then you are turned away (from Him)
40|63|Thus those who were turned away were denying in the Verses of Allah
40|64|It is Allah Who has made for you the earth as a residing place and the sky as a canopy, has given you shape and made your shapes good looking and has provided you with good things. That is Allah, your Lord, then blessed be Allah, the Lord of the worlds
40|65|He is the Ever-living; there is no one worthy of worship but He, so invoke Him making your worship pure (alone) to Him. All the praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds
40|66|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely I have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship besides Allah, since there have come to me evidences from my Lord, and I am commanded to submit (in Islam) to the Lord of the worlds
40|67|It is He Who has created you from dust, then from a sperm, then from a clot, then brings you forth as children, then (make you grow) to reach the age of full strength, then afterwards to be old among you who die before, and you reach an appointed term in order that you may understand
40|68|It is He Who gives life and causes death. When He decides upon a thing, only He says to it: “Be!” and it is
40|69|Don’t you see those who dispute about the evidences of Allah? How are they turning away (from the truth)
40|70|Those who deny the book (this Qur’an) and that with which We sent Our Messengers, then they will come to know (in the fire)
40|71|when iron collars and the chains will be rounded over their necks, they shall be dragged along
40|72|in the boiling water, then they will be burned in the fire
40|73|Then it will be said to them: “Where are those whom you used to join in worship as partners
40|74|besides Allah?” They will say: “They have vanished from us. (Now we know that) we did not invoke (worship) anything before.” Thus Allah leads the disbelievers go astray
40|75|(It will be said): “That was because you used to be delighted in the earth without the right (worship others instead of Allah), and you used to rejoice extremely
40|76|Enter the gates of hell to abide forever in it, what an evil abode of the arrogant!”
40|77|So be patient (O Muhammad), surely, Allah’s Promise is true. Whether We show you (O Muhammad in this world) some part of that which We have promised them, or We cause you to die, then it is to Us, they all shall be returned
40|78|And indeed We have sent Messengers before you (O Muhammad); some of them We have related their story to you and some of them whom We have not related their story to you, and it was not given to any Messenger so that he may bring a Verse except by the permission of Allah. So when the Commandment of Allah came, the matter was decided with truth, and the followers of falsehood suffered the loss
40|79|It is Allah Who has made cattle for you so that you may ride on some of them and eat some of them
40|80|And you have many benefits in them; they carry you where you wish to reach that are in your hearts and on them as ships carry you (by sea)
40|81|And thus He shows you His signs. So which of the signs of Allah do you deny
40|82|Have they not traveled through the earth and seen how was the end of those from before them? They were more in numbers than them and mightier in strength, and (left behind them) the traces in the land, yet all that they used to earn did not avail them
40|83|When their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were glad with the (worldly) knowledge which they had; (the punishment) surrounded them at which they mocked
40|84|So when they saw Our punishment, they said: “We believe in Allah alone and reject all what we associated as partners with Him.”
40|85|But their faith (in Islam) could not avail them when they saw Our punishment. Such was the Way of Allah which were established in (dealing with) His servants. Thus the disbelievers were lost
41|1|Ha-Mim
41|2|A revelation from (Allah), the Beneficent, the Merciful
41|3|a book with its Verses are explained; Qur’an in Arabic language for people who understand
41|4|giving glad tidings and warning, but most of them turn away, so they don’t listen
41|5|They say: “Our hearts are covered (screened) from that to which you invite us, there is deafness in our ears and there is a screen between us and you; so you work (your way) and surely we are working (our way).”
41|6|Say (O Muhammad): “I am only a human being like you. It is revealed to me that your one worthy of worship is one Allah, therefore take Right Way to Him and seek forgiveness from Him. Woe to polytheists
41|7|those who don’t give the obligatory charity and they are disbelievers in the Hereafter
41|8|Surely, those who believe and do righteous deeds, they will have a reward without end.”
41|9|Say (O Muhammad): “Do you really disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in 2 days and do you set up rivals (in worship) with Him? That is the Lord of the worlds
41|10|He has placed in it (the earth) firm mountains from above it, and He blessed in it, and measured in it its sustenance in 4 days equal for all those who (live in and) ask for it
41|11|Then He rose over towards the heaven while it was smoke, and said to it and to the earth: ‘Come forward both of you willingly or unwillingly.’ They both said: ‘We shall come willingly.’
41|12|Then He completed and finished their creation of 7 heavens in 2 days and He made its laws in each heaven. We adorned the nearest (lowest) heaven with lamps (stars) and made it secure. Such is the Decree of the All-Mighty, the All-Knower.”
41|13|But if they turn away, then say (O Muhammad): “I have warned you of a destructive awful cry thunderbolt like that of Ad and Thamud (people).”
41|14|When the Messengers came to them from before them and behind them (saying): “Don’t worship but Allah,” They said: “If our Lord had so willed, He would surely have sent down the angels. So indeed! We disbelieve in what with which you have been sent.”
41|15|As for Ad, they were arrogant in the land without right and said: “Who is mightier than us in strength?” Don’t they see that Allah, Who created them, was mightier in strength than them? They used to deny Our Verses
41|16|So We sent upon them furious wind in days of evil sign so that We might give them a taste of the disgracing punishment in this worldly life, but surely the punishment of the Hereafter will be more disgracing, and they will never be helped
41|17|As for Thamud, We guided them but they preferred blindness to guidance, the destructive awful cry of disgracing punishment seized them because of their misdeeds
41|18|but We saved those who believed and feared Allah
41|19|(Remember) the Day that the enemies of Allah will be gathered to the fire, so they will be collected there
41|20|till, when they will reach it (hellfire), their ears, their eyes, and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do
41|21|They will say to their skins: “Why do you testify against us?” They will say: “Allah has caused us to speak as He causes all things to speak. He has created you the first time, and to Him you are made to return.”
41|22|You used to hide (in the worldly life with your sins and never thought) your ears, your eyes, and your skins will testify against you. Rather you thought that even Allah does not know much of what you were doing
41|23|That thought of yours which you thought about your Lord, has brought you to destruction, and you have become of those utterly lost
41|24|Then, whether they have patience (or not), the fire will be a home for them, and if they beg to be excused, they are not those who will ever be excused
41|25|We have assigned intimate companions (of like nature in the world) for them who have made their past and present seem fair to them. The word (of punishment) is justified against them which has passed away (generations) of jinns and men before them. Indeed they are losers
41|26|Those who disbelieve say: “Don’t listen to this Qur’an and make noise in it (during recitation) so that you may gain the upper hand.”
41|27|But surely, We shall cause the disbelievers to taste a severe punishment and We shall requite them the worst of what they used to do
41|28|Such is the recompense of the enemies of Allah: the fire will be their eternal home, a recompense for their denying Our revelations
41|29|Those who disbelieve will say: “Our Lord! Show us those from jinns and men who led us astray, we shall crush them under our feet so that they become the lowest.”
41|30|Surely, those who say: “Our Lord is Allah,” then stick to the Right Way, the angels will descend (at death) on them (saying): “Don’t fear or grieve, and receive the glad tidings of Paradise which you have been promised
41|31|We are your friend in the life of this world and in the Hereafter. You will find in it what your souls desire and you will find in it what you ask for
41|32|a hospitable gift from (Allah), the Forgiving, Merciful.”
41|33|Who is better in speech than the one who invites (people) to Allah, does righteous deeds, and says: “I am one of the Muslims?”
41|34|The good deed and the evil deed are not equal. Repel (evil) with one which is better. Then surely, one with whom you had enmity, will become your close friend
41|35|But none will be granted it (this quality) except those who are patient and none will be granted it except those who own the great portion of the happiness (with high moral character)
41|36|If an evil whisper from Satan comes to you (O Muhammad), seek refuge in Allah. Surely, He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
41|37|From among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Don’t prostrate to the sun or the moon, but prostrate to Allah Who created them, if you really worship Him
41|38|But if they are too proud (to do so), then those (angels) who are with your Lord, glorify Him night and day, and they never get tired
41|39|Among His signs, you see the earth barren; but when We send down water (rain) to it, it stirs to life and growth (of vegetations). Surely, He Who gives it life, surely, will be Able give life to the dead (on the Day of Resurrection). Indeed! He has power over all things
41|40|Surely, those who deviate concerning Our Verses are not hidden from Us. Is the one who is cast into the fire better or the one who emerges safe on the Day of Judgment? Do what you will. Surely! He is All-Seer of what you do
41|41|Surely, those who disbelieve in the reminder (the Qur’an) when it comes to them (should know that) surely, it is an honorable respected book
41|42|No falsehood can come to it from before or from behind. It is sent down from the All-Wise, Praise-worthy (Allah)
41|43|Nothing is said to you (O Muhammad) except surely what was said to the Messengers before you. Surely, your Lord is indeed the Possessor of Forgiveness, and (at the same time) the Possessor of painful punishment
41|44|If We had sent this Qur’an in a foreign language other than Arabic, they would have said: “Why its Verses are not explained in details (in our language)? What (a book if) not in Arabic and (the Messenger) an Arab?” Say: “It is for those who believe, a guide and a healing. As for those who disbelieve, there is deafness in their ears, and it (the Qur’an) is blindness for them. They are those who are (as if) called from a place far away (so they neither hear nor understand)
41|45|Indeed We gave Moses the Scripture, but dispute arose in it. Had it not been for the word that went forth from your Lord, the matter would have been settled between them. But truly, they are in suspicious doubt about it (the Qur’an)
41|46|Whoever does righteous deed, it is for his own self; and whoever does evil, it is against himself; and your Lord is not unjust to (His) servants
41|47|To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour (of Judgment). No fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive, nor does she give birth except with His knowledge. On the Day (of Judgment) when He will ask them (polytheists): “Where are My (so-called) partners?” They will say: “We confess to You that none of us bear witness to it!”
41|48|Those (deities) whom they used to invoke will vanish from them and they will realize that there is no place of refuge (to avoid punishment)
41|49|People (disbelievers) don’t get tired of asking good (things from Allah), but if an evil touches them, they give up all hope and are lost in despair
41|50|Truly, if We favor one with the taste of Mercy from Us after some adversity (poverty or disease) has touched him, one is sure to say: “This is for me (I deserve); I don’t think the Hour will be established. Even if I am brought back to my Lord, surely, there will be the best (treatment) from Him for me.” Surely, We shall inform those who disbelieve with what they have done and We shall make them taste a severe punishment
41|51|When We show favor to a person, he withdraws and turns away; but when evil touches the (same) person, then it has long supplications
41|52|(O Muhammad) ask: “Tell me, if it (the Qur’an) is really from Allah and you disbelieve in it, who is more astray than you who has gone far away in opposition (from truth)?”
41|53|We will show them Our signs in the universe and in their own selves, until it becomes clear to them that this (the Qur’an) is the truth. Is it not sufficient that your Lord is a witness over all things
41|54|Surely! They are in doubt concerning the meeting with their Lord (Day of Resurrection). Surely! It is He Who surrounds all things
42|1|Ha-Meem
42|2|Ain-Sinn-Qaf
42|3|Thus Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise inspires you (O Muhammad) and to those sent before you
42|4|To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. He is the High, the Great
42|5|The heavens might have almost broken apart from above them (by His glory) while the angels glorify the praises of their Lord and are asking forgiveness for those on the earth. Surely, Allah is indeed the Forgiving, the Merciful
42|6|For those who take others as protectors besides Him, Allah is the protector over them and you (O Muhammad) are not a guardian over them
42|7|Thus We have revealed to you (O Muhammad) this Qur’an in Arabic so that you may warn the residents of the mother town (Makkah) and whoever is around it. Warn them of the Day of assembling; there is no doubt about it; when a group (believers) will go to Paradise and a group (disbelievers) in the blazing fire
42|8|If Allah had willed, He could have made them one nation, but He admits whom He wills to His Mercy. The wrongdoers will not have any protector or a helper
42|9|Or have they taken guardians besides Him? But Allah alone is the Protector. He is the one Who gives life to the dead and it is He Who has power over all things
42|10|In whatever matter you differ, its decision is with Allah. (Say O Muhammad to the polytheists): Such is Allah, my Lord in whom I have put my trust, and to Him I turn in repentance
42|11|the creator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you mates from among yourselves and also mates among the cattle. He creates you (in the womb) by this means. There is no one like Him, and He is the All-Knower, the All-Seer
42|12|To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens (it for whom He wills). Surely! He is the All-Knower of everything
42|13|He has ordained for you the same religion (Islam) which He ordained for Noah, and which He has revealed to you (O Muhammad), and which He ordained for Abraham, Moses and Jesus (saying): “You should establish religion, and not be divided in it (various sects).” Intolerable is for the polytheists to which you (O Muhammad) call them to it. Allah chooses whom He wills, and guides to Himself who turns to Him in repentance and obedience
42|14|They were not divided till after knowledge had come to them through selfish transgressions between themselves. Had it not been for a word (to defer punishment) that went forth before from your Lord for an appointed term, the matter would have been settled between them. Surely, those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them are in serious doubt concerning it (the Qur’an)
42|15|So (O Muhammad) invite people to this (Islam), stand firm as you are commanded, and don’t follow their desires but say: “I believe in what Allah has revealed of the book (all revealed books), and I am commanded to do justice among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. We are (responsible) for our deeds and you are for your deeds. There is no dispute between us and between you. Allah will assemble us (on the Day of Judgment) and to Him is the final return
42|16|Those who dispute concerning Allah after accepting (obedience) to Him, their dispute is futile in the sight of their Lord, on them is the wrath (of Allah), and for them there will be a severe punishment
42|17|It is Allah Who has revealed the book (the Qur’an) in truth and the balance (to distinguish between right and wrong). What will make you realize that perhaps the Hour (of Judgment) is near at hand
42|18|Those who don’t believe in it, seek to hasten it. But those who believe are fearful of it, and they know that it is the very truth. Surely, indeed those who dispute concerning the Hour (of judgment) are certainly in error far away
42|19|Allah is very gracious and kind to His servants. He gives provisions to whom He wills. He is the All-Strong, the All-Mighty.”
42|20|Whoever desires (for good deeds) the reward of the Hereafter, We increase (many fold) in its reward, and whoever desires the reward of this world (for good deeds), We give it thereof (what is meant for), but will have no portion in the Hereafter
42|21|Or do they have partners (false deities), who have instituted for them from religion what Allah has not allowed? Had it not been a decisive word (already decided on the Day of Judgment), the matter would have been judged between them? Surely, for the wrongdoers, there is a painful punishment
42|22|You will see (on the Day of Resurrection) that the wrongdoers will fear for what they have earned, and it (Allah’s punishment) will befall them. While those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in the flowering meadows of the gardens (Paradise) and will receive for them what they wish from their Lord. That will be the supreme grace
42|23|That is (the grace) of glad tidings which Allah gives to His servants who believe and do righteous deeds. Say (O Muhammad): “I don’t ask any reward for it except to be kind to me for kinship with you.” Whoever does a righteous deed, We shall increase (many fold) for him in it. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Ready to appreciate (good deeds)
42|24|Or do they say: “He has invented a lie against Allah?” But if Allah willed, He could have sealed your heart. Allah wipes out falsehood, and establishes the truth (Islam) by His Word (this Qur’an). Surely, He knows well what is in the hearts (of people)
42|25|And He is One Who accepts repentance from His servants, forgives their sins, and He knows what you do
42|26|And He answers those who believe, do righteous deeds, and gives them increase of His Bounty. As for the disbelievers, there will be a severe punishment
42|27|If Allah were to enlarge the provision for His servants, they would surely rebel in the earth; but He sends down by measure what He wills. Surely! He is Well-Aware, the All-Seer of everything of His servants
42|28|It is He who sends down the rain after they have lost hope, and spreads His Mercy. He is the Protector, Praise-Worthy
42|29|Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the moving creatures that He has spread in both of them. He is potent over their assembly (on the Day of Resurrection) whenever He wills
42|30|Whatever misfortune befalls you, it is because of what your hands have earned. He pardons from much (of your misdeeds)
42|31|You cannot escape from Allah (His punishment) in the earth, and besides Allah you have neither any protector nor any helper
42|32|Among His signs are the ships like mountains in the sea
42|33|If He wills, He can cause the wind to settle and then they would become motionless on the back (of the sea). Surely, in this example there are signs for everyone (who is) patient and grateful
42|34|Or He may destroy them (by drowning) because of that which their people have earned. He pardons much (of their evil deeds)
42|35|Those who (polytheists) dispute about Our revelations should know that there is no place of refuge (from Allah’s punishment) for them
42|36|Whatever you are given is nothing but a passing enjoyment for this worldly life. What is with Allah (Paradise) is better and more lasting for those who believe, put their trust in their Lord
42|37|avoid major sins and shameful deeds, forgive even when they are angry
42|38|answer the call of their Lord, establish their prayers, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, spend of what We have bestowed on them
42|39|and when they are oppressed, take defense
42|40|The recompense for an injury is an injury like thereof; but whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, it shall be rewarded by Allah. Surely, He does not like the wrongdoers
42|41|Those who take revenge after they have suffered wrong, for such there is no way (of blame) against them
42|42|The way (of blame) is only against those who oppress people and rebel in the earth without right. It is they who will have a painful punishment
42|43|Surely, those who show patience and forgive, surely would be from the steadfast things
42|44|Those whom Allah sends astray, there is no protector for them after Him. When they will face the punishment, you will see the wrongdoers say: “Is there any way for return (to the world)?”
42|45|You will see them brought forward to it (hell) made humble by disgrace, looking with stealthy glance. Those who believe will say: “Surely, the losers are they who have lost themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Surely, indeed the wrongdoers will be in a lasting punishment.”
42|46|They will not have any protector in it to help them other than Allah. The one whom Allah sends astray, there is no way of escape
42|47|Answer the call of your Lord before there comes from Allah a Day which cannot be averted. You will not have any refuge on that Day nor will you be able to deny (your misdeeds)
42|48|But if they turn away, (they should know that) We have not sent you (O Muhammad) over them as a guardian. Your duty is to convey (the message). Surely, when We cause people to taste the Mercy from Us, they rejoice in it; but when some ill befalls them because of (misdeeds) which their hands have sent forth, then surely, the people become ungrateful
42|49|To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He bestows female (daughter) to whom He wills and bestows male (son) to whom He wills
42|50|Or He combines them both males and females, and He renders barren whom He wills. Surely, He is the All-Knower of everything and is Able to do all things
42|51|It is not given to any human being that Allah should speak (directly) unless (it be) by inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by sending a Messenger to reveal by His permission what He wills. Surely, He is High, Wise
42|52|Thus We have sent to you (O Muhammad) a revelation (Qur’an) of Our command. You did not know what the book is or what the faith is! But We have made it (this Qur’an) a light, We guide by it whoever We will of Our servants. Surely, you (O Muhammad) are indeed guiding mankind to the Right Way
42|53|the way of Allah, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. Surely, all the matters return to Allah (for decision)
43|1|Ha-Mim
43|2|By the clear book (the Qur’an)
43|3|Surely, We surely has revealed it a Qur’an in Arabic so that you may be able to understand
43|4|And surely, it (this Qur’an) is in the mother of the book (Al-Lauh Al-Mahfooz) before US, indeed exalted, full of wisdom
43|5|Should We then take away the reminder (this Qur’an) from you in your rejection because you are a transgressing people
43|6|And how many prophets have We sent amongst the previous people
43|7|Never came to them a prophet and they did not mock at him
43|8|So We destroyed people stronger than them in power, and the example of the ancient people has passed away (before them)
43|9|Indeed if you (O Muhammad) ask them: “Who has created the heavens and the earth?” They will surely say: “The All-Mighty, the All-Knower of everything created them.”
43|10|(Allah) Who has made the earth like a bed for you and has made roads for you in it in order that you may find your way
43|11|and Who sends down water (rain) from the sky in due measure. Then We revive a dead land from it, and even so you will be brought out (from the dead again)
43|12|and Who has created all the pairs and has appointed for you from ships and cattle on which you ride
43|13|in order that you may mount firmly on their backs, and then may remember the Favor of your Lord when you mount on them, and say: “Glory to Allah who has subjected this to us, and we could never have ability for it (by our efforts)
43|14|and surely, to our Lord we all shall return.”
43|15|Yet they assign to some of His servants a share with Him (as partners). Surely, mankind is clearly ungrateful
43|16|Or has He taken daughters (pagan Arabs used to believe that angels were daughters of Allah) out of what He has created, and has He selected for you sons
43|17|Yet, if the news of one (the birth of a girl) of them is informed which it sets forth as a parable to the Beneficent (Allah), its face becomes dark, gloomy, and is filled with grief
43|18|(Do they then like for Allah) a creature who is brought up in ornaments (women) and is unable to make itself clear in dispute
43|19|And they regard the angels as females who themselves are servants of the beneficent (Allah). Did they witness their creation? Their witness will be recorded and they will be questioned
43|20|And they say: “If it had been the Will of the beneficent (Allah), we would not have worshipped them (false deities).” They don’t have any knowledge of that. They don’thing but lie
43|21|Or have We given them any book before this (the Qur’an) which they hold fast to it
43|22|Nay! They said: “We found our forefathers following on a certain way and religion, and we guide ourselves on their footsteps.”
43|23|And similarly, whenever We sent a Warner before you (O Muhammad) to any town (people), its luxurious people among them said: “We found our forefathers following on a certain way and religion, and we are indeed following their footsteps.”
43|24|(The Warner) said: “What if I bring you better guidance than that which you found your forefathers on it?” They said: “Surely, We disbelieve in it with which you have been sent.”
43|25|So We took retribution on them; and then see how the end of those who denied was
43|26|(Remember) when Abraham said to his father and his people: “Surely, I renounce (deities) that you worship
43|27|except Him (alone) who created me, and surely, He will guide me.”
43|28|And he made it a word lasting among his offspring so that they may turn back (to repent to Allah)
43|29|Nay, but I gave (good things) to these (polytheists) and their forefathers to enjoy (this life), till there came to them the truth (the Qur’an) and a Messenger (Muhammad) making things clear
43|30|And when the truth (this Qur’an) came to them, they (disbelievers) said: “This is magic, and we don’t believe in it.”
43|31|And they said: “Why is this Qur’an not sent down to some great man of the 2 towns (Makkah and Taif)?”
43|32|Is it they who would distribute the Mercy of your Lord? It is We Who distributes between them their livelihood in the life of this world, and We raise some of them above others in ranks, so that some may employ others in their work. The Mercy of your (O Muhammad) Lord is better than the (wealth of this world) which they accumulate
43|33|And were it not that all mankind would become one community (of disbelievers), We would have provided for those who disbelieve in the Beneficent (Allah), silver roofs for their houses, and elevators on which they mount
43|34|and doors (of silver) for their houses and thrones (of silver) on which they recline
43|35|and adornments of gold. Yet all these are nothing but an enjoyment of the life of this world. And the Hereafter is only for the pious which is with your Lord
43|36|And whoever turns away from the remembrance of the Beneficent (Allah), We appoint a Satan for it who becomes a companion for him
43|37|and surely, they (Satans) hinder them from the Way (of Allah) but they think that they are guided aright
43|38|Till, when such one comes to Us (on the Day of Judgment), it says (to its Satan): “I wish that between me and you were the distance of the 2 easts (or the east and west), you were an evil companion!”
43|39|(It will be said to them): “It will not profit you this Day as you already did wrong, and both of you will be sharing the punishment.”
43|40|Can you (O Muhammad) make the deaf to hear, or guide the blind or those who are in clear error
43|41|And even if We take you (O Muhammad) away, We shall indeed take retribution on them
43|42|or if We show you (the end of) what We have threatened them, then surely, We have perfect command over them
43|43|So you (O Muhammad) hold fast to that (the Qur’an) which is revealed to you. Surely, you are on a Right Way
43|44|And surely, this (the Qur’an) is indeed a reminder for you (O Muhammad), your people, and you will be questioned about it
43|45|And ask (O Muhammad) those of Our Messengers whom We sent before you: “Did We ever appoint any other one worthy of worship to be worshipped besides the Beneficent (Allah)?”
43|46|And indeed We sent Moses with Our Signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs (inviting them to Allah). He said: “Surely, I am a Messenger of the Lord of the worlds.”
43|47|When he came to them with Our Signs, behold! They laughed at them
43|48|Yet, We showed them sign after sign each greater than its preceding and We seized them with punishment in order that they might turn (to Right Way)
43|49|And then they said (to Moses): “O you sorcerer! Invoke your Lord for us according to what He has entrusted with you. Surely, We shall guide.”
43|50|But when We removed the punishment from them, behold! They broke their covenant
43|51|Then Pharaoh proclaimed amongst his people, saying: “O my people! Is not the dominion of Egypt mine? Are not these rivers flowing underneath me? Then don’t you see
43|52|Or am I not better than this one (Moses), who is despicable and can hardly express himself clearly
43|53|(If he is true Messenger) why then bracelets of gold are not bestowed on him, or angels sent along with him?”
43|54|Thus he (Pharaoh) befooled and misled his people, and they obeyed him. Surely, they were a people who were sinners
43|55|So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all
43|56|and We made them a precedent (a lesson for future), and an example to later generations
43|57|And when the son of Mary (Jesus) is quoted as an example (Jesus is worshipped like their idols), behold! Your people cry aloud about it
43|58|and say: “Are our deities better or is he (Jesus)?” They did not quote the above example for you except for argument. But they are a quarrelsome people
43|59|He (Jesus) was not more than a servant (of Allah). We granted Our Favor to him, and We made him an example to the children of Israel (created without a father)
43|60|And if it were Our Will, We would have (destroyed mankind and) made angels to replace you on the earth
43|61|And he (Jesus) is a known sign for the (coming of the) Hour (Day of Resurrection). Therefore, don’t have doubt concerning it (the Day of Resurrection). And follow Me! This is the Right Way
43|62|Let not Satan hinders you (from the right religion). Surely, he is your open enemy
43|63|When Jesus came with (Our) clear signs, he said: “Surely I have come to you with wisdom (Prophethood), and to clarify to you some of the points in which you differ, therefore fear Allah and obey me
43|64|Surely, it is He Who is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him (alone). This is the Right Way.”
43|65|But the sects differed among themselves. So woe to the wrongdoers (who ascribe things to Jesus that are not true) from the punishment of the painful Day (of Resurrection)
43|66|Are they only waiting for the Hour that it will come on them suddenly, while they don’t perceive
43|67|On that Day, even friends will be enemies to one another accept the pious
43|68|(It will be said to the believers): “My worshippers! Today you have nothing to fear or to grieve
43|69|you are those who believed in Our Revelations and were Muslims
43|70|‘Enter Paradise, you and your wives in happiness.’”
43|71|Trays of gold and cups will be (used to) serve round them, there will be everything that the souls could desire, and all that their eyes can delight in, and (it will be said to them): “You will abide in it forever
43|72|This is the Paradise which you have made to inherit because of your good deeds which you used to do (in the world)
43|73|in it you will have plenty of fruits to eat.”
43|74|But the criminals will abide in the punishment of hell forever
43|75|(Their punishment) will not be lightened for them and they will be plunged into destruction with despair in it
43|76|We did not wrong them, but they were the wrongdoers
43|77|They will cry: “O Malik (keeper of hell)! Let your Lord put an end to us.” It will say: “Surely you shall abide forever.”
43|78|Indeed We have brought the truth (the Qur’an) to you, but most of you hate the truth
43|79|Or have they plotted some plan (against you O Muhammad)? Then We too are planning (to destroy them)
43|80|Or do they think that We don’t hear their secrets and their private counsel? Of course Our Messengers (angels) are recording by them
43|81|Say (O Muhammad): “If the Beneficent (Allah) (suppose) had a son, then I would be the first of worshippers.”
43|82|Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne! (Exalted be He) above all that they ascribe (to Him)
43|83|So leave them alone to speak nonsense and play until they meet their Day, which they have been promised
43|84|It is He Who is to be worshipped in the heaven and to be worshipped on the earth. And He is the All-Wise, the All-Knower
43|85|And blessed be He to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He (alone) has the knowledge of the Hour (of judgment), and to Whom you all will be returned
43|86|And those whom they invoke besides Him, has no power of intercession; except those who bear witness to the truth (believers), and they know (the facts about the Oneness of Allah)
43|87|And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say: “Allah.” How then are they turned away (from Allah)
43|88|(Allah has knowledge) of (Muhammad’s) saying: “O my Lord! Surely, these are a people who don’t believe!”
43|89|So turn away from them (O Muhammad), and say: Salam (peace)! They will come to know (the truth)
44|1|Ha-Mim
44|2|By the clear book (the Qur’an)
44|3|Surely We sent it (this Qur’an) down in a blessed night (of Qadr in the month of Ramadan). Surely, We are ever warning (mankind)
44|4|in it (that night) every matter is decided wisely
44|5|by a command from Us. Surely, We have ever sending (the Messengers)
44|6|(as) Mercy from your Lord. Surely! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower
44|7|The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you have faith with certainty
44|8|There is no true one worthy of worship but He. It is He Who gives life and causes death, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers
44|9|Nay! They play in doubt
44|10|Then you wait for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke
44|11|covering the people, this will be a painful punishment
44|12|(People will say): “Our Lord! Remove the punishment from us, really we have become believers!”
44|13|How can there be an admonition (at the time when the punishment has reached) for them when a Messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them
44|14|Yet, they turn away from him (Muhammad) and said: “He (Muhammad) is a madman, taught (by others)!”
44|15|Surely, We shall remove the punishment (famine) for a while. But you will return (to disbelief)
44|16|On the Day We shall seize you with the greatest grasp. Surely, We will take retribution
44|17|And indeed We tried Pharaoh’s people before them, when a noble Messenger (Moses) came to them
44|18|saying: “Deliver the servants of Allah (the children of Israel) to me. Surely! I am a Messenger to you worthy of all trust
44|19|And don’t exalt (yourselves) against Allah. Truly, I have come to you with a clear authority
44|20|And truly, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me
44|21|But if you don’t believe me, then keep away from me and leave me alone.”
44|22|So he (Moses) called upon (when they were aggressive) his Lord (saying) indeed: “These are criminal people.”
44|23|(Allah said): “You depart with My servants by night. Surely, you will be pursued
44|24|And (when you have crossed the sea with your people), then leave the sea as it is (quiet and divided). Surely, they are a host to be drowned.”
44|25|How many gardens and springs did they (Pharaoh’s people) leave behind
44|26|and corn-fields and goodly places
44|27|and comforts (of life) they used to take delight in it
44|28|Thus We made other people inherit them (the children of Israel inherit the kingdom of Egypt)
44|29|And neither the heavens and the earth did weep for them, nor were they given a respite
44|30|And indeed We saved the children of Israel from the humiliating punishment
44|31|from Pharaoh. Surely! He was arrogant and was one of the transgressors
44|32|and surely, We chose them (the children of Israel) above the worlds (during the time of Moses) with knowledge
44|33|And granted them signs in which there was a plain trial
44|34|Surely, these (people of Quraish) say
44|35|“There is nothing after our first death and we shall not be resurrected
44|36|Bring back our forefathers if you speak the truth!”
44|37|Are they better than the people of Tubba and those who were before them? We destroyed them because they were indeed criminals
44|38|And We did not create the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, for merely a play
44|39|We have not created them but (to reveal) the truth, but most of them don’t know
44|40|Surely, the Day of judgment is the time appointed for all of them
44|41|the Day when a near relative cannot avail a relative in anything, nor they can receive help
44|42|except those on whom Allah will show Mercy. Surely, He is the Mighty, the Merciful
44|43|Surely, the tree of Zaqqum (very bitter taste)
44|44|will be the food of the sinners
44|45|like boiling oil, it will boil in the bellies
44|46|like the boiling of scalding water
44|47|(It will be said): “Seize and drag him into the midst of blazing fire
44|48|then pour from the punishment of boiling water over its head
44|49|taste you (this)! Surely, you were (pretending to be) the mighty, the noble
44|50|Surely! This is what you used to doubt about it!”
44|51|Surely! The pious will be in place of security (Paradise)
44|52|among gardens and springs
44|53|dressed in fine silk and also in thick silk, facing each other
44|54|So (it will be), and We shall marry them to Houris (fair females) with wide lovely eyes
44|55|They will call in it for every kind of fruit in peace and security
44|56|they will never taste death in it except the first death (of this world), and He will save them from the punishment of the blazing fire
44|57|as a Bounty from your Lord! That will be the supreme success
44|58|Certainly, We have made this (Qur’an) easy in your tongue in order that they may remember
44|59|Wait then (O Muhammad); surely, they too are waiting
45|1|Ha-Mim
45|2|The revelation of the book (this Qur’an) is from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
45|3|Surely, in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the believers
45|4|in your own creation and that of moving creatures which He has scattered (through the earth), there are signs for people who have firm faith
45|5|and in the alternation of the night and the day, in the provision that Allah sends down from the sky and revives with it the earth after its death and in the turning of the winds, there are signs for those people who understand
45|6|These are the revelations of Allah, which We recite to you (O Muhammad) with truth. Then in which report after Allah and His revelations, will they believe
45|7|Woe to every sinful liar
45|8|before whom the revelations of Allah are recited, yet persists with pride as if it did not hear them. So announce a painful punishment to them
45|9|And when one learns something of Our Revelations (this Qur’an), it takes them as a joke. For such people, there will be a humiliating punishment
45|10|In front of them there is hell, and nothing of what they have earned (in this world) will be of any benefit to them, nor those whom they have taken as protectors besides Allah. They will have a great punishment
45|11|This (Qur’an) is guidance. Those who disbelieve in the revelations of their Lord, there will be a terrible painful punishment for them
45|12|Allah, it is He Who has subjected the sea to you, so that the ships may sail through it by His Command, and that you may seek His Bounty and you may be thankful
45|13|and has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth; all from Him. Surely, there are signs for those people who think deeply in it
45|14|Say (O Muhammad) to those who have believed, to forgive those who don’t hope for the (bad) days from Allah, so that He may recompense those people according to what they have earned
45|15|Whoever does a good deed, it is for its own self; and whoever does evil, it is against it (own self). Then you will be made to return to your Lord
45|16|And indeed We gave the Scripture to the children of Israel, the understanding of the Scripture, and the Prophethood, and provided them with good things of life, and preferred them above all the worlds (during that time)
45|17|and gave them clear proofs of matters (revealed in the Torah). They did not differ until after the knowledge had come to them, through transgression among themselves. Surely, Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about which they used to differ
45|18|Then We have put you (O Muhammad) on the plain Way of (Our) commandment. So follow it (Islam) and don’t follow the desires of those who don’t know
45|19|surely, they can avail you nothing against Allah. Surely, the wrongdoers are friends of one another, while Allah is the protector of the pious people
45|20|This (Qur’an) is a clear insight and evidence for mankind; guidance and a Mercy for those who have firm faith
45|21|Or do those evil doers think that We shall make them equal with those who believe and do righteous deeds, in their present life and after their death? Worst is the judgment that they make
45|22|And Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth, in order that each person may be recompensed what it has earned, and none of them will be wronged
45|23|Have you seen the one who has taken its own desires as worthy of worship? And Allah lets it astray upon knowing, and sealed over its hearing and its heart, and put a cover on its sight. Who then will guide him after Allah (has withdrawn)? Will you not then remember
45|24|And they (disbelievers) say: “There is nothing but our life of this world. We die and we live, nothing but time destroys us.” They have no knowledge of it, verily they are only guessing
45|25|And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, their argument is not except that they say: “Bring back our dead forefathers if you are truthful!”
45|26|(O Muhammad) say (to them): “Allah gives you life and then causes you to die; then He will assemble you to the Day of Resurrection. There is no doubt about it. But most people don’t know.”
45|27|And to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On the Day when the Hour (of judgment) will be established, the followers of falsehood shall lose on that Day
45|28|And you will see every nation humbled to its knees. Each nation will be called to its Record (of deeds). (It will be said): “This Day you shall be recompensed for what you used to do
45|29|This Our record speaks about you with truth. Surely, We were recording (by angels) what you used to do.”
45|30|Then, as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them into His Mercy. That will be the clear success
45|31|But as for those who disbelieved (it will be said to them): “Were not Our Revelations recited to you? But you were proud and became a nation of criminals.”
45|32|And when it was said: “Surely! Allah’s Promise is true and there is no doubt about the Hour (of judgment).” You used to say: ‘We don’t know what is the Hour (of Judgment); we think it only as a guess, and we have no firm convincing belief.’”
45|33|And the evil of their deeds will appear to them and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
45|34|And it will be said: “This Day We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours. Your abode will be the fire, and there will be no helper for you
45|35|This is because you used to take the revelations of Allah (this Qur’an) as a joke and the life of the world deceived you.” So this Day neither they shall be taken out from there (hell), nor shall they be allowed excuses (to amend their ways to please Allah)
45|36|So all the praises and thanks are to Allah, the Lord of the heavens, the Lord of the earth, and the Lord of the worlds
45|37|And to Him belongs the Majesty in the heavens and the earth, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
46|1|Ha-Mim
46|2|The revelation of the book (this Qur’an) is from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
46|3|We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth, and for an appointed term. Those who disbelieve turn away from that where they are warned
46|4|Say (O Muhammad): “Do you see what you invoke besides Allah? Show me what have they created of the earth? Or do they have any share in (the creation of) the heavens? Bring me any book (revealed) before this or some trace of knowledge (to support your claims), if you are truthful!”
46|5|And who is more astray than one who calls (deities) besides Allah, one who will not answer till the Day of Resurrection, and who are not even aware of their calls to them
46|6|And when mankind shall be gathered (on the Day of Resurrection), they (false deities) will become enemies for them and will deny their worshipping
46|7|And when Our clear revelations are recited to them, and the truth (this Qur’an) reaches them, the disbelievers say: “This is plain magic!”
46|8|Or they say: “He (Muhammad) has fabricated it.” Say: “If I have fabricated it, then you have no power to support me in anything against (the Wrath of) Allah. He knows better of what you say among yourselves concerning it (this Qur’an)! He is sufficient as a witness between me and between you! And He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
46|9|Say (O Muhammad): “I am not a new thing among the Messengers (of Allah) and I don’t know what will be done with me or with you. I only follow what is revealed to me, and I am not but a plain Warner.”
46|10|Say: “Do you see, if this (Qur’an) is from Allah and you deny it, and a witness from the children of Israel (Abdullah bin Salam) has testified to its similarity (that this Qur’an is from Allah like the Torah), and he has believed (embraced Islam), while you are too proud (to believe). Surely! Allah does not guide the wrongdoers.”
46|11|And those who disbelieve (strong and wealthy) say to those who believe (weak and poor): “Had it (the Qur’an) been a good thing, they (believers) would not have believed in it before us!” Since they did not accept its guidance (this Qur’an), they say: “This is an ancient lie!”
46|12|And from before, this was the Scripture of Moses as a guide and a Mercy. This book (the Qur’an) confirms it. It is revealed in the Arabic language to warn those who do wrong, and as glad tidings to the righteous people
46|13|Surely, those who say: “Our Lord is (only) Allah,” and thereafter stand firm, there shall be no fear on them, nor they shall grieve
46|14|They shall be the residents of Paradise, abide in it forever, a reward for what they used to do
46|15|And We have enjoined on people to be dutiful and kind to their parents. Its mother bears it with hardships and she brings it forth with hardships, and the bearing of it, and the weaning of it is 30 months. Till when it attains full strength and reaches 40 years, it says: “My Lord! Grant me the power and ability so that I may be grateful for Your Favor which You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and that I may do righteous deeds such as to please You, and make my offspring good for me. Truly, I have turned to You in repentance, and truly, I am one of the Muslims.”
46|16|They are those from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds and overlook their evil deeds. They will be among the residents of Paradise, a Promise of truth which they have been promised
46|17|But one who says to its parents: “Uff upon you both! Do you hold out the promise to me that I shall be raised up again and surely generations before me have passed away (without rising)?” While they (father and mother) invoke Allah (for help and rebuke their son): “Woe to you! Believe! Surely, the Promise of Allah is true.” But he says: “This is nothing but the tales of the ancient.”
46|18|They are those against whom the word (of punishment) is justified and they will be among the previous generations of jinns and mankind that surely have passed away. Surely! They will be the losers
46|19|For all, there will be ranks according to their deed, so that He may recompense them fully for their deeds. They will not be wronged
46|20|On the Day when those who disbelieved will be exposed to the fire (it will be said): “You received your good things in the life of the world, and you took your pleasure in it. Now this Day you shall be recompensed with a punishment of humiliation because you were arrogant in the land without a right, and because you used to rebel and disobey (Allah).”
46|21|And remember (Hud) the brother of Ad, when he warned his people in the curved sand-hills (located in the southern part of Arabian Peninsula). Surely, warners have passed before him and after him (saying): “Worship none but Allah. Truly, I fear for you the punishment of a mighty Day.”
46|22|They said: “Have you come to us to turn us away from our deity? Then bring us that (punishment) with which you threaten us, if you are one of the truthful!”
46|23|He said: “The knowledge (of the time of its coming) is only with Allah. I convey to you what I have been sent herewith, but I see that you are ignorant people.”
46|24|Then, when they saw it (punishment) as a dense cloud coming towards their valleys, they said: “This cloud will bring us rain.” Nay, but it is that (punishment) which you were asking to be hastened! It is a wind in it is a painful punishment
46|25|It will destroy everything by the command of its Lord. So they became such that nothing could be seen except their (ruined) residences! Thus We did recompense the people who were criminals
46|26|And indeed We had firmly established them much better than We have established you (O Quraish of Makkah)! And We had assigned for them hearing, seeing, and hearts. But their hearing, seeing and their hearts availed them nothing since they used to deny the revelations of Allah, and they were completely encircled by that which they used to mock at
46|27|And indeed We have destroyed towns (populations) around you, and We have shown them in various ways the revelations so that they may return (to the truth)
46|28|Then why did those whom they had taken as deities besides Allah, as a way of approach (to Allah) not help them? Nay, but they (deities) vanished completely from them (where punishment came). Those were their lies and false inventions (before their destruction)
46|29|And (remember) when We have sent towards you (Muhammad) a party of the jinns, quietly listening to the Qur’an when they stood in the presence thereof, they said: “Listen in silence!” When it was finished, they returned to their people, as warners
46|30|They said: “O our people! Surely! We have listened to a book (this Qur’an) sent down after Moses, confirming what came before it, and it guides to the truth and to the Right Way (Islam)
46|31|O our people! Respond to Allah’s caller (Muhammad), and believe in him. He will forgive you from your sins and will save you from a painful punishment (hellfire)
46|32|And whoever does not respond to Allah’s caller, it cannot escape on earth, and there will not be protectors for it besides Allah (from His punishment). Those people are in clear error.”
46|33|Don’t they see that Allah, who created the heavens and the earth and was not tired by their creation, is Able to give life to the dead? Yes, surely He has power over all things
46|34|On the Day when those who disbelieve will be exposed to the fire, (it will be said): “Is this not the truth?” They will say: “Yes, by our Lord!” He will say: “Taste the punishment, because you used to disbelieve!”
46|35|Therefore be patient (O Muhammad) as endured by those Messengers of strong will and don’t haste about them (disbelievers). On the Day when they will see that (punishment) with which they are being threatened as if they had not stayed more than an Hour in a single day. (This Qur’an is sufficient as) a clear message. But shall anyone be destroyed except the people who are sinners
47|1|Those who disbelieve and hinder people from the Way of Allah, He will render their deeds vain
47|2|But those who believe, do righteous deeds, and believe in what is sent down to Muhammad, for it is the truth from their Lord, He will remove their sins from them, and will make their condition good
47|3|That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus Allah does set forth their examples for mankind
47|4|So, when you meet (fight with) those who disbelieve, strike at their necks till you have killed and wounded many of them, then bind a bond firmly (and take them as captives). After the war lays down its burden, then either show generosity (free them without ransom), or ransom (to benefit Islam). But if Allah had willed, He could certainly have won over them. But (He adapted this way) in order to test some of you with others. Those who are killed in the Way of Allah, He will never let their deeds be lost
47|5|He will guide them and set their state right
47|6|and admit them to Paradise which He has made known to them
47|7|O you who believe! If you help (the Cause of) Allah, He will help you, and make your foothold firm
47|8|But those who disbelieve, there is destruction for them, and (Allah) will make their deeds vain
47|9|That is because they hate that which Allah has sent down (this Qur’an), so He has made their deeds fruitless
47|10|Have they not traveled through the earth and seen how was the end of those before them? Allah destroyed them completely and its likeness (similar fate waits) for the disbelievers
47|11|That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe and the disbelievers have no protector
47|12|Certainly! Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds, to gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise). While those who disbelieve, enjoy themselves (in worldly life) and eat as cattle eat, but the fire will be abode for them
47|13|And many towns were stronger in strength than your town (Makkah) (O Muhammad), which has driven you out, We have destroyed them. There was none to help them
47|14|Is the one who is on a clear proof from its Lord be compared to those for whom their evil deeds are beautified for them, while they follow their own lusts (evil desires)
47|15|The description of Paradise which has been Promised for those who fear is that there are rivers of water not stagnant in it, rivers of milk whose taste never changes, rivers of wine delicious to those who drink, and rivers of clarified honey. In it, they will have every kind of fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord. (Are these) like those who shall reside forever in the fire and be given to drink boiling water so that it cuts up their intestines
47|16|And among them there are some who listen to you (O Muhammad) till, when they go out from you, they say to those who have received knowledge: “What has he said just now?” Such are those Allah has sealed on their hearts and they follow their lusts (evil desires)
47|17|Those who accept guidance, He will increase their guidance and bestow on them their piety
47|18|Are they waiting for the Hour (of judgment) so that it should come upon them suddenly? But indeed some of its signs have already come and when it will actually be on them, then how can they benefit by their reminder
47|19|So know (O Muhammad) that there is no one worthy of worship but Allah, and ask forgiveness for your sins, and also for believing men and believing women. Allah knows your activities well and your resting place (homes)
47|20|Those who believe say: “Why is not a Surah (chapter of the Qur’an) sent down (to allow us to fight)? But when a decisive Surah is sent down and fighting (in Allah’s Cause) is mentioned in it, you will see those in whose hearts is a disease (of hypocrisy) looking at you with a look of one fainting to death. But it was better for them
47|21|Obedience (to Allah) and good words (are better for them). When the matter (preparation for fight) is resolved, then if they had been true to Allah, it would have been better for them
47|22|Would you might then, if you were given the authority, do mischief in the land, and sever your ties of kinship
47|23|Such are they whom Allah has cursed so that He has made them deaf and blinded their sight
47|24|Will they not then think deeply in the Qur’an? Or are there locks in their hearts
47|25|Surely, those who turn on their backs after the guidance has become clear, Satan has beautified for them (false hopes), and (Allah) has prolonged them (their age)
47|26|This is because they said to those who hate what Allah has sent down: “We will obey you in some matter,” but Allah knows their secrets
47|27|Then what will they do when the angels will take their souls at death, striking their faces and their backs
47|28|That is because they followed what angered Allah and hated what pleased Him. So He made their deeds wasted
47|29|Or do those in whose hearts is a disease (of hypocrisy) think that Allah will never bring to light their hidden ill-wills
47|30|If We willed, We could have shown them to you and you would have known them by their marks. But surely, you will know them by the tone of their speech! Allah knows all your deeds
47|31|And surely, We shall try you till We know those who strive hard (for Allah) and from you the patient ones, and We shall test your facts (whether lying or not)
47|32|Surely, those who disbelieve and hinder people from the Way of Allah, and oppose the Messenger after the guidance has been clearly shown to them, they will never hurt Allah in the least, but He will make their deeds fruitless
47|33|O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger (Muhammad) and don’t render vain your deeds
47|34|Surely, those who disbelieve, and hinder people from the Way of Allah, then die while they are disbelievers; Allah will never forgive them
47|35|So don’t be weak and ask for peace while you have upper hand. Allah is with you, and will never decrease the reward of your good deeds
47|36|The life of this world is but play and pastime. But if you believe and fear Allah, and avoid evil, He will grant you your wages, and will not ask you your wealth
47|37|If He were to ask you of it, and press you, you would withhold with extreme desire, and He will bring out all your ill-wills
47|38|Behold! You are those who are called to spend in the Cause of Allah. Yet among you are some who are stingy. Whoever is stingy, and then one is stingy only to one’s own self. But Allah is Rich, and you people are poor. If you turn away (from the obedience of Allah), He will exchange you by some other people besides you who will not be like you
48|1|Surely, Allah has given to you (O Muhammad) a clear victory (treaty of Hudaibiyah)
48|2|so that Allah may forgive your past as well as future sins, complete His Favor on you, and guide you to the Right Way
48|3|and Allah may offer you with strong help
48|4|It is He Who has sent down the tranquility into the hearts of the believers so that they may add more faith to their present faith. And to Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. Allah is the All-Knower, the All-Wise
48|5|(For good deeds) He may admit the believing men and the believing women to gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), to abide in it forever and to compensate them from their sins, and that is the supreme success with Allah
48|6|and He may punish the hypocritical men and women, and also the polytheist men and women, who thought evil thoughts about Allah. For them there is a disgraceful punishment and the anger of Allah is upon them. He has cursed them, prepared hell for them, and worst indeed is that destination
48|7|And to Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is the All-Powerful, the All-Wise
48|8|Surely, We have sent you (O Muhammad) as a witness, as a bearer of glad tidings, and as a Warner
48|9|so that you people may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and that you may assist him, honor him, and glorify (Allah’s) praises morning and afternoon
48|10|Surely, those who gave allegiance to you (O Muhammad), indeed they gave allegiance to Allah. The authority of Allah was over their hands. Then whoever will break its pledge, will break only its own, and whoever will fulfill what it has pledged with Allah, He will bestow a great reward to it
48|11|Those of the Bedouins who stayed behind will say to you: “Our possessions and our families occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us.” They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: “Who then has any power (to intervene) on your behalf with Allah, if He intends to hurt you or intends to benefit you? Nay, but Allah is All-Aware of what you do
48|12|Nay, but you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families; and that was made seem fair in their hearts. You thought evil thoughts and you became a useless people for destruction.”
48|13|Whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), then surely, We have prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers
48|14|And to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, He forgives whom He wills, and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful
48|15|When you set forth to take them to the spoils (of war), those who stayed behind will say: “Allow us to follow you.” They want to change Allah’s Words. Say: “You shall not follow us. Allah has said this before.” They will say: “Nay, you envy us.” But they don’t understand except a little
48|16|Say (O Muhammad) to the Bedouins who stayed behind: “You shall be called to fight against a people with great warfare, then either you will fight them or they shall surrender. Then if you obey, Allah will give you a good reward, but if you turn away as you did turn away before, He will punish you with a painful punishment.”
48|17|There is no blame or sin on the blind, nor there is blame or sin on the lame, nor there is blame or sin on the sick (excused not to go to war). Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), He will admit to gardens beneath which rivers flow (Paradise); and whoever turns back, He will punish with a painful punishment
48|18|Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they gave the allegiance to you (O Muhammad) under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, He sent down the tranquility upon them, and He rewarded them with a near victory
48|19|and abundant spoils which they will capture. And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise
48|20|Allah has Promised you abundant spoils which you will capture, and He has hastened these (spoils of Khaibar) for you. He has restrained the hands of people (enemy) from you so that it may be a sign for the believers and that He may guide you to the Right Way
48|21|And others (victories and booty Promised) which are not yet within your power over it, indeed Allah has compassed them. And Allah has power over all things
48|22|If those who disbelieve fight against you, they would have turned their backs, and then they would have found neither a protector nor a helper
48|23|That has been the Way of Allah which already passed away before. You will never find any change in the Way of Allah
48|24|And it is He Who has restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the midst of Makkah (through the peace treaty of Hudaibiyah), after that He had made you victors over them. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do
48|25|They are the ones who disbelieved and obstructed you from the sacred Masjid (of Makkah) and detained the sacrificed animals from reaching their place of sacrifice. Had there not been believing men and believing women (in Makkah) whom you did not know, and you may trample (heavily burst) them under your feet and thus incurring a sin committed by you without your knowledge (but Allah held back your hands), so that Allah may admit to His Mercy whom He wills. If they (believers and disbelievers) should have been apart, We would have punished those of them who disbelieved with painful punishment
48|26|When those who disbelieve had put in their hearts pride and arrogance, the pride and arrogance of the time of ignorance, then Allah sent down His Tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and made them stick to the word of piety, and they were well entitled to it and worthy of it. And Allah is the All-Knower of everything
48|27|Indeed Allah will fulfill His Messenger’s true vision (which Allah showed him) in all truth. Certainly, you shall enter the sacred Masjid; if Allah wills, secure (to perform Umrah) having your heads shaved, and having your head hair cut short, having no fear. He knows what you don’t know, and besides He granted a near victory
48|28|It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islam), so that He may make it (Islam) superior over all other religions. And Allah is All-Sufficient as a Witness
48|29|Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those who are with him are strong against disbelievers, and merciful among themselves. You see them bowing and falling down prostrate (in prayer), seeking Bounty from Allah and (His) good pleasure. The mark of them (their faith) is on their faces (foreheads) from the traces of prostration. This is their description in the Torah. Their description in the Gospel is like a seed which sends forth its shoot, then makes it strong, it then becomes thick, and it stands right on its stem delighting the sowers (of the seed) so that He may make the disbelievers angry with them. Those among them who believe and do righteous deeds, Allah has Promised forgiveness and a great reward
49|1|O you who believe! Don’t put forward (your decision in advance) before Allah and His Messenger, and fear Allah. Surely! Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower (of everything)
49|2|O you who believe! Don’t raise your voices above the voice of the prophet, nor speak aloud when talking to him as some of you speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds should become fruitless while you don’t perceive
49|3|Surely! Those who lower their voices in the presence of Allah’s Messenger, they are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for piety. They shall have forgiveness and a great reward
49|4|Surely! Those who call you (O Muhammad) from behind the residences, most of them have no common sense
49|5|If they had patience until you could come out to them, it would certainly be better for them. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
49|6|O you who believe! If a rebellious evil person comes to you with news, verify it, lest you should harm people in ignorance and afterwards you become regretful for what you have done
49|7|Know that the Messenger of Allah is among you. If he were to follow you (opinions and desires) in most of the affairs, you would surely be in trouble. Allah has made the faith beloved to you and beautified it in your hearts, and has made disbelief, wickedness and disobedience (to Allah and His Messenger) hateful to you. Such are they who are rightly guided
49|8|(through) a grace from Allah and His Favor. And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
49|9|And if 2 parties among the believers begin fighting, then make peace between them. But if one of them transgresses against the other, then you fight against the one who has transgressed until it complies with the command of Allah. Then if it complies, make reconciliation between them justly and be fair. Surely! Allah loves those who are just and fair
49|10|The believers are only brothers (in Islam). So make reconciliation between your brothers and fear Allah, so that you may receive mercy
49|11|O you who believe! Let not a group mock at another group, it may be that the latter are better than them (former). Nor let (some) women mock at other women, it may be that they (latter) are better than them (former), nor defame one another, nor insult one another by nicknames. How bad is it (to call) wicked name after having faith. Whoever does not repent, then such are indeed wrongdoers
49|12|O you who believe! Avoid much of suspicions, indeed some suspicions are sins. Don’t spy, nor backbite some of you to others. Would one of you like to eat the flesh of its dead brother? You would hate it. Fear Allah. Surely, Allah is the one who Accepts repentance, Merciful
49|13|O mankind! Surely We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes so that you may know one another. Surely, the most honorable of you with Allah is the most pious of you. Surely, Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware
49|14|The Bedouins say: "We believe." Say: "You don’t believe but you only say, we have submitted (in Islam), for the faith has not yet entered into your hearts. But if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward for your deeds. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
49|15|Only those are the believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and afterward don’t doubt but they strive with their wealth and their lives in the Way of Allah. They are those who are truthful
49|16|Say (O Muhammad): "Will you inform Allah about your religion? Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and Allah is All-Aware of everything
49|17|They regard as favor upon you (O Muhammad) that they have embraced Islam. Say: "Don’t count your Islam as a favor upon me. Nay, but Allah has conferred a favor upon you that Allah has guided you to the faith; (agree) if you indeed are truthful
49|18|Surely, Allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth. Allah is the All-Seer of what you do
50|1|Qaf. By the Glorious Qur’an
50|2|But they wonder that there has come to them a Warner (Muhammad) from among themselves. So the disbelievers say: “This is a strange thing
50|3|that after we are dead and have become dust (we shall be resurrected), that is a far return.”
50|4|Indeed We know that the earth consumes them (their dead bodies) and with Us there is a book preserved (with all records)
50|5|Nay, but they deny the truth (this Qur’an) when it comes to them, so they are confused (can not differentiate between right and wrong)
50|6|Have they not looked at the sky above them, (and see) how We have made it, adorned it, and there are no flaws in it
50|7|And the earth! We have spread it out, set on it mountains standing firm, and has produced every kind of lovely growth (plants) in it
50|8|(All these are) an insight and a reminder for every servant turning to Allah
50|9|And We send down blessed water (rain) from the sky, then We produce with it gardens and grain (crops) that are reaped
50|10|and tall date-palms with arranged clusters (of dates)
50|11|and provision for (Allah’s) servants. Thus We give life to a dead land with it. That is how the Resurrection (of the dead) will be
50|12|Denied before them (the pagans of Makkah) the people of Noah, the residents of Al-Rass, and the Thamud
50|13|and Ad, Pharaoh, and the brothers of Lot
50|14|the residents of the Al-Aiykah (wood), and the people of Tubba; every one of them denied Messengers, so My threat took effect (upon them)
50|15|Were We tired with the first creation? Nay, they are in confused doubt about a new creation (Resurrection)
50|16|And indeed We have created mankind and We know what one’s own self whispers to it. And We are nearer to one than rope of its jugular vein (by Our knowledge)
50|17|(Remember!) that the 2 receivers (recording angels) receive (for each human) sitting on the right and on the left (to record actions)
50|18|not a word does one utter but there is a watcher by it ready (to record)
50|19|And when the agony of death will come in truth (they will say): “This is what you were trying to avoid from it!”
50|20|And the trumpet will be blown; that will be the Day of warning (Resurrection)
50|21|And every person will come forth along with an (angel) to drive, and an (angel) to bear witness
50|22|(It will be said to the sinners): “Indeed you were heedless of this, but now We have removed your covering from you, and your eyesight is sharp this Day!”
50|23|And its companion (angel) will say: “Here is (record) ready with me!”
50|24|(It will be said): “Both of you (2 angels) throw every stubborn disbeliever into hell
50|25|opponent of good, doubting transgressor
50|26|who set up another one worthy of worship with Allah. So (both of you) cast him into the severe punishment.”
50|27|Its companion (Satan) will say: “Our Lord! I did not push him to transgress but he himself was in error far astray.”
50|28|(Allah) will say: “Don’t dispute in front of Me and surely I sent forth the threat (in advance) to you
50|29|The words from Me cannot be changed and I am not unjust to the servants.”
50|30|On that Day when We will ask the hell: “Are you filled?” It will say: “Are there any more (to come)?”
50|31|The Paradise will be brought near to the pious, which will not be far off
50|32|(it will be said): “This is what you were Promised. It is for every one returning (to Allah) in sincere repentance and those who preserve (their covenant with Allah)
50|33|who feared the Gracious (Allah) in the unseen (in the world) and brought a heart turned in repentance (to Him).”
50|34|(Allah will say): “You enter in it in peace and security; this is the Day of eternal life!”
50|35|They will have all that they desire in it, and We have more (for them)
50|36|And how many generations We have destroyed before them who were stronger in power than them? (When punishment came) they ran for a refuge in the land! Could they find any place of refuge (to save them from destruction)
50|37|Surely, in that, there is a lesson for one who has a heart or gives ear while one is witness
50|38|And indeed We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in 6 days, and no fatigue touched Allah
50|39|So, bear with patience (O Muhammad) on all that they say, and glorify the praises of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset
50|40|And during a part of the night, glorify His praises and after the prostration (prayers)
50|41|And listen on the Day when the caller will call from a near place
50|42|the Day when the people will hear the cry in truth; that will be the Day of coming out (dead will rise from the graves i.e., the Day of Resurrection)
50|43|Surely, it is We Who gives life and causes death; and to Us is the final return
50|44|on the Day when the earth shall be split asunder and the people will be rushing out of it; that will be a gathering quite easy for Us
50|45|We know very well what they (disbelievers) say. You (O Muhammad) are not a tyrant over them (to force them to believe). So warn by the Qur’an, (everyone) who fears My warning
51|1|By (the winds) that scatter dust
51|2|and (the clouds) that bear heavy weight of water
51|3|and (the ships) that float with ease and gentleness
51|4|and those (angels) that distribute command (of Allah)
51|5|surely that which you are Promised is true
51|6|and surely, the recompense is sure to happen
51|7|By the sky full of orbits
51|8|certainly, you have different ideas
51|9|turn aside from (Muhammad and the Qur’an) is the one who is turned aside
51|10|Curse be to the liars
51|11|who are under a cover of heedlessness (don’t think about the Hereafter)
51|12|They ask: “When will be the Day of recompense?”
51|13|(It will be) a Day when they will be punished over the fire
51|14|(it will be said): “You taste your trial (burning)! This is what you used to ask to be hastened!”
51|15|Surely, the pious will be in the midst of gardens and springs (in Paradise)
51|16|taking joy in the things which their Lord has given them. Surely, they were before this (in the world) righteous people
51|17|They used to sleep but little by the night
51|18|and ask (Allah) for forgiveness in the Hours before dawn
51|19|and share their properties with the needy (who asked) for it, and the deprived (who did not ask)
51|20|And in the earth, there are signs for those who have firm faith
51|21|and also in your own selves. Can you not then see
51|22|And in the heaven is your provision, and all that which you are Promised
51|23|Then by the Lord of the heaven and the earth, surely it is the truth just as what you speak
51|24|Has the story of the honored guests (angel Gabriel with 2 more angels) of Abraham reached you
51|25|When they came to him, and said: “Peace be upon you!” He answered: “Peace be upon you,” and said: “You are people unknown to me,”
51|26|then he turned to his family, brought out a fat roasted calf
51|27|and he put it before them (saying): “Will you not eat?”
51|28|(When they did not eat), he became afraid of them. They said: “Don’t fear.” They gave him glad tidings of an intelligent son
51|29|Then his wife came forward with a loud voice, she strikes her face and said: “(A son to) a barren old woman!”
51|30|They said: “Even so says your Lord. Surely, He is the All-Wise, the All-Knower.”
51|31|He (Abraham) said: “For what purpose you have come, O Messengers?”
51|32|They said: “We have been sent to a criminal people (of prophet Lot, who were homosexuals)
51|33|to send down upon them stones of baked clay
51|34|marked by your Lord for those who transgress Allah’s limits.”
51|35|So We brought out all those who were believers in the town
51|36|but We found none in it except one household of the Muslims (Lot and his 2 daughters)
51|37|and We left in it a sign (the Dead Sea in Palestine) for those who fear the painful punishment
51|38|And (There is sign in the story) of Moses, when We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authority
51|39|but he (Pharaoh) turned away (from belief) with his hosts and said: “A sorcerer, or a madman.”
51|40|So, We took him and his hosts, and dumped them into the sea. Indeed he deserved to be blamed
51|41|(There is sign in the story) of Ad, when We sent against them the barren wind
51|42|which spared nothing that it reached and it blew on like something rotten (decayed)
51|43|And (there is sign in the story) of Thamud, when it was said to them: “Enjoy yourselves for a while (3 days),”
51|44|but they disobeyed the command of their Lord with arrogance; so the awful cry overtook them while they were looking
51|45|So neither they were able to rise up nor could they help themselves
51|46|(Allah destroyed) the people of Noah before them. Surely, they were people who were rebellious, disobedient (to Allah)
51|47|Allah has built the heaven with power. Surely, We are Able to extend the vastness of space in it
51|48|And We have spread out the earth, how Excellent Spreader are We
51|49|We have created everything in pairs, so that you may remember (Allah)
51|50|(Say to mankind, O Muhammad):“Rush towards Allah, surely, I (Muhammad) am from Him a plain Warner to you
51|51|And don’t set up any other one worthy of worship with Allah. Surely, I (Muhammad) am from Him a plain Warner to you.”
51|52|Likewise, whenever a Messenger came to those before them, they said: “A sorcerer or a madman!”
51|53|Have they (past people) transmitted this saying (to these pagans)? Nay, but they are a people transgressing beyond bounds
51|54|So, turn away (O Muhammad) from them (pagans), you are not to be blamed (you have conveyed message)
51|55|And remind (by preaching the Qur’an, O Muhammad), for surely, the reminding benefits the believers
51|56|I have not created the jinns and mankind except to worship Me (alone)
51|57|I don’t want any provision from them nor do I want that they feed Me
51|58|Surely, Allah is the All-Provider, Owner of Power, the Strong
51|59|And surely, for those who do wrong, there is a portion of punishment similar to the portion of the punishment of their friends (predecessors), so ask Me not to hasten on
51|60|Then, woe to those who disbelieve from their Day which they have been promised (for punishment)
52|1|By the (mount) Tur (where Moses received Torah)
52|2|and by the book inscribed
52|3|in parchment (written sheep skin) unrolled
52|4|and by the house (Bait-ul-Mamoor, the house over the heavens parallel to the Ka’bah at Makkah, visited by the angels)
52|5|and by the roof raised high (sky)
52|6|and by the sea boiling blaze
52|7|surely, the punishment of your Lord will surely come to pass
52|8|There is none that can avert it
52|9|On the Day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking
52|10|and the mountains will move away with a horrible movement
52|11|On that Day, woe be to the rejecters (of truth)
52|12|who are engaged in falsehood
52|13|That Day they will be pushed down by force to the fire of hell with a forceful pushing
52|14|(it will be said to them): “This is the fire which you used to deny
52|15|Is this a magic, or do you not see
52|16|You burn in its heat; it will be the same for you whether you be patient or not be patient. You are only being requited for what you used to do.”
52|17|Surely, the pious will be in gardens (Paradise), and delight
52|18|enjoying in that which their Lord has bestowed on them and their Lord saved them from the punishment of the blazing fire
52|19|(It will be said to them): “Eat and drink with happiness because of what you used to do (good deeds).”
52|20|They will recline (with ease) on thrones arranged in ranks. And We shall marry them to lovely maidens with wide lovely eyes
52|21|Those who believe and their offspring follow them in faith, We will join their offspring to them, and We will not decrease any reward for their deeds. Every person has a pledge for that which it has earned
52|22|And We shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire
52|23|They shall pass from hand to hand a wine cup in it which shall cause no dirty, false talk in it (between them), and no sin will go around
52|24|and boy-servants will go round for them to serve them as if they were preserved pearls
52|25|And some of them will come near to others, questioning (worldly life)
52|26|and they will say: “Surely, we were previously afraid with our families (from the punishment of Allah)
52|27|But Allah has been Gracious to us, and has saved us from the punishment of the fire
52|28|Surely, we used to invoke Him before. Surely, He is the Kind, the Merciful.”
52|29|Therefore, remind and preach (mankind, O Muhammad). By the Grace of Allah, you are neither a fortune-teller, nor a madman
52|30|Or do they say: “(Muhammad is) a poet! We are waiting for him some calamity (by time)!”
52|31|Say (O Muhammad to them): “Wait! I am with you among the waiters!”
52|32|Or do their minds command them this (to tell a lie against you)? Or are they people exceeding all bounds (from belief to disbelief)
52|33|Or do they say: “He (Muhammad) has forged it (this Qur’an)?” Nay! They don’t believe
52|34|Then let them produce a Scripture like it (the Qur’an) if they are truthful
52|35|Or were they created by no one? Or were they (themselves) the creators
52|36|Or have they created the heavens and the earth? Nay, but they have no firm belief
52|37|Or are the treasures of your Lord with them? Or are they the tyrants with the authority to do as they like
52|38|Or do they have a stairway (to heaven), by means of which they listen (to the talks of the angels)? Then let their listener produce some clear proof
52|39|Or has He only daughters and you have sons
52|40|Or is it that you (O Muhammad) ask a wage from them (for your preaching) so that they are burdened from a load of debt
52|41|Or is the (knowledge of) unseen with them and they write it down
52|42|Or do they intend a plot (against you)? If so, those who disbelieve are themselves (trapped) in a plot
52|43|Or do they have one worthy of worship other than Allah? Glorified is Allah from all that they ascribe as partners (to Him)
52|44|Even if they were to see a piece of the heaven falling down, they would say: “Clouds gathered in heaps!”
52|45|So leave them alone till they meet their Day, in which they will sink into a fainting (with horror)
52|46|The Day when their plotting will avail them nothing nor will be helped
52|47|Surely, for those who do wrong, there is punishment (in this world and in graves) before this, but most of them don’t know
52|48|So wait patiently (O Muhammad) for the decision of your Lord, for surely He is watching you. Glorify the praises of your Lord when you get up from sleep
52|49|and also glorify His praises in the night-time, and at the setting of stars
53|1|By the star when it goes down (vanishes)
53|2|your companion (Muhammad) has neither gone astray nor misguided
53|3|nor does he speak of (his own) desire
53|4|It is only a revelation that is revealed
53|5|He (Muhammad) has been taught (this Qur’an) by one mighty in power (angel Gabriel)
53|6|the one free from any defect who rose and became stable (in view)
53|7|While he (Gabriel) was in the highest part of the horizon
53|8|then he (Gabriel) approached and came closer
53|9|and was at a distance of 2 bow’s length or even closer
53|10|so he (Gabriel) conveyed the revelation to His servant (Muhammad) what he was supposed to reveal
53|11|(The prophet’s) heart did not deny what he (Muhammad) saw
53|12|Will you (disbelievers) then dispute with him (Muhammad) about what he saw (during his ascent journey over the 7 heavens)
53|13|Indeed he (Muhammad) saw him (Gabriel) another descent time
53|14|near Sidra-tul-Muntaha (the lote-tree at the farthest end of the 7th heavens, beyond which none can cross)
53|15|Near it is Jannatul-M’awa (the rest-house of Paradise)
53|16|When that lote-tree was covered with what covered it
53|17|the sight (of Muhammad) did not turn aside (right or left), nor it transgressed beyond limit
53|18|Indeed he (Muhammad) did see some of the greatest signs of his Lord
53|19|Have you then considered Lat, Uzza (2 idols of the pagan Arabs)
53|20|and another idol (Manat of the pagan Arabs), the other 3rd (as the daughters of Allah)
53|21|Is it for you the sons and for Him the daughters
53|22|This indeed is a division most unfair
53|23|They (Lat, Uzza, Manat) are nothing but names which you and your forefathers have named, for Allah has not sent down any authority in them. They (disbelievers) follow nothing but a guess which is their soul’s desire, even though the guidance has come to them from their Lord
53|24|Or should human have whatever he wishes
53|25|But to Allah belong the last (Hereafter) and the first (the world)
53|26|How many angels are there in the heavens; yet their intercession can avail nothing except what Allah gives permission for whom He wills and pleases
53|27|Surely those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, name the angels with female names
53|28|But they have no knowledge of it. They follow but a guess; and surely guess does not substitute for the truth at all
53|29|Therefore, withdraw (O Muhammad) from those who turn away from Our reminder (this Qur’an) and they only desire the life of this world
53|30|This is their highest point of knowledge. Surely, your Lord is He Who knows those best who go astray from His Way, and He knows those best who receive guidance
53|31|And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, so that He may requite those who do evil with what they have done (punish them in hell), and reward those who do good with what is best (Paradise)
53|32|Those who avoid major sins and shameful deeds except the small faults; surely, for them your Lord will have abundant forgiveness. He knew you well when He created you from the earth and when you were fetuses in your mother’s wombs. So don’t scribe piety to yourselves. He knows best who fears (Him)
53|33|Have you (O Muhammad) seen the one who (Waleed bin Mugheerah, who wanted to accept Islam but someone Promised him to take the punishment on his behalf for certain amount of money, he) turned away (from Islam)
53|34|He gave a little (amount of money), then he stopped (giving)
53|35|Does he has the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees (the reality)
53|36|Or has he not been informed about what was in the pages (Scripture) of Moses
53|37|and of Abraham who fulfilled (his covenant)
53|38|“That no burdened person (with sins) shall bear the burden of another
53|39|that a human can have nothing except what he strives for
53|40|that one’s efforts will be seen (checked)
53|41|that one will be fully recompensed and the best recompense
53|42|that to your Lord is the end
53|43|that it is He Who makes laugh and makes weep
53|44|that it is He Who causes death and gives life
53|45|that it is He Who created in pairs, the male and the female
53|46|from a drop of semen when it is emitted
53|47|that it is upon Him to grant another life (Resurrection)
53|48|that it is He Who gives much or little (of wealth and contentment)
53|49|that it is He the Lord of Sirius (the star whom the pagan Arabs used to worship)
53|50|and that it is He Who destroyed the former Ad (people)
53|51|and Thamud (people). So He spared none
53|52|and the people of Noah previously, surely they were more unjust and more rebellious and transgressing
53|53|And He destroyed the overthrown cities (of Sodom and Gomorrah during prophet Lot)
53|54|who were covered by (the punishment with stones) that covered them.”
53|55|Then which of the graces of your Lord will you doubt
53|56|This (Muhammad) is a Warner just like the old warners
53|57|The Day of Resurrection is drawing near
53|58|none besides Allah can avert it
53|59|Do you then wonder at this recital (the Qur’an)
53|60|and laugh at it and don’t weep
53|61|You are wasting your precious life in pastime and amusements
53|62|So you fall down in prostration to Allah and worship Him
54|1|The Hour (of doom) is drawing near, and the moon has split asunder (the people of Makkah requested Muhammad to show a miracle, so he showed them the splitting of the moon)
54|2|Yet, when they (disbelievers) see a sign, they turn away and say: “This is continuous magic.”
54|3|They deny (the Verses of this Qur’an) and follow their own lusts. Every matter will be settled (good deeds will take to Paradise, and evil deeds will take to hell)
54|4|And indeed there has come to them the news (in this Qur’an about previous nations) wherein there is (enough warning) to check (from evil)
54|5|perfect wisdom (as a warning), but (preaching of) warners don’t benefit them
54|6|So you (O Muhammad) withdraw from them. The Day when the caller will call them to a terrible thing
54|7|They will come out from their graves with their humbled eyes as if they were locusts spread abroad
54|8|rushing towards the caller and disbelievers will say: “This is a hard Day.”
54|9|The people of Noah denied (their Messenger) before them. They rejected Our servant and said: “A madman!” and he was rudely rebuked and threatened
54|10|(After warning people for 950 years) he invoked his Lord (saying): “I have been overcome, so help me!”
54|11|So We opened the gates of heaven with water (rain) pouring out
54|12|and We caused the earth to gush out with springs. So the waters met for a matter predestined
54|13|And We carried him on (a ship) built with planks and nails
54|14|floating under Our care, a reward for him (Noah) who was rejected (by disbelievers)
54|15|And indeed, We have left this (ship) as a sign, so is there any who will remember (or take admonition)
54|16|Then how terrible was My punishment and My warnings
54|17|And We have indeed made the Qur’an easy to understand and remember, and is there any who will remember (or take admonition)
54|18|Ad (people) denied (their Prophet Hud), then how terrible was My punishment and My warnings
54|19|Surely, We sent against them a furious wind of harsh voice on a Day of evil sign and continuous calamity
54|20|snatching out the people as if they were uprooted stems of date-palms
54|21|Then how terrible was My punishment and My warnings
54|22|And indeed We have made the Qur’an easy to understand and remember, then is there anyone who will remember (or take admonition)
54|23|Thamud (people) denied the warnings
54|24|they said: “A human alone from among us whom we are to follow? Truly, then we should be in error and madness
54|25|Is it that the reminder is sent only to him (prophet Saleh) from among us? Nay, he is an insolent liar!”
54|26|(Allah said to Saleh): “Tomorrow they will come to know, who the insolent liar is
54|27|Surely, We are sending the she-camel as a test for them. So watch them (O Saleh) and be patient
54|28|Inform them that the water is to be shared between them (and she-camel). Each (one’s right) to drink is being established (by turns)
54|29|But they (people of Thamud) called one of their comrades who took (responsibility) and killed (she-camel)
54|30|Then how terrible was My punishment and My warnings
54|31|Surely, We sent against them a single punishment (awful cry) and they became like the dry stubble (crushed twigs) of a fence-builder
54|32|And indeed, We have made the Qur’an easy to understand and remember, and is there any who will remember (or take admonition)
54|33|The people of Lot denied the warnings
54|34|Surely, We sent against them a storm of stones (which destroyed them), except the family of Lot, whom We saved in the last Hour of the night
54|35|as a Favor from Us. Thus We do reward those who give thanks (by obeying Us)
54|36|And indeed he (Lot) had warned them of Our grasp but they doubted the warnings
54|37|And indeed they even sought to lure him about his guest (by asking to commit sodomy with them). So We blinded their eyes and said: “Now you taste My punishment and My warnings.”
54|38|And surely, a lasting punishment seized them early in the morning
54|39|(as if to say): “Now you taste My punishment and My warnings.”
54|40|And indeed, We have made the Qur’an easy to understand and remember, and is there any who will remember (or take admonition)
54|41|And indeed, the warnings came to the people of Pharaoh (through Moses and Aaron)
54|42|(They) denied Our all signs. So We seized them with a seizure of the All-Mighty, All-Capable
54|43|Are your disbelievers (O Quraish!) better than these (nations of Noah, Lot, Saleh, and the people of Pharaoh who were destroyed)? Or have you granted immunity (against Our punishment) in the divine Scriptures
54|44|Or do they say: “We are great in numbers, and we shall be victorious?”
54|45|Their huge number will be put to flight, and they will show their backs
54|46|Nay, but the Hour is their appointed time (for recompense), and the Hour will be more grievous and more bitter
54|47|Surely, the criminals are in error (in this world) and will burn (in the hell in the Hereafter)
54|48|The Day when they will be dragged into the fire with their faces downwards, (it will be said to them): “You taste the touch of hell!”
54|49|Surely, We have created all things with divine ordainment
54|50|And Our Commandment is but one as the twinkling of an eye
54|51|And indeed, (O disbelievers) We have destroyed many like you, and is there any who will remember (or take admonition)
54|52|Each and everything they have done is being noted in their deed records
54|53|Everything, small and big, is being written down
54|54|Surely, the pious will be in the midst of gardens and rivers (Paradise)
54|55|in a seat of truth (Paradise), near the most Powerful King (Allah)
55|1|The Gracious (Allah)
55|2|Who taught (mankind) the Qur’an
55|3|created human
55|4|and taught human persuasive speech
55|5|The sun and the moon (run on their fixed courses) for reckoning
55|6|The stars and the trees both prostrate
55|7|And He has raised the heaven high, and He has set up the balance
55|8|so that you may not transgress in the balance
55|9|Establish the weight with justice and don’t give less in measurement
55|10|And He has put the earth for the creatures
55|11|therein are fruits, date-palms with sheathed fruit-stalks
55|12|and corn with leaves and stalk for food and sweet-scented plants
55|13|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|14|He created man from sounding clay like the clay of pottery
55|15|and He created the jinns from smokeless flame of fire
55|16|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|17|(He is) the Lord of the 2 easts (places of sunrise during summer and winter) and the Lord of the 2 wests (places of sunset during summer and winter)
55|18|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|19|He has let loose the 2 seas (salt water and sweet water) meeting together
55|20|Yet, between them is a barrier which none of them can transgress
55|21|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|22|Both pearl and coral come out of them
55|23|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|24|And the ships are His going and coming in the seas like mountains
55|25|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|26|Everyone who is on it (earth) will perish
55|27|and the Face (authority) of your Lord will remain full of Majesty and Honor forever
55|28|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|29|Whoever is in the heavens and on earth begs of Him (for needs). Every day He is engaged in some matter (task)
55|30|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|31|We shall attend to you (give account), O you 2 classes (jinns and mankind)
55|32|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|33|O assembly of jinns and mankind! If you have the power to pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth (to escape punishment), then pass them! But you will never be able to pass them, except with authority (from Allah)
55|34|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|35|The smokeless flames of fire and molten brass will be sent against you both (jinns and mankind), and you will not be able to defend yourselves
55|36|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|37|When the heaven will burst and it becomes rosy (or red) like red hide
55|38|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|39|On that Day neither human nor jinn will be asked about their sins (their faces will be either white (for Paradise) or black (for hell)
55|40|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|41|The sinners will be recognized by their marks (black faces) and they will be seized by their forelocks and their feet
55|42|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|43|(It will be said to them): “This is hell which the sinners had denied it.”
55|44|They will go around between it (hell) and the boiling hot water
55|45|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|46|But for those who fear the standing before their Lord, there will be 2 gardens (in Paradise)
55|47|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|48|With spreading branches (of shady trees)
55|49|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|50|In both of them 2 springs will be flowing
55|51|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|52|In both of them there will be every kind of fruit in pairs
55|53|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|54|They will recline on couches whose inner livings will be of silk brocade and the fruits of the 2 gardens will be near at hand
55|55|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|56|Therein will be chaste virgins restraining their glances (upon their husbands only) whom no human or jinn has touched them before
55|57|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|58|They are (in beauty) like rubies and coral
55|59|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|60|Is there any reward for good other than good
55|61|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|62|Besides these 2 there shall be 2 other gardens (in Paradise)
55|63|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|64|(shaded with) dark green (trees)
55|65|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|66|In both of them there will be 2 springs gushing out water
55|67|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|68|In each of them there will be fruits, date-palms, and pomegranates
55|69|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|70|Therein will be chaste and beautiful (virgins)
55|71|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|72|Beautiful virgins (Huris) guarded in pavilions
55|73|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|74|Whom no human or jinn has touched them before
55|75|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|76|Reclining on green cushions and rich beautiful mattresses
55|77|Then which of your Lord’s favors will you both (jinns and human) deny
55|78|Blessed is the name of your Lord (Allah), the Owner of Majesty and Honor
56|1|When the event (the Day of Resurrection) will befall
56|2|there will be no denying of its befalling
56|3|it will bring low (to some), it will exalt (for others)
56|4|When the earth will be shaken with a terrible shake
56|5|and the mountains will be powdered to dust
56|6|so that they will become floating dust particles
56|7|And then you all will be in 3 kinds (separate groups)
56|8|those on the right hand (receive their records in right hands) who will be those on the right hand (will go to Paradise)
56|9|and those on the left hand (receive their records in left hands) who will be those on the left hand (will go to hell)
56|10|and those foremost (in Islamic faith) will be foremost (in Paradise)
56|11|Those will be nearest (to Allah)
56|12|in the gardens of delight (Paradise)
56|13|A most of them will be from the first generations (who embraced Islam)
56|14|and a few will be from the later generations
56|15|(They will be) on thrones of gold and precious stones
56|16|reclining on them face to face
56|17|immortal youths will go round serving them
56|18|with cups, jugs, and glasses of flowing wine
56|19|from where they will neither get any pain of the head, nor they will get any intoxication
56|20|(They will have) fruits of their own choice
56|21|and the flesh of fowls that they may desire
56|22|and Huris (chaste virgins) with wide lovely eyes
56|23|like guarded pearls
56|24|as a reward for what they used to do (good deeds)
56|25|They will neither hear any vain talk therein nor any sinful speech
56|26|but the saying of Salam! Salam! (greetings with peace)
56|27|And those on the right hand who will be those on the right hand
56|28|(They will be) among thornless lote-trees
56|29|and among banana trees with fruits piled one above another
56|30|and in long-extended shade
56|31|and by water flowing constantly
56|32|and fruit in plenty
56|33|whose season is not limited and their supply will not be cut off
56|34|and on high raised couches or thrones
56|35|Surely, We have created them (maidens) of special creation
56|36|and made them virgins
56|37|loving (their husbands only), equal in age
56|38|for those on the right hand
56|39|A large number will be from the first generation (who embraced Islam)
56|40|and a large number will be from the later generations
56|41|And those on the left hand - will be those on the left hand
56|42|(They will be) in fierce hot wind and boiling water
56|43|and in the shadow of black smoke
56|44|(that shadow is) neither cool, nor good
56|45|Surely, they were indulged in luxury before
56|46|and were persisting in great sin
56|47|and they used to say: “When we die and become dust and bones, shall we then indeed be resurrected
56|48|and also our forefathers?”
56|49|Say (O Muhammad): “Surely, those of old, and those of later times
56|50|all will surely be gathered together to an appointed meeting of well known Day
56|51|Then surely, you the erring-ones, the deniers (of Resurrection)
56|52|surely you will eat of trees of Zaqqum
56|53|then you will fill your bellies with it
56|54|and drink from the boiling water on it
56|55|yet, you will drink like thirsty camels!”
56|56|That will be their entertainment on the Day of Resurrection
56|57|We created you, then why do you not believe
56|58|You see what you emit (semen)
56|59|Is it you who create it (make this semen into a human), or are We the creator
56|60|We have decreed the death among you and We are not unable
56|61|to transfigure you by others like yourselves and creates you in forms that you don’t know
56|62|And indeed, you know the first form of creation (of Adam), why then do you not remember or take heed
56|63|Do you see (the seed) that you sow (in the ground)
56|64|Is it you who make it grow, or are We the grower
56|65|If We willed, We could surely make it into dry pieces and you would be regretful
56|66|(saying): “We are indeed ruined
56|67|nay, but we are deprived (from the results of our work)!”
56|68|Do you see the water that you drink
56|69|Is it you who cause it to come down from the rain clouds or are We Who cause it to come down
56|70|If We willed, We could make it salty (undrinkable). Why then do you not give thanks (to Allah)
56|71|Do you see the fire which you kindle
56|72|Is it you who made the tree to grow, or are We the grower
56|73|We have made it a reminder (of the hellfire in the Hereafter); and an article of use for the travelers
56|74|Then glorify the name of your Lord, the great
56|75|Surely I swear by the setting of the stars
56|76|and surely, that is a great oath, if you know
56|77|surely, this is indeed a honorable recital (the Qur’an)
56|78|in a book well-guarded (with Allah)
56|79|which none can touch it (the Qur’an with Allah) except the purified (angels)
56|80|a revelation (this Qur’an) from the Lord of the worlds
56|81|Is it such a talk (this Qur’an) that you (disbelievers) deny
56|82|and (instead of thanking Allah for) your provision He gives you, you deny (Him)
56|83|Then why do you not (intervene) when (the soul of a dying person) reaches the throat
56|84|while you are looking at that moment
56|85|but We are nearer to him than you, but you don’t see (Allah)
56|86|Why do you not, if you are exempt from the reckoning and recompense
56|87|bring back the soul (to its body) if you are truthful
56|88|Then, if the dying person be of those brought near (to Allah)
56|89|for him there is rest and provision, and a garden of delights (Paradise)
56|90|Yet if the dying person be of those on the right hand
56|91|then (there is greeting) ‘Peace be upon you’ for those from those on the right hand
56|92|Yet if the dying person is one of the denying (of the Resurrection), the erring
56|93|then (for him there) is entertainment from boiling water
56|94|and burning in hellfire
56|95|Surely, this is an absolute truth with certainty
56|96|So glorify with praises the name of your Lord, the greatest
57|1|All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah, and He is the All-Mighty, All-Wise
57|2|To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death and He has power over all things
57|3|He is the First (nothing is before Him) and the Last (nothing is after Him), the Evident (everything is in front of Him) and the Hidden (nothing is hidden from Him). And He is the All-Knower of every thing
57|4|It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in 6 days and then rose over the throne (in a manner that suits His Majesty). He knows what goes into the earth and what comes forth from it, and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it. And He is with you (by His knowledge) wherever you may be. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do
57|5|To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. All the matters return to Allah (for decision)
57|6|He causes the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night, and He has full knowledge of whatever is in the hearts
57|7|Believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), and spend (in His Way) out of what He has made you trustees. Those of you who believe and spend (in His way), they will be greatly rewarded
57|8|And what is the matter with you that you don’t believe in Allah? The Messenger (Muhammad) invites you to believe in your Lord, and indeed He has taken your covenant if you are real believers
57|9|It is He Who sends down clear revelations to His servant (Muhammad), so that He may bring you out from the darkness into the light. Surely, Allah is full of Kindness and Merciful to you
57|10|And what is the matter with you that you don’t spend in the Cause of Allah? To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth. Not equal among you are those who spent and fought before the conquering (of Makkah) (with those among you who did later). Such are higher in degree than those who spent and fought afterwards. Yet, Allah has promised all of you the best (reward). And Allah is All-Aware of all of what you do
57|11|Who is the one who will lend to Allah a goodly loan, so that (Allah) will increase it manifold to its credit (by repaying), and (besides) it will have a good reward (Paradise)
57|12|On the Day (of judgment) you shall see the believing men and the believing women, with their light shining before them and by their right hands. (It will be said to them): “Glad tidings for you this Day! (You shall enter the) gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), to reside in it forever! Truly, this is the greatest success!”
57|13|On the Day the hypocrite men and hypocrite women will say to those who believe: “Wait for us! Let us get something from your light!” It will be said: “Go back to your rear! Then seek a light!” So a wall will be put up between them with a gate in it. Inside it will be Mercy and outside it will be facing toward the punishment (of hell)
57|14|(The hypocrites) will call them (believers): “Were we not with you?” They (believers) will reply: “Yes! But you led yourselves into temptations, looked forward (for our destruction), you doubted (in faith); and you were deceived by false desires until the command of Allah came, while the chief deceiver (Satan) deceived you in respect of Allah.”
57|15|(They will be told): “So this Day no ransom shall be taken from you (hypocrites), or from those who disbelieved. Your abode is the fire, that is your friend (proper place), and worst is that destination.”
57|16|Has not the time come for the hearts of the believers to be humble by the reminder (this Qur’an) of Allah, and to the truth which has been revealed, so that they don’t become like those who received the Scripture before, and the term was prolonged for them but their hearts were hardened? Many of them are rebellious
57|17|Know that Allah gives life to the earth after its death! Indeed We have made clear the revelations to you so that you may understand
57|18|Surely, the charitable men and charitable women, and those who lend a goodly loan to Allah, it shall be increased manifold for them, and (besides) there shall be honorable reward (Paradise)
57|19|And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers, they are the truthful and the true witnesses with their Lord; they shall have their reward and their light. But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations; they shall be the inmates of the blazing fire
57|20|Know that the life of this world is only play and amusement, show, and mutual boasting among you, and rivalry in respect of wealth and children. It is like the vegetation (flourishes) after rain: its growth pleases the tillers; afterwards it dries up and you see it turn yellow; then it becomes straw. But in the Hereafter, there will be severe punishment (for disbelievers) and forgiveness from Allah and (His) good pleasure (for the believers). The life of this world is not but a deceiving enjoyment
57|21|Race with one another in hastening towards the forgiveness from your Lord and towards the Paradise, width of which is as the width of the heaven and the earth, prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers. Such is the Grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom He pleases. And Allah is the Owner of great Bounty
57|22|No calamity can befalls on the earth or in yourselves, except (that is inscribed) in a book (of Decrees), before We bring it into existence. Surely, that is easy for Allah
57|23|(This is done) in order that you may not grieve for the things that you fail to get, or rejoice over that which has been given to you. And Allah does not like any prideful boasters
57|24|nor those who are misers and enjoin miserliness upon people. Whoever turns away (from Allah), then (know that) surely Allah is Rich (free of all wants), Praise-Worthy
57|25|Indeed, We have sent Our Messengers with clear signs and revealed the Scripture with them and the balance (justice) so that mankind may keep up justice. And We sent down iron, with its mighty power (in matters of war), and benefits for mankind, so that Allah may test those who will help Him (His religion) and His Messengers in the unseen. Surely, Allah is All-Strong, All-Mighty
57|26|And indeed, We sent Noah and Abraham, and bestowed in their offspring Prophethood and Scripture. Some of them were guided ones, but many of them were rebellious
57|27|Then We sent after them, Our Messengers, and We sent Jesus, son of Mary, and gave him the gospel. And We placed compassion and Mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. But the monasticism which they invented for themselves, We did not prescribe it for them but they sought to please Allah, but they did not observe it with the right of its observance. Yet, We rewarded those among them who believed, but many of them are rebellious
57|28|O you who believe! Fear Allah, and believe in His Messenger (Muhammad). He will grant you a double portion of His Mercy, provide for you a light to walk (straight) and forgive you. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
57|29|(Adapt this way) so that the people of the Scripture may know that they don’t have power over anything from the Grace of Allah, and that the Grace is in His authority, bestows it on whomever He wills. And Allah is the Owner of great Bounty
58|1|Indeed Allah has heard the statement of her (Khawlah, daughter of Tha’labah), who pleaded with you (O Muhammad) against her husband (Aus, son of As-Samit) and she complained to Allah. Allah has heard the conversation between each other. Surely, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer
58|2|Those of you who divorce their wives by Zihar (by saying to them “you are like my mother’s back”) (should know that) they cannot be their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave birth to them. Surely, they say an evil word and a lie. Surely, Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving
58|3|And those who divorce their wives by Zihar, then wish to go back (free themselves) from what they said, the penalty is to free a captive before they touch each other. This is prescribed for you (so that you may not return to such an evil thing). Allah is All-Aware of what you do
58|4|And he who does not find (money for freeing a captive), then must fast for 2 successive months before they both touch each other. For him who is unable to do so (fast), he shall feed 60 poor people. This is (enjoined) in order that you may believe in Allah and His Messenger. These are the limits of Allah. For disbelievers, there is a painful punishment
58|5|Surely, those who oppose Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad); they will be disgraced as those who were disgraced before them (among the past nation). And indeed, We have sent down clear revelations. For the disbelievers, there is a disgracing punishment
58|6|On the Day (of judgment) Allah will resurrect them all together and inform them about what they have done. Allah has kept account (of all deeds) while they may have forgotten. Allah is Witness over all things
58|7|Are you not aware that Allah knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? There is no secret counsel of 3, but He is their 4th (with His knowledge), nor of 5 but He is their 6th, nor of less than that or more, but He is with them wherever they may be. Then on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did. Surely, Allah is All-Knower of everything
58|8|Have you not seen those who were forbidden from secret counsels, and afterwards they returned to what they were forbidden from it? They conspired together for sin, wrong doing, and disobedience to the Messenger (Muhammad). Yet, when they come to you, they greet you with a greeting with which Allah does not greet you, and they say to themselves: “Why Allah does not punish us for what we say?” Hell will be sufficient for them, they will burn in it, and worst indeed is that destination
58|9|O you who believe! When you hold secret counsel, don’t hold secret council for sin, wrong-doing, and disobedience towards the Messenger (Muhammad); but hold secret council for righteousness and piety; and fear Allah to whom you shall be gathered
58|10|Secret counsels (conspiracies) are only from Satan so that he may cause grief to those who believe. But he cannot harm them in anything except with the permission of Allah. In Allah let the believers put their trust
58|11|O you who believe! When you are asked to make room in the assemblies, (spread out) make room. Allah will make room (from His Mercy) for you (Hereafter). When you are told to rise up (His cause), then rise up. Allah will elevate those of you who believe and those who have been granted knowledge in degrees. Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do
58|12|O you who believe! When you wish to consult the Messenger (Muhammad) in private, spend something in charity before your private consultation. That will be better and purer for you. But if you don’t find (anything), then surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
58|13|Are you afraid to spend in charity before your private consultation (with Muhammad)? If you cannot afford, Allah will forgive you; so establish prayer and give obligatory charity and obey Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad). Allah is Well-Aware of what you do
58|14|Have you (O Muhammad) not seen those (hypocrites) who take as friends those people who are under the Wrath of Allah? They are neither of you nor of them and they knowingly swear to a lie
58|15|Allah has prepared for them severe punishment. Indeed evil is that which they do
58|16|They have taken their oaths as shields (for their evil actions). Thus they hinder people from the Way of Allah. They shall have a humiliating punishment
58|17|Neither their children nor their wealth will avail them anything against Allah. They will be the inmates of the fire; they will reside in it forever
58|18|On the Day when Allah will resurrect them together (for their account), then they will swear to Him as they now swear to you. They think that they are on something (to stand for help). Lo! Surely they are liars
58|19|Satan has overtaken them and caused them to forget the remembrance of Allah. They are the party of Satan. Lo! Surely it is the party of Satan, they will be the losers
58|20|Surely, those who oppose Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad); they will be among the lowest (most humiliated)
58|21|Allah has decreed: “Surely! I and My Messengers will overcome (be victorious).” Surely, Allah is All-Powerful, All-Mighty
58|22|You (O Muhammad) will never find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day on friendly terms with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), even though they are their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their kindred (people). For such He has written faith in their hearts and has strengthened them with spirit (true guidance) from Himself. And He will admit them to Gardens (Paradise) under which rivers flow, to reside in it forever. Allah will be pleased with them, and they will be pleased with Him. They are the party of Allah. Lo! Surely it is the party of Allah that will be the successful
59|1|Glorifies Allah whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Allah is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
59|2|It is He Who drove out those who disbelieve from the people of the Scripture (the Jews of Bani An-Nadheer) from their homes at the first gathering. You did not think that they would ever get out. They thought that their fortresses would defend them from Allah! But Allah’s (punishment) reached them from a place where from they did not expect it, and He cast fear into their hearts, so that they destroyed their own homes with their own hands and by the hands of the believers. So take admonition, O you with eyes (to see)
59|3|And had it not been that Allah had decreed exile for them, He would certainly have punished them in this world, and in the Hereafter they shall have the punishment of the fire
59|4|That is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad). Whoever opposes Allah, then surely Allah is Severe in punishment
59|5|Whatever palm-trees (of the enemy) you (O Muslims) cut down or left them standing on their roots, it was by the permission of Allah, so that He might disgrace the transgressors
59|6|And what Allah gave as booty to His Messenger (Muhammad) from them, you made no expedition for that with either cavalry or riding-camel. But Allah gives power to His Messenger over whoever He wills. And Allah has power over all things
59|7|Whatever Allah gave as booty to His Messenger (Muhammad) from the people of the townships, it is for Allah, His Messenger (Muhammad), the kindred (relatives of Messenger), the orphans, the poor, and the wayfarer; so that it may not become a fortune between the rich among you. Whatever the Messenger (Muhammad) gives you, take it and whatever he forbids you, abstain from it, and fear Allah. Surely, Allah is Severe in punishment
59|8|(There is share in this booty) for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their property, and are seeking Bounties from Allah and pleasure (of Him). This is helping Allah (in His religion) and His Messenger (Muhammad). They are indeed the true believers
59|9|(Share of booty given to) those who had homes (Ansars in Madinah) and had faith before (the arrival of) them (emigrants) and love those who emigrated to them and they had no jealousy in their hearts for things given (from the booty) to them, and prefer them (emigrants) over themselves, even though they themselves were in need of that. Those who are saved from their enviousness, such are they who will be the successful
59|10|And those who came after them say: “Our Lord! Forgive us and our brothers who have preceded us in faith and don’t put any hatred in our hearts against those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of Kindness, Merciful.”
59|11|Have you (O Muhammad) not observed those who were hypocrites? They say to their fellow disbelievers among the people of the Scripture: “If you are expelled, we indeed will go out with you. We will never obey anyone against you. Even if you are attacked, we will indeed help you.” But Allah is witness that surely they are liars
59|12|Surely, if they (people of the book) are expelled, they (hypocrites) will never go out with them, and if they are attacked, they will never help them. Even if they help them, they (hypocrites) will turn their backs; so they will not be victorious
59|13|Surely, you (believers) are more fearful in their (Jews of An-Nadir) hearts than of Allah. That is because they are a people who don’t comprehend (power of Allah)
59|14|They will never fight against you together except in fortified townships or from behind walls. Their enmity among themselves is very strong. You think them as united but their hearts are divided. This is because they are a people who don’t understand
59|15|They are like their immediate predecessors (Jews of Bani Qainuqa); they tasted the evil result of their deeds, for them will be a painful torment
59|16|They are like Satan who says to human: “Disbelieve.” So when human disbelieves, Satan says: “I am free of you, I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds!”
59|17|So the end of both will be that they will be in the fire, abiding in it forever. That is the recompense of the wrongdoers
59|18|O you who believe! Fear Allah and let every person look to what it has sent forth for tomorrow (Hereafter), and fear Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Aware of what you do
59|19|And be not like those who forgot Allah and He caused them to forget their own selves. Those are the transgressors
59|20|Not equal are the inmates of the fire and the residents of the Paradise. It is the residents of Paradise, they will be successful
59|21|If We had sent down this Qur’an on a mountain, you would have seen it humbling itself and split asunder from the fear of Allah. Such are the examples which We put forward to mankind so that they may reflect
59|22|He is Allah, besides Whom there is no one worthy of worship but He, the Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Beneficent, the Merciful
59|23|He is Allah besides Whom there is no one worthy of worship but He, the King, the Holy, the one free from all defects, the Giver of security, the Watcher over His creatures, the Mighty, the Compeller, the Supreme. Glory be to Allah above all that they associate as partners with Him
59|24|He is Allah, the Creator, the Inventor of all things, and the Bestower of forms. To Him belongs the best names. All that are in the heavens and the earth glorify Him. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
60|1|O you who believe! Don’t take My enemies and your enemies (disbelievers) as friends. Would you show affection towards them, when they have disbelieved in what has come to you of the truth (Islam) and have driven out the Messenger (Muhammad) and yourselves (from your homeland), simply because you believe in Allah, your Lord? If you have come forth to strive in My Cause and to seek My good pleasure, then how can you show friendship to them in secret? I am aware of what you conceal and what you reveal. And whoever of you (Muslims) does that, then indeed has gone astray from the Right Way
60|2|If they gain the upper hand over you, they would behave to you as enemies and stretch out their hands and their tongues against you with evil, and they wish that you should become disbelievers
60|3|On the Day of Resurrection, neither your relatives nor your children will benefit you. He will judge between you. Allah sees all of what you do
60|4|Indeed an excellent example has been set for you in Abraham and those with him. When they said to their people: “Surely, we are free from you and whatever you worship besides Allah. We reject you. Hostility and hatred shall appear between us and between you forever until you believe in Allah alone.” Except the saying of Abraham to his father: “Surely, I will ask for forgiveness (from Allah) for you, but I have no power to get anything for you from Allah.” (They prayed): “Our Lord! In You (alone) we put our trust, to You (alone) we turn in repentance, and to You (alone) is the final return
60|5|Our Lord! Don’t make us a trial for those who disbelieve, and forgive us. Our Lord! Surely You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.”
60|6|Surely, there is an excellent example for you in them to follow for those who look forward to (the meeting with) Allah and the Last Day. Whoever turns away, then surely, Allah is Rich (free of all wants), Praise-Worthy
60|7|Perhaps that Allah will make friendship among them between you and between those with whom you hold as enemies. And Allah has power (over all things), and Allah is Forgiving, the Merciful
60|8|Allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who had neither fought against you on account of religion nor drove you out of your homes. Surely, Allah loves those who deal with equity
60|9|Allah only forbids you to befriend them as to those who fought against you on account of religion, drove you out of your homes, and helped to drive you out. Whoever will befriend them, such are the wrongdoers
60|10|O you who believe! When the believing women come to you as emigrants, examine them. Allah knows best as to their faith. If you ascertain that they are true believers, don’t send them back to the disbelievers. They are not lawful (wives) for them (disbelievers), nor are they (disbelievers) lawful (husbands) for them. But give them (disbelievers) that (amount of money) which they have spent (as their dowries) to them. There is no sin on you to marry them if you pay them their dowries. Likewise don’t hold the disbelieving women as wives. Ask for (the return of) that which you have spent (as dowry) and let them (disbelievers) ask back for what they have spent. This is the judgment of Allah. He judges between you. And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
60|11|And if any of your wives have gone from you to the disbelievers (and afterwards you have your turn (of triumph)) and you have an investment (by the coming over of a woman from the disbelief), then pay to those whose wives have gone, the equivalent of what they had spent (on their dowry). Fear Allah, in whom you believe
60|12|O Prophet! When the believing women come to you to give you the pledge that they will not associate anything in worship with Allah, that they will not steal, that they will not commit illegal sexual intercourse, that they will not kill their children, that they will not utter slander, that they will not forge between their hands and their feet (falsehood by accusing another women of having illicit relationship with a man or making illegal children and making husband believe that it belongs to her husband), they will not disobey you in any just matter (permitted by Islam), then accept their pledge, and ask Allah to forgive them. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
60|13|O you who believe! Don’t take as friends the people who incurred upon them the Wrath of Allah. Surely, they have despaired from (any good) in the Hereafter, just as the disbelievers have despaired from the people of the graves (buried)
61|1|Glorifies Allah whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Allah is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
61|2|O you who believe! Why do you say that which you don’t do
61|3|It is most hateful with Allah that you say that which you don’t do
61|4|Surely, Allah loves those who fight in His cause in rows (ranks in battle) as if they were a solid structure
61|5|And (remember) when Moses said to his people: “O my people! Why do you hurt me while certainly you know that I am the Messenger of Allah to you?” So when they turned away (from Allah), Allah turned away their hearts (from the Right Way). And Allah does not guide those who are transgressors
61|6|And (remember) when Jesus, son of Mary, said: “O Children of Israel! I am the Messenger of Allah to you, confirming the Torah which came before me, and give you glad tidings of a Messenger that will come after me whose name shall be Ahmed (another name of Muhammad, meaning ‘The praised one’).” But when he (Muhammad) came to them with clear proofs, they said: “This is plain magic.”
61|7|Who does more wrong than the one who invents a lie against Allah while he is being invited to Islam? And Allah does not guide the people of wrongdoers
61|8|They intend to put out the Light of Allah (of Islam) with their mouths. But Allah will perfect His Light even though the disbelievers hate it
61|9|It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islam) to make it victorious over all other religions even though the polytheists hate it
61|10|O you who believe! Shall I guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment
61|11|You believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), and that you strive hard, and fight in the cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives. That will be better for you, if you but know
61|12|(If you do so) He will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens under which rivers flow, and pleasant residences in gardens of Eden (eternity) (Paradise), that is the great success
61|13|And also (He will give you) another blessing which you love, help from Allah (against your enemies) and a near victory. So give glad tidings (O Muhammad) to the believers
61|14|O you who believe! Be the helpers (in the Cause) of Allah, just as Jesus, son of Mary, said to the disciples: “Who will be my helpers (in the cause) of Allah?” The disciples said: “We are helpers of Allah.” Then a group of the children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved. So Allah gave power to those who believed against their enemies, and they became the uppermost
62|1|Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies Allah, the King, the Holy, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
62|2|It is He Who has sent among the unlettered people, a Messenger (Muhammad) from among themselves, who recites to them His revelations, purifies them (from disbelief), and teaches them the book (this Qur’an) and wisdom, even though they were in clear error before
62|3|and also to others among them (Muslims) who have not yet joined them. Allah is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
62|4|That is the Grace of Allah, which He bestows on whom He wills. And Allah is the Owner of Mighty Grace
62|5|The likeness of those who were entrusted with the Torah (to obey its commandments), but they failed it (those obligations), is as the likeness of a donkey who carries huge burdens of books (but understands nothing). How bad is the example of people who deny the Verses of Allah? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers
62|6|Say (O Muhammad): “O you who are Jews! If you claim that you are friends of Allah to the exclusion of all other people, then wish for death if you are truthful.”
62|7|But they will never wish for it (death), because of what deeds their hands have sent before them! Allah knows well the wrongdoers
62|8|Say (to them): “Surely, the death from which you flee, will surely meet you, then you will be sent back to (Allah) the All-Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will tell you what you used to do.”
62|9|O you who believe! When the call is proclaimed for the prayer on Friday, then hasten to the remembrance of Allah and leave off business. That is better for you if you did but know
62|10|When the (Jumu’ah) prayer is finished, you may disperse in the land and seek the Grace of Allah (by working). Remember Allah much so that you may be successful
62|11|And when they (people with weak faith) see some merchandise or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it, and leave you (Muhammad) standing (while you are delivering Jumu’ah religious talk). Say: “That which Allah has is better than any amusement or merchandise! Allah is the Best of providers.”
63|1|When the hypocrites come to you (O Muhammad), they say: “We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah.” Allah knows that you are indeed His Messenger and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars
63|2|They have taken their oaths as a shield (for their hypocrisy). Thus they hinder people from the Way of Allah. Surely, evil is what they do
63|3|This is because they believed, then disbelieved. Their hearts are sealed, so they don’t understand
63|4|When you look at them, their good look pleases you; and when they speak, you listen to their words. Yet, they are as blocks of wood propped up (worthless). They think that every cry is against them. They are the enemies, so beware of them. May Allah curse them! How are they deviated
63|5|When it is said to them: “Come, so that the Messenger of Allah will ask forgiveness from Allah for you,” they turn aside their heads and you see them turning away (their faces) while they are in pride
63|6|It is equal to them whether you (Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them or don’t ask forgiveness for them. Allah will not forgive them. Surely, Allah does not guide the people who are disobedient
63|7|They are the ones who say: “Don’t spend on those who are with the Messenger of Allah, until they desert him.” To Allah belongs the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites don’t comprehend
63|8|They (hypocrites) say: “If we return to Madinah, indeed the more honorable (Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul, the chief hypocrite at Madinah) will expel from there the meaner (Allah’s Messenger).” But honor, power and glory belong to Allah, and to His Messenger (Muhammad), and to the believers, but the hypocrites don’t know
63|9|O you who believe! Let neither your properties nor your children distract you from the remembrance of Allah. Those who will do so, then they are the real losers
63|10|Spend (in charity) of that which We have provided you before death comes to one of you who says: “My Lord! If only You would give me respite for a little while (return to the worldly life), then I would give in charity, and be among the righteous.”
63|11|And Allah never grants respite to a soul when its appointed time (death) comes to an end. Allah is All-Aware of what you do
64|1|Glorifies Allah whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. The dominion is His, to Him belong all the praises and thanks, He has power over all things
64|2|It is He Who created you; yet, some of you are disbelievers and some of you are believers. And Allah is All-Seer of what you do
64|3|He has created the heavens and the earth with the truth. He has shaped you and shaped you well, and to Him is the final return
64|4|He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. Allah is All-Knower of what is in the hearts
64|5|Has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before? So they tasted the evil result of their disbelief, and there will be a painful punishment (in the Hereafter) for them
64|6|That is because, when their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, they said: “Shall simple human guide us?” So they disbelieved and turned away (from truth). But Allah is not in need (of them). And Allah is Rich (free of all wants), Praise-worthy
64|7|The disbelievers claim that they will never be resurrected (to account). Say (O Muhammad): “Yes! By my Lord, you will certainly be resurrected, you will be informed of what you did, that is easy for Allah.”
64|8|Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad), and in the light (this Qur’an) which We have sent down. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do
64|9|(And remember) the Day when He will gather you all on the Day of gathering, that will be the Day of mutual loss and gain. Those who believe in Allah and perform righteous deeds, He will remit from them their sins and will admit them to gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), they will reside in it forever; that will be the great success
64|10|But those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, they will be the inmates of the fire, they will reside in it forever, and worst is that destination
64|11|No calamity can ever befall except by the permission of Allah. Whoever believes in Allah, He guides its heart (to the truth). And Allah is All-Knower of everything
64|12|Obey Allah and obey the Messenger (Muhammad). But if you turn away, then (know that the duty) of Our Messenger is only to convey (the message) clearly
64|13|Allah! There is no one worthy of worship but He, and in Allah let the believers put their trust
64|14|O you who believe! Surely, among your wives and your children there are enemies (who may stop you from the obedience of Allah) for you; so beware of them! But if you pardon them, overlook, and forgive (their faults), then surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
64|15|Your wealth and your children are only a trial. With Allah there is a great reward (Paradise)
64|16|So, fear Allah as much as you can, listen (to His message) and obey, and spend in charity, that is better for you. And those who are saved from their own enviousness, it is they who are the successful ones
64|17|If you lend to Allah a goodly loan (spend in His Cause), He will double it for you, and will forgive you. And Allah is Appreciative, Forbearing
64|18|Knows all of the unseen and seen, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise
65|1|O Prophet (Muhammad)! When you (the believers) divorce women, divorce them at (end of) their prescribed (waiting) periods, and count their periods (correctly). Fear Allah, your Lord. Don’t turn them out from their (husband’s) homes (waiting period), nor they should leave (themselves), unless they have committed adultery openly. These are the limits of Allah. Whoever transgresses the limits of Allah, then indeed has wronged itself. You (one who divorces wife) never know, Allah may bring something new (situation) after that (reconciliation for her return back to you)
65|2|Then, when they have fulfilled their appointed term (waiting period ends), either take them back in a good manner or part with them in a good manner. Take for witness 2 honest persons among you (Muslims), and establish the witness for Allah. This advice is given to all who believe in Allah and the Last Day. And whoever fears Allah, He makes a way out for him (from difficulty)
65|3|and He provides him sustenance from (sources) where he could never imagine. Whoever puts its trust in Allah, then He is sufficient for him. Surely, Allah accomplishes what He pleases. Indeed Allah has set a measure for every thing
65|4|Those of your women who have passed the monthly periods (of menstruation), if you have doubts in their prescribed period, it is 3 months (of waiting), and (same period apply) for those who don’t have periods (young age or diseased). For those who are pregnant (whether they are divorced or their husbands are dead), their waiting period is until they deliver their burdens. Those who fear Allah; He will make their matters easy for them
65|5|This is the Command of Allah which He has sent down to you. Those who fear Allah, He will remit their sins from them and will enlarge rewards for them
65|6|Let them (divorced women during their waiting period) live where you yourself live according to your means. You don’t harm them so as to straiten them (make their life intolerable and leave your house). If they are pregnant, then spend on them till they deliver their burden. Then if they give suck (to the children) for you, then give them their due payment (compensation), and let each of you accept the advice of the other between you in a just way. But if you make difficulties for one another, then some other woman may give suck for you (father of the child)
65|7|Let the rich people spend according to their means, and the people whose resources are restricted (poor), let them spend according to what Allah has given them. Allah does not put burden on any person beyond what He has given him. Allah will grant ease after hardship
65|8|Many townships revolted against the Command of their Lord and His Messengers. We called them to a severe account (punishment in worldly life) and We shall punish them with a horrible punishment (Hereafter)
65|9|So they tasted the evil result of their misdeeds and the consequence of their misdeeds was loss (destruction in this life and punishment in the Hereafter)
65|10|Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment (in the Hereafter). So fear Allah, O men of understanding who have believed! Indeed Allah has sent down to you a reminder (this Qur’an)
65|11|(And also sent to you) a Messenger (Muhammad), who recites to you the Verses of Allah (the Qur’an) with clear explanations, so that He may take out those who believe and do righteous deeds from the darkness (of polytheism) to the light (of faith). Those who believe in Allah and perform righteous deeds, He will admit them into gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), they will reside in it forever. Indeed Allah has granted an excellent provision for them
65|12|It is Allah Who has created 7 heavens and of the earth like them. His Command descends between them (heavens and earth), so that you may know that Allah has power over all things and that Allah indeed surrounds all things in (His) knowledge
66|1|O Prophet! Why do you make unlawful (for yourself) which Allah has made lawful to you in seeking the pleasure of your wives? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
66|2|Allah has already ordained for you (Muslims) the absolution from your oaths. And Allah is your Master and He is the All-Knower, the All-Wise
66|3|And (remember) when the prophet (Muhammad) disclosed a matter (secret) to one of his wives (Hafsa), she disclosed it (to Aisha). And Allah made it known to him; he informed part of it (to Aisha) and left a part. Then when he told her (Hafsa) of it, she said: “Who told you this?” He said: “The All-Knower, the All-Aware (Allah) has told me.”
66|4|If you both (Aisha and Hafsa) turn in repentance to Allah (it will be better) as your hearts have indeed so inclined (to oppose what the prophet likes); but if you help one another against him (Muhammad), then surely (know that) Allah is his Protector, Gabriel, and the righteous (among) the believers, and furthermore, the angels too are his helpers
66|5|It may well be that, if he divorces you all, his Lord will give him wives better than you in exchange: Muslims, believers, obedient (to Allah), turn to Allah in repentance, worshippers, (who are) fasting or emigrating (for Allah’s sake), previously married and virgins
66|6|O you who believe! Save yourselves and your families against a fire (hell) whose fuel is people and stones, over which angels are appointed who are stern and severe, who don’t disobey the Commandments they receive from Allah, but do what they are commanded
66|7|(It will be said in the Hereafter): “O you who disbelieve! Don’t make excuses this Day! You are being requited only for what you used to do.”
66|8|O you who believe! Turn to Allah with sincere repentance! It may well be that your Lord will remit your sins from you and admit you into gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise). On that Day, Allah will not disgrace the prophet (Muhammad) and those who believe with him. Their light will run before them and (their record of deeds) in their Right Hands, they will say: “Our Lord! Keep our light perfect for us and grant us forgiveness. Surely, Allah has power over all things.”
66|9|O Prophet (Muhammad)! Strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and be severe against them. Their abode will be hell and worst indeed is that destination
66|10|Allah has set forth an example for the disbelievers: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were under 2 of Allah’s righteous servants, but they both betrayed them (husbands by rejecting their doctrine). So they (Noah and Lot) could not protect them (their wives) from Allah at all, and it was said (to them): “Enter the fire along with those who enter!”
66|11|And Allah has set forth an example for those who believe, the wife of Pharaoh, who said: “My Lord! Build for me a home from You in Paradise and save me from Pharaoh and his work, and save me from the wrongdoer people.”
66|12|And (another example) Mary, the daughter of Imran, who guarded her chastity, and We breathed into it (the sleeve of her shirt or her garment) through Our spirit (Gabriel), and she believed in the Words of her Lord and the Scriptures, and she was among the devout obedient ones (to Allah)
67|1|Blessed be He in Whose authority is the dominion (the universe), and He has power over all things
67|2|The One (Allah) who has created death and life, so that He may test you (to find out) which of you are best in deed. And He is the All-Mighty, the Forgiving
67|3|The one (Allah) Who has created the 7 heavens one above another, you cannot see any fault in the creations of the Gracious. So look once again, can you see any rifts
67|4|Then repeat the look again, and yet again, your sight will return to you humbled and it is worn out
67|5|And indeed We have decorated the nearest heaven with lamps, We have made such lamps as missiles to drive away the devils, and have prepared for them the punishment of the blazing fire
67|6|And for those who disbelieve in their Lord, there will be the punishment of hell, and worst indeed is that destination
67|7|When they will be cast in the fire, they will hear the (terrible) drawing of its breath as it blazes out
67|8|It almost bursts up with fury. Every time a group is cast in it; its keeper will ask: “Did no Warner come to you?”
67|9|They will say: “Yes indeed, a Warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said: Allah has never sent down anything (of revelation), you are only in great error.”
67|10|And they will say: “Had we only listened or used our intelligence, we would not have been among the inmates of the blazing fire!”
67|11|Then they will confess their sin. So, away (from the Mercy of Allah) will be the inmates of the blazing fire
67|12|Surely! Those who fear their Lord unseen, they will have forgiveness and a great reward (Paradise)
67|13|And whether you keep your talk secret or disclose it, surely, He is All-Knower of what is in the hearts
67|14|Should not He know Who has created? And He is the Kind, and Courteous (to His servants), All-Aware (of everything)
67|15|It is He Who has made the earth submissive to you, so walk in the path thereof and eat of His provision, and to Him will be (the return) for Resurrection
67|16|Do you feel secure from He Who is over the heaven, will not cause the earth to sink with you when it shakes (as in an earthquake)
67|17|Or do you feel secure from He Who is over the heaven, will not send against you a violent tornado? Then you shall know how terrible has been My Warning
67|18|And indeed those before them denied (the Messengers of Allah), then see how terrible was My denial (punishment)
67|19|Do they not see the birds above them spreading out their wings and folding them in? None upholds them except the Gracious (Allah). Surely, He is the All-Seer all of everything
67|20|Who is the one that has an army to help you besides the Gracious? The disbelievers are in nothing but delusion
67|21|Who is there that can provide you if He withholds His provision? Nay, they continue to be in pride and they flee (from the truth)
67|22|Who is more rightly guided: one who walks with his face bend down without seeing, or the one who sees and walks upright on a Right Way
67|23|Say: “It is He Who has created you, and made for you hearing, seeing, and hearts. Yet, you give little thanks.”
67|24|Say: “It is He Who has created you in the earth, and to Him you shall be gathered (in the Hereafter).”
67|25|They say: “When will this Promise (the Day of Resurrection) come to pass if you are telling the truth?”
67|26|Say (O Muhammad): “The knowledge (of its exact time) is only with Allah, and I am only a plain Warner.”
67|27|But, when they will see it (the punishment on the Day of Resurrection) approaching, the faces of those who disbelieve will change with sadness (turn black), and it will be said (to them): “This is the Promise which you were calling for!”
67|28|Say (O Muhammad): “Even if Allah destroys me and those with me or He bestows His Mercy on us; who will save the disbelievers from a painful punishment?”
67|29|Say: “It is the Gracious (Allah), in Him we believe, and in Him we put our trust. Soon you will come to know who is it that is in clear error.”
67|30|Say (O Muhammad): “Have you seen that if all your water were to sunk away (in the ground), who then can supply you with flowing water?”
68|1|Nun. By the pen and what they (angels) write (records of people)
68|2|By the Grace of your Lord you (O Muhammad) are not a madman
68|3|and surely, you (O Muhammad) will have an endless reward
68|4|And surely, you (O Muhammad) are on an exalted (standard of) character
68|5|Soon you will see and they will see
68|6|which of you is afflicted with madness
68|7|Surely, your Lord knows those better who have gone astray from His Way, and He is the Best Knower of those who are guided
68|8|So (O Muhammad) don’t yield to the deniers (of Islam)
68|9|They wish that you should compromise (in religion with them), so they would also compromise with you
68|10|Don’t yield to everyone who swears much and is considered worthless
68|11|a slanderer, going about with mischief
68|12|opponent of the good, transgressor, sinful
68|13|cruel, and moreover wicked (of illegitimate birth)
68|14|though he has wealth and children
68|15|When Our Verses (of the Qur’an) are recited to him, he says: “Tales of the people of old!”
68|16|We shall brand the one over the nose
68|17|Surely, We shall try them as We tried the people of the garden when they swore to pick the fruits of the garden in the morning
68|18|without saying: If Allah wills
68|19|Then something (fire) from your Lord passed by on the garden (at night and burnt it) while they were asleep
68|20|so the garden became black by the morning, like a pitch dark night (completely ruined)
68|21|Then they called out one to another as soon as the morning broke
68|22|saying: “Go to your tilth in the morning if you want to pick the fruits.”
68|23|So they departed and whispered in secret low tones (saying)
68|24|“Let no poor person enter into the garden today.”
68|25|And then they went in the morning with strong intention, thinking that they have powers (to prevent the poor from taking any of the fruits)
68|26|But when they saw the garden, they said: “Surely, we have gone astray
68|27|(then they said): Nay! Indeed we have been deprived (of the fruits)!”
68|28|The best among them said: “Did I not tell you: why do you not glorify Allah (If Allah wills)?”
68|29|They said: “Glory to our Lord! Surely, we have been wrongdoers.”
68|30|So they started blaming one another
68|31|(Later) they said: “Woe to us! Surely, we had become transgressors
68|32|We hope that our Lord will give us in exchange a better garden than this. Truly, we turn to our Lord.”
68|33|Such is the punishment (in this life) and truly, the punishment of the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew
68|34|Surely, the pious will be rewarded with gardens of delight (Paradise) by their Lord
68|35|Shall We then treat the Muslims like the criminals
68|36|What is the matter with you? How do you judge
68|37|Or do you have a book from which you learn
68|38|that you shall have in it all that you choose
68|39|Or do you have oaths from Us reaching to the Day of Resurrection that your will have whatever you judge
68|40|Ask if anyone of them will Promise for that
68|41|Or do they have ‘partners (other deities besides Allah)?’ Then let them bring their ‘partners’ if they are truthful
68|42|(Remember) the Day (of Judgment) when the events shall be unfolded and they shall be called to prostrate (to Allah), but they shall not be able to do so
68|43|Their eyes will be cast down, humiliation will cover them; because they used to be called to prostrate (offer prayers), and they were healthy and good (in the world, but they refused to do so)
68|44|Then (O Muhammad) leave Me Alone with those who deny this speech (Qur’an). We shall punish them gradually from where they don’t perceive
68|45|And I will (even) grant them a respite. Surely, My plan is strong
68|46|Or have you (O Muhammad) asked them a wage, so they are heavily burdened from debt
68|47|Or do they have the (knowledge of the) unseen with them, so they can write it down
68|48|So wait with patience for the decision of your Lord, and don’t be like the companion of the fish (reference to Prophet Jonah who was swallowed by a fish), who cried out (to Us) while he was in distress
68|49|Had not a Grace from his Lord reached him, he would indeed have been (left in the stomach of the fish, but We forgave him, so he was) cast off on the naked shore, while he was blamed
68|50|But his Lord chose him and made him of the righteous
68|51|And surely, the disbelievers would almost make you slip with their eyes (through hatred) when they hear the reminder (the Qur’an), and they say: “Surely, he (Muhammad) is a madman!”
68|52|This (the Qur’an) is nothing but a reminder to all people of the worlds
69|1|The inevitable (of the Day of Resurrection)
69|2|What is the inevitable
69|3|And what will make you understand what the inevitable is
69|4|Thamud and Ad people denied the calamity (the striking Hour of judgment)
69|5|As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the awful cry
69|6|As for Ad, they were destroyed by a furious violent wind
69|7|which Allah imposed on them for 7 nights and 8 days in succession, so that you could see the people lying overthrown (destroyed) in it as if they were hollow trunks of date-palms
69|8|Now, do you see any remnants of them
69|9|And Pharaoh and those before him, and the cities overthrown (the people of Lot) who committed sin
69|10|and they disobeyed their Lord’s Messenger, so He seized them with a strong seize
69|11|Surely! When the water rose beyond limits (Noah’s flood), We carried you people in the floating ship
69|12|that We may make it an event of warning for you so that it may be understood by the retaining ears (in memory)
69|13|Then when the Trumpet will be blown with one blowing (first one)
69|14|and the earth with its mountains will be removed (from their places) and crushed with a single crushing
69|15|then on that Day the great Event will befall
69|16|and the heaven will split asunder, and for that Day it (heaven) will be frail and torn up
69|17|And the angels will be on all sides and on that Day 8 angels will bear the Throne of your Lord above them
69|18|That Day you will be brought to judgment (before your Lord), and not a secret of you will be hidden
69|19|Then, as for the one who will be given its record (of deeds) in its right hand, will say: “Here! read my record
69|20|Surely, I did believe that I shall meet my account!”
69|21|So he shall have a life of well-pleasing
69|22|in a lofty Paradise
69|23|with fruits in bunches which will be low and near at hand
69|24|(It will be said him): “Eat and drink at ease, (this is the reward) for what you did sent on before in past days!”
69|25|But as for the one who will be given its record (of deeds) in its left hand, will say: “I wish that I had not been given my record (of deeds)
69|26|and that I had never known what my account was
69|27|I wish if only it had been my end (death)
69|28|My wealth has availed me nothing
69|29|my power and arguments (to defend myself) have gone from me!”
69|30|(It will be said): “Seize him and fetter (with a chain around its neck)
69|31|then throw him in the blazing fire
69|32|then fasten him with a chain of 70 cubits long
69|33|Surely, he did not believe in Allah, the Great
69|34|and did not urge on the feeding of the poor
69|35|This Day he has neither a friend here
69|36|nor any food except the filth from the washing of wounds
69|37|which none will eat except the sinners.”
69|38|So, surely I swear by whatever you see
69|39|and by whatever you don’t see
69|40|that surely this is the word of an honored Messenger
69|41|It is not the word of a poet, little is that you believe
69|42|nor it is the word of a soothsayer, little is that you remember
69|43|This is the revelation sent down from the Lord of the worlds
69|44|Had he (Muhammad) forged false sayings concerning Us
69|45|We certainly would have seized him by his right hand
69|46|then certainly would have cut off his life artery
69|47|and none of you could prevent (Us) from punishing him
69|48|Surely this (Qur’an) is a reminder for the pious
69|49|Surely We know that there are some among you who deny (the Qur’an)
69|50|and indeed it (this Qur’an) will be an anguish for the disbelievers
69|51|Yet, it (this Qur’an) is an absolute truth with certainty
69|52|So glorify the name of your Lord, the Great
70|1|A questioner asked concerning a punishment about to befall
70|2|upon the disbelievers, none can avert
70|3|(It will come) from Allah, the Lord of the Ways of Ascent
70|4|The angels and the spirit (Gabriel) ascend to Him in a Day the measure of which is 50,000 years
70|5|So be patient (O Muhammad) with a good patience
70|6|Surely! They see it (Day of judgment) to be far off
70|7|but We see it quite near
70|8|On that Day, the sky will be like molten lead
70|9|and the mountains will be like flakes of wool
70|10|and no friend will ask of a friend
70|11|though they will be made to see one another (no one can help including relatives). The criminal would wish to ransom himself from the punishment of that Day by his children
70|12|his wife and his brother
70|13|his kindred who gave him shelter
70|14|and all that is in the earth, so that it might save him
70|15|But no means! Surely, it will be the fire of hell
70|16|to take away (burn completely) the head skin
70|17|he will call all those who turn their backs and turn away their faces
70|18|who collected (wealth) and hide it (from spending in the cause of Allah)
70|19|Surely, human has been created very impatient
70|20|when the evil touches them, they are distressed
70|21|but when good (fortune) touches them, they are stingy
70|22|except those who devote to prayers
70|23|those who remain steadfast in their prayers
70|24|those who set aside a known right in their wealth
70|25|for the beggar who asks and for the deprived (who lost property and wealth)
70|26|those who believe in the Day of recompense
70|27|those who fear the punishment of their Lord
70|28|surely! The punishment of their Lord is that before which none can feel secure
70|29|those who guard their chastity (private parts from illegal sex)
70|30|except with their wives or those whom their right hands possess so they are not to be blamed
70|31|But those who seek to go beyond this, then it is those who are transgressors
70|32|And those who keep their trusts and their covenants
70|33|and those who stand firm in their testimonies
70|34|and those who guard their prayers well
70|35|it is they who will be in the gardens (Paradise) with honor
70|36|So what is the matter with the disbelievers that they hasten to listen from you (O Muhammad)
70|37|sitting in groups on the right and on the left (of you, O Muhammad)
70|38|Does every one of them seek to enter the Paradise of delight
70|39|But nay! Surely, We have created them out of that which they (disbelievers) know
70|40|So, I (Muhammad) swear by the Lord of all points of sunrise in the east and sunset in the west that surely We are Able (to destroy them)
70|41|and can replace them by others better than them; and We are not to be outrun
70|42|So, leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about, until they meet their Day which they are promised
70|43|The Day when they will come out of the graves quickly as if they are racing towards a goal
70|44|with their eyes lowered in fear and humility, covering them with disgrace! That is the Day which they are promised
71|1|Surely, We sent Noah to his people (saying): “Warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment.”
71|2|He said: “O my people! Surely, I am sent to you as a plain Warner
71|3|That you should worship Allah (alone), be dutiful to Him, and obey me
71|4|(If you do so) He will forgive you of your sins and give you respite for an appointed term. Surely, the term of Allah when it comes, cannot be delayed, if you but knew.”
71|5|(After all his efforts were exhausted) he said: “O my Lord! Surely, I have called my people night and day
71|6|but all my calling added nothing but to their flight (from the truth)
71|7|Surely! Every time I called to them that Allah might forgive them, they put their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up with their garments, persisted (in their refusal), and magnified themselves in pride
71|8|Surely, I called them openly (aloud)
71|9|then surely, I proclaimed to them in public, and I have appealed to them in private
71|10|I said (to them): ‘Ask forgiveness from your Lord; He is Forgiving
71|11|He will send the sky (rain) to you in abundance
71|12|help you with increase in wealth and children, bestow on you gardens, and bestow on you rivers.’”
71|13|And what is the matter with that you don’t have any hope (from Allah)
71|14|and surely He has created you in stages
71|15|Don’t you see how Allah has created the 7 heavens one above another
71|16|and has made the moon as a light in it and made the sun as a lamp
71|17|And Allah has brought you out as a growth from the (dust of) earth
71|18|Then He will return you into it (the same earth), and bring you forth (to life again on the Day of Resurrection)
71|19|And Allah has made for you the earth as a wide spread
71|20|so that you may go about in it on broad roads
71|21|Noah said: “My Lord! Surely they have disobeyed me, and followed those whose wealth and children give them no increase but only loss
71|22|They have plotted a mighty plot
71|23|and they have said: ‘Don’t leave your deity, nor shall you leave Wadd, nor Suwa, nor Yaghuth, nor Yauq, nor Nasr (names of the idols).’
71|24|Indeed they have led many astray. (O Allah): don’t increase the wrongdoers (in anything) but error.”
71|25|Because of their sins they were drowned (in the flood) and were made to enter the fire. They did not find any help for them instead of Allah
71|26|And Noah said: “My Lord! Don’t leave any inhabitant of the disbelievers on the earth
71|27|Surely if You leave them, they will mislead Your servants and they will beget none but wicked disbelievers
71|28|My Lord! Forgive me, and my parents, and those who enter my home as a believer, and all the believing men and women. And You don’t grant increase to the wrongdoers but destruction!”
72|1|Say (O Muhammad): “It has been revealed to me that a group of jinns listened (to the Qur’an). They (returned to their folk and) said: ‘Surely! We have heard a wonderful recitation (this Qur’an)
72|2|it guides to the Right Way. We have believed in it and we shall never join (in worship) anything with our Lord
72|3|And surely, the majesty of our Lord is exalted: He has neither taken a wife nor a son
72|4|And the foolish among us have been uttering against Allah which was wrong and not right
72|5|surely, we thought that no human or jinns could utter a lie against Allah
72|6|And surely, there were people among mankind used to seek refuge with individuals among the jinns, so they (jinns) increased them (mankind) in sin and arrogance
72|7|and they thought as you thought that Allah will never appoint anyone (as a Messenger to mankind or jinn)
72|8|And we have sought to reach the heaven but found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires
72|9|We used to sit there at stations (heaven) to steal a hearing, but those who listen now find flaming fire (stars) watching in ambush for them
72|10|We did not know whether an evil was intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends for them a Right Way
72|11|There are some among us who are righteous, and some of us contrary to that; we are groups on different ways (religious sect)
72|12|And we know that we can neither escape (punishment of) Allah in the earth nor can we escape (punishment of) Him by flight
72|13|And indeed, when we heard the guidance (this Qur’an), we believed in it; and those who believe in their Lord shall have neither fear of any loss nor any oppression
72|14|And surely, there are some among us who are Muslims and some who are deviators from the truth. Those who have embraced Islam have found the Right Way
72|15|as for the unjust deviators (from truth), they will be firewood for hell.”
72|16|Say (O Muhammad): “If they (the Makkans) had stood upright on the Right Way (Islam), We would surely have bestowed on them water (rain) in abundance
72|17|so that We might test them thereby. And those who turn away from the reminder of their Lord (this Qur’an), He will cause them to enter in a severe punishment (hell)
72|18|And the Masjids are built for Allah’s worship alone, so don’t invoke anyone along with Allah
72|19|And yet, when the servant of Allah (Muhammad) stood up invoking Him in prayer, they (the jinns) just were around him in a dense crowd (to listen to the Prophet’s recitation).”
72|20|Say (O Muhammad): “I only pray to my Lord, and I associate none as partners with Him.”
72|21|Say: “Surely I don’t have power to cause you harm, nor bring you the Right Way.”
72|22|Say (O Muhammad): “(If I were to disobey Him) none can protect me from Allah’s punishment, nor can I find refuge except in Him
72|23|(My mission is) only to convey the truth from Allah and His Messages. Those who disobey Allah and His Messenger, then surely, they will be put in the fire of hell to reside in it forever.”
72|24|Till, when they will see (the punishment) that which they are Promised, then they will know whose helpers are weak and whose (supporters) are less in numbers
72|25|Say (O Muhammad): “I don’t know whether (punishment) which you are Promised is near or whether my Lord has appointed for it a distant term
72|26|(He alone is) the All-Knower of the unseen, and He does not reveal His unseen to anyone
72|27|except to the Messenger whom He has chosen. Then He makes a band of watching guards (angels) to march before him and behind him
72|28|so that He may know that surely they (the Messengers) have conveyed the messages of their Lord. And He surrounds all their surroundings and He keeps a count of all things.”
73|1|O you wrapped in garments (Muhammad)
73|2|Stand to pray all night, except a little
73|3|half of it or a little less than that
73|4|or add to it (little more), and recite the Qur’an in a slow, (pleasant tone) style
73|5|Surely, We shall soon send down to you a weighty Word (obligations)
73|6|Surely, the rising by night (for Tahajjud prayer) is very hard, most potent, and most suitable (to understand) for the Word (of Qur’an)
73|7|surely, during the day there is prolonged occupation for you with ordinary duties
73|8|And remember the Name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him with a complete devotion
73|9|He is the Lord of the east and the west: there is no one worthy of worship but He. So take Him alone as your Guardian
73|10|And be patient (O Muhammad) with what they say and keep away from them, withdraw (leave) in a good way
73|11|And leave Me alone to deal with the deniers who are in possession of good things of life. Give them respite for a little while
73|12|Surely, We have fetters (in store to bind them) and a raging fire
73|13|and a food that chokes, and a painful punishment
73|14|On the Day when the earth and the mountains will be in a violent shake, the mountains will be a heap of sand poured out and flowing
73|15|Surely, We have sent to you (O mankind) a Messenger (Muhammad) to be a witness over you, as We sent a Messenger (Moses) to Pharaoh
73|16|But Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger (Moses); so We seized him with a severe seize
73|17|If you disbelieve, how will you avoid the punishment on that Day (of Resurrection) which will turn the children grey-headed (old)
73|18|the heaven will split asunder? His Promise will certainly be fulfilled
73|19|Surely, this is an admonition, so let them who will, take a way to their Lord
73|20|Surely, your Lord knows that you stand (to pray at night) a little less than 2/3rd of the night, or ½ of the night, or 1/3rd of the night, also a party of those with you. And Allah measures the night and the day. He knows that you can never calculate it (unable to pray the whole night), so He has turned to you (in Mercy). So, recite from the Qur’an as much as may be easy for you. He knows that there may be some sick among you, and some others who travel through the land to seek Allah’s Bounty; and yet, some others who fight in Allah’s cause. So recite as much of it (Qur’an) as may be easy for you, establish prayer, pay obligatory charity, and lend to Allah a goodly loan. And whatever good you will send before you (leave the world) for yourselves, you will certainly find it with Allah, which is better and greater in reward. And seek the forgiveness of Allah. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful
74|1|O you (Muhammad) enveloped (in garments)
74|2|Arise and warn
74|3|Proclaim (the greatness of) your Lord (Allah)
74|4|and purify your garments
74|5|and keep away from filth (idols)
74|6|and don’t give a thing to have more (obey Allah not as a Favor to Him)
74|7|and be patient for the sake of your Lord
74|8|When the trumpet will be sounded
74|9|surely, that Day will be a hard Day
74|10|not easy for the disbelievers
74|11|Leave Me alone to deal with whom I created alone (without any means, including Al-Walid bin Al-Mughirah, a bitter opponent of the prophet)
74|12|and Allah granted him abundant resources
74|13|and children by his side
74|14|and made life smooth and comfortable for him
74|15|Yet, he desires that I should give more
74|16|Nay! Surely, he has been stubborn and opposing to Our revelations
74|17|I shall soon oblige him to face (climb a slippery mountain in the hellfire) a severe punishment
74|18|surely, he thought and plotted
74|19|So let him be cursed, how he plotted
74|20|And (again) let him be cursed, how he plotted
74|21|Then he thought
74|22|then frowned and looked in a bad tempered way
74|23|then he turned his back and was proud
74|24|and he said: “This is nothing but a magic from the old
74|25|this is nothing but the word of a human being.”
74|26|I will burn him in hellfire
74|27|And what will make you know exactly what hellfire is
74|28|It does not spare (any sinner), nor does it leave (anything not burnt)
74|29|Fire burns the skins
74|30|Over it are 19 (angels as guardians and keepers of hell)
74|31|And We have set none but angels as guardians of the fire. We have not fixed their numbers (19) except as a trial for those who disbelieve in order that those who were given the Scripture may be convinced (Qur’an is the truth as it agrees with their books i.e. number (19) is written in the Torah and the Gospel). Those who believe may increase in faith (in Qur’an). Those who were given the Scripture and believers may say to those in whose hearts there is a disease (hypocrisy) and the disbelievers say: “What Allah means by this example?” Allah leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. No one knows the forces of your Lord but He. This (Qur’an) is nothing but a reminder to mankind
74|32|Nay, by the moon
74|33|and by the night when it withdraws
74|34|and by the dawn when it brightens
74|35|surely, it (hell) is one of the greatest signs
74|36|and a warning to mankind
74|37|to any of you that chooses to go forward (by righteous deeds), or remain behind (by sins)
74|38|Every person is held in a pledge for what he has earned
74|39|except those on the right (true believers)
74|40|in gardens (Paradise) they will ask one another
74|41|about the criminals. (They will say to them)
74|42|“What has caused you to enter into hell?”
74|43|They will say: “We were not of those who used to offer prayers
74|44|nor we used to feed the poor
74|45|we used to talk falsehood with vain talkers
74|46|and we used to deny the Day of recompense
74|47|until there came to us the certainty (death).”
74|48|(On that Day) no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to them
74|49|Then what is wrong with them (disbelievers) that they turn away from receiving the admonition
74|50|As if they were frightened donkeys
74|51|fleeing from a hunter, or a lion, or a beast of prey
74|52|Nay, everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out (writing from Allah that Islam is the right religion)
74|53|Nay! But they don’t fear the Hereafter (Allah’s punishment)
74|54|Nay, surely, this (Qur’an) is an admonition
74|55|So whoever wills (let him read it), will reflect on it
74|56|And they will not take heed unless Allah wills. He is the One deserves that mankind should be afraid of Him. He is the One Who forgives
75|1|I swear by the Day of Resurrection
75|2|and I swear by the self-reproaching person (believer)
75|3|Does mankind think that We shall not assemble their bones
75|4|Yes, We are Able to put together in perfect order very tips of their fingers
75|5|But mankind desires to continue committing sins
75|6|He (mankind) asks: “When will be this Day of Resurrection?”
75|7|So, (it will come) when the sight will be dazed
75|8|the moon will be eclipsed
75|9|and the sun and moon will be joined together
75|10|on that Day mankind will say: “Where (is the refuge) to flee?”
75|11|No! There will be no refuge
75|12|On that Day, the place of rest will only be to your Lord
75|13|On that Day mankind will be informed of (their deeds) what they sent forward and what they left behind
75|14|Nay! Mankind will be witness against themselves (body parts will speak about deeds)
75|15|though they may put forth their excuses (to cover evil deeds)
75|16|(O Muhammad) don’t move your tongue with it (the Qur’an) to make haste therewith (to memorize the Verses)
75|17|surely, it is upon Us to collect it and give you (O Muhammad) the ability to recite it (the Qur’an)
75|18|and when We have recited it to you (O Muhammad through Gabriel), then you follow its (the Qur’an’s) recitation
75|19|then surely, it is for Us to make it clear to you
75|20|nay but you (mankind) love the present life of this world
75|21|and leave the Hereafter
75|22|On that Day, some faces will be radiant
75|23|looking towards their Lord
75|24|On that Day, other faces will be gloomy
75|25|thinking that some calamity is about to fall on them
75|26|Nay, when it (soul) reaches to the collar bone (up to the throat in its exit)
75|27|and it will be said: “Who can cure (save from death)?”
75|28|He (dying person) will conclude that it was the time of departure (death)
75|29|and one leg will be joined with another leg (shrouded)
75|30|on that Day, the drive will be to your Lord
75|31|So the he (disbeliever) neither believed nor prayed
75|32|but (on the contrary) he denied (this Qur’an) and turned away
75|33|Then he walked to his family admiring himself
75|34|Woe to you (disbeliever)! And then (again) woe to you
75|35|(Again) woe to you (disbeliever)! And then (again) woe to you
75|36|Does the human think that it will be left (to wander) without requital (any purpose)
75|37|Was the human not a drop of emitted semen
75|38|Then he became a hanging clot; then (Allah) created and fashioned him in due proportion
75|39|and made him either of the 2 sexes, male and female
75|40|Is not He Able to give life to the dead
76|1|Has there not come over human, a period of time when it was not a thing worth mentioning
76|2|Surely, We have created human from the sperm drop of mixed semen (containing both sexual discharge) in order to test human. So We gave people to hear and see
76|3|Surely, We showed human the Way, whether it be grateful or ungrateful
76|4|Surely, We have prepared for the disbelievers iron chains, iron collars, and a blazing fire
76|5|Surely, the righteous shall drink from a cup (of wine) mixed with water from a spring in Paradise called Kafur
76|6|a spring from where the servants of Allah will drink, causing it to gush out abundantly
76|7|They fulfill their vows, and fear the Day whose evil will be widespread
76|8|who feed the poor, the orphan, and the captive for the love (of Allah)
76|9|(saying): “We feed you for the sake of Allah’s Pleasure only. We wish neither reward nor thanks from you
76|10|Surely, we fear from our Lord a hard and distressful Day that will make the faces look horrible.”
76|11|So Allah will save them from the evil of that Day, and bestow on them a radiant light and joy
76|12|and will compensate them (Paradise) and garments of silk because they were patient
76|13|(They will) recline on raised thrones in it; they will feel neither the excessive heat of the sun nor the excessive bitter cold in it
76|14|And (the trees of Paradise) will have shade close upon them, and the bunches of fruits will hang low (within their reach) in it
76|15|And they will be served with round dishes of silver, cups of crystal
76|16|crystal-clear, made of silver. They will determine the measure there (according to their wishes)
76|17|They will also be given to drink a cup (wine) that is mixed with ginger
76|18|from a spring there, called Salsabil
76|19|And they will be attended by boys (servants) of everlasting youth. If you see them, you would think them like scattered pearls
76|20|And wherever you look there (in Paradise), you will see a delight and a great dominion
76|21|Their honoring garments (of the people of Paradise) will be made of fine green silk and gold embroidery. They will be adorned with bracelets of silver and their Lord will give them pure drink
76|22|(And it will be said to them): “Surely, this is a reward for you and your endeavor is appreciated and accepted.”
76|23|Surely! It is We Who have sent down this Qur’an to you (O Muhammad) in stages
76|24|therefore be patient (O Muhammad) for the command of your Lord and don’t yield to a sinner or a disbeliever among them
76|25|And remember the name of your Lord every morning and afternoon
76|26|prostrate yourself to Him at night and glorify Him during long night Hours
76|27|Surely! These disbelievers love the present life of this world and leave behind them a heavy Day (that will come)
76|28|It is We Who created them and made their joints strong. But if We will, We can replace (them) like them with a complete replacement
76|29|Surely! This (Verses of the Qur’an) is an admonition, so those who will, let them adapt the Way to their Lord
76|30|but you cannot will, unless Allah wills. Surely, Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise
76|31|He admits to His Mercy whom He wills, and for the wrongdoers He has prepared a painful punishment
77|1|By the emissary winds (sent forth) one after another
77|2|by the raging hurricanes
77|3|by (the winds) that scatter (the clouds) to distant places
77|4|then separate them one from another
77|5|by those (angels) who bring down the reminder (to the Messengers)
77|6|either to (remove all) excuses or to (covey the) warning
77|7|Surely, what you are promised must be fulfilled
77|8|(It will be fulfilled) when the stars will lose their light
77|9|when the heaven will cleft asunder
77|10|when the mountains will blow away (into dust)
77|11|when the Messengers will be gathered to their appointed time
77|12|For what Day are these signs deferred
77|13|For the Day of sorting out (judgment)
77|14|What will make you know, what is the Day of sorting out
77|15|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|16|Did We not destroy the previous generations (for evil deeds)
77|17|Then We shall make later generations to follow them
77|18|Thus We will deal with the criminals
77|19|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|20|Have We not created you from a worthless fluid (semen)
77|21|which We placed in a place of safety (womb)
77|22|for a known period
77|23|So We have measured (its term) and We are the best to measure (things)
77|24|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|25|Have We not made the earth a home for both
77|26|the living and the dead
77|27|placed on it firm, tall and high mountains, and given you sweet water to drink
77|28|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|29|(It will be said to the disbelievers on the Day of Judgment): “You depart to that (hell) which you used to deny
77|30|You depart towards the shadow (of hellfire smoke ascending) in 3 columns
77|31|neither shady nor of any use against the fierce flame of the fire
77|32|surely! it (hell) throws up huge sparks like a castle
77|33|as if they were yellow camels.”
77|34|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|35|That will be the Day when they shall not be able to speak
77|36|they will not be permitted to put forth any excuse for them
77|37|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|38|Such will be the Day of decision! We will bring you and your previous generations together
77|39|So, if you have a plot, then plot against Me
77|40|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|41|Surely, the pious shall reside in shades and springs
77|42|and they will have whatever fruits they desire
77|43|(It will be said to them): “Eat and drink comfortably for that which you used to do (good deeds).”
77|44|Surely, thus We will reward the righteous
77|45|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|46|(O disbelievers)! Eat and enjoy yourselves (in this worldly life) for a little while. Surely, you are the criminals
77|47|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|48|When it is said to them: “Bow down yourself (in prayer before Allah)!” They don’t bow down
77|49|Woe on that Day to the deniers (of the Day of Resurrection)
77|50|Then in what statement after this (the Qur’an), will they believe
78|1|About what are they asking (one another)
78|2|About the great news (Islam)
78|3|about which they disagree
78|4|Nay, they will come to know
78|5|nay, again, they will come to know (very soon)
78|6|Have not We made the earth like a bed
78|7|the mountains as pegs
78|8|created you in pairs
78|9|made your sleep for rest
78|10|made the night as a covering
78|11|made the day (to work) for livelihood
78|12|built above you 7 strong (heavens)
78|13|placed in it a shinning lamp (sun)
78|14|sent down abundant water from the clouds
78|15|thereby to produce corn and vegetation in it
78|16|and gardens of thick growth
78|17|Surely, the Day of decision is a fixed time
78|18|On that Day, the trumpet will be blown in and you shall come forth in crowds
78|19|The sky will be opened, as if there were doors
78|20|The mountains will be moved away, as if they were a mirage
78|21|Truly, hell is a place of ambush
78|22|a living place for the transgressors
78|23|They will live in it for ages
78|24|they will neither taste cool nor any drink in it
78|25|except boiling water and pus (dirty wound discharges)
78|26|as a fitting recompense (for their evil deeds)
78|27|Surely, they never expected a reckoning (for their deeds)
78|28|and denied Our revelations with strong denial
78|29|But We have recorded every thing in a book
78|30|(It will be said): “So you taste (the results of evil actions). We shall give you nothing but increase in punishment.”
78|31|Surely, there will be a success (Paradise) for the righteous
78|32|gardens and grape yards
78|33|young mature maidens of equal age
78|34|full cups (of wine to the brim)
78|35|they will neither hear vain talk nor any lying in it
78|36|a reward from your Lord and a gift beyond their account (for good deeds)
78|37|from the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them; the Gracious, before Whom no one will be able to speak (on the Day of Resurrection)
78|38|On that Day, the spirit (Gabriel) and the angels will stand in rows; none will speak except the one to whom the Gracious (Allah) will allow to speak, and he will speak what is right
78|39|That is (without doubt) the true Day. Let those who wish, seek a Way back to their Lord (by obeying Him in this world)
78|40|Surely, We have warned you of an imminent punishment, on the Day when people will see (the deeds) what their hands have sent forth, and the disbeliever will cry: “Woe to me! Would that I were dust!”
79|1|By those (angels) who violently pull out (the souls of the disbelievers)
79|2|by those (angels) who gently draw out (the souls of the believers)
79|3|by those (angels) who swim swiftly (through space)
79|4|by those (angels) who press forward in a race (to fulfill Allah’s orders)
79|5|by those (angels) who arrange to execute the commands (of their Lord)
79|6|On the Day when the first blowing of the trumpet will shake (the earth, the mountains, and everybody will die)
79|7|the second blowing of the trumpet will follow it (everybody will raise up)
79|8|On that Day, hearts will beat (with fear and anxiety)
79|9|their eyes will be downcast
79|10|They (disbelievers) say: “Shall we really be returned to the former state of life
79|11|when we will become crumbled bones?”
79|12|They say: “In that case, it would be a return with loss!”
79|13|But it will be only a single shout (the second blowing of the trumpet)
79|14|when they will be awakened (alive after death)
79|15|Have you heard the story of Moses
79|16|When his Lord called him in the sacred valley of Tuwa
79|17|and said: “Go to Pharaoh, surely he has transgressed all bounds
79|18|and say to him: ‘Do you have the desire to purify yourself (from sins)
79|19|I will guide you to your Lord, so that you may fear (Him).’”
79|20|Then he (Moses) showed him (Pharaoh) the great sign (miracles)
79|21|but he (Pharaoh) denied and disobeyed
79|22|Then he turned his back and strive (against Allah)
79|23|gathered his people and cried aloud
79|24|saying: “I am your Lord, most high.”
79|25|So Allah seized him with punishment for the Hereafter and this life
79|26|Surely, in this, there is an admonition for those who fear (Allah)
79|27|Are you (O mankind) more difficult to create or the heaven that He constructed
79|28|He raised its canopy and perfected it
79|29|He covers its night with darkness and brings out light in its forenoon
79|30|And after that, He spreads out the earth
79|31|and brings out its water and its pasture from there
79|32|fixed the mountains firmly
79|33|made a provision and benefit for you and for your cattle
79|34|But when the greatest catastrophe (the Day of recompense) will strike
79|35|the Day when people will remember what they had striven for
79|36|When hellfire shall be made apparent in full view for those who see
79|37|then, those who transgressed all bounds (evil deeds)
79|38|and preferred the worldly life
79|39|surely, will have their abode in hell
79|40|But those who feared standing before their Lord and restrained themselves from evil desires
79|41|then surely, will have their homes in Paradise
79|42|They ask you (O Muhammad) about the Hour: “When will be its appointed time?”
79|43|But you have no knowledge to say anything about it
79|44|Only your Lord (has knowledge of) the term of it
79|45|You (O Muhammad) are only a Warner for those who fear it
79|46|On that Day, when they will see it, it will be as if they had not stayed (in this world) only an afternoon or one morning
80|1|He (the prophet) frowned and turned away
80|2|when there came to him the blind man (Abdullah bin Umme Maktoom, who came to the prophet while the prophet was preaching to the chiefs of Makkah)
80|3|And how can you know? He might become pure (from sins)
80|4|or he might receive admonition, and the admonition might profit him
80|5|As for those who think themselves indifferent
80|6|to whom you were attending
80|7|you will not be held responsible, if they would not purify themselves (your duty is to convey the message of Allah)
80|8|Yet, to him who came to you running (with enthusiasm)
80|9|and with fear (of Allah)
80|10|you were unmindful from him
80|11|Nay, (you should not do so), indeed this is an admonition
80|12|so those who want, let them pay attention to it
80|13|It is written in honored records
80|14|exalted (in dignity), purified
80|15|in the hands of scribes (angels)
80|16|(who are) honorable and obedient
80|17|Be cursed (disbelieving) people! How ungrateful they are
80|18|Out of what He has created them
80|19|From semen drop He has created them and then set them in due proportion
80|20|then makes their way (of life) easy for them
80|21|then causes them to die and puts them in their graves
80|22|Then, He will surely resurrect them again when He wills
80|23|Nay, but they (disbelievers) have not fulfilled what He has commanded them
80|24|Then let people look at their food
80|25|We pour out water (rain) in abundance
80|26|then split the earth (soil) in clefts
80|27|And We cause to grow in it the grain
80|28|and grapes and clover plants
80|29|and olives and date-palms
80|30|and gardens, dense with many trees
80|31|and fruits and fodder
80|32|as a provision and benefit for you and your cattle
80|33|Then when there will come the deafening shout
80|34|on that Day a person will flee from his brother
80|35|and his mother and his father
80|36|and his spouse and its children
80|37|On that Day, every person will have enough concern to become careless of others
80|38|Some faces on that Day will be bright (for true believers)
80|39|laughing, rejoicing at good news (of Paradise)
80|40|And other faces on that Day will be dusty
80|41|darkness will cover them
80|42|Such will be the (faces of the) disbelieving wicked
81|1|When the sun will cease to shine (overthrown)
81|2|and when the stars will fall
81|3|and when the mountains will be moved away
81|4|and when the pregnant she-camels will be neglected (unattended)
81|5|and when the wild beasts will be gathered together
81|6|and when the seas will overflow (or set on fire)
81|7|and when the souls will be joined (with their bodies)
81|8|and when the infant girl buried alive (as the pagan Arabs used to do) will be questioned
81|9|for what sin she was killed
81|10|and when the written pages (record of deeds) will be laid open
81|11|and when the heaven will be stripped off (taken away from its place)
81|12|and when hellfire will be kindled to blaze (fierce heat)
81|13|and when Paradise will be brought near
81|14|then every person will know what he has brought (of good and evil)
81|15|So surely, I swear by the planets that recede
81|16|and that move swiftly and hide themselves
81|17|and by the night as it departs
81|18|and by the dawn as it brightens
81|19|surely, this is the Word (this Qur’an) of a honorable Messenger (Gabriel from Allah to Muhammad)
81|20|possessor of mighty power, established (high rank) with the Owner of the Throne (Allah)
81|21|obeyed (by the angels in the heaven), and trustworthy
81|22|(O people of Makkah) your companion (Muhammad) is not a mad man
81|23|and indeed he (Muhammad) saw him (Gabriel) in the clear horizon
81|24|and he (Muhammad) does not withhold knowledge on the unseen
81|25|And this (Qur’an) is not the word of the outcast Satan
81|26|Then where are you going
81|27|This (the Qur’an) is but a reminder to the people of the worlds
81|28|to whoever among you who wishes to follow the Right Way
81|29|Yet, you will not (avail your wishes) unless that Allah wills, the Lord of the worlds
82|1|When the heaven will cleft asunder
82|2|and when the stars will scatter
82|3|and when the oceans are burst out
82|4|and when the graves will be turned upside down (bring out their contents)
82|5|every person will know what he has sent forward and what left behind
82|6|O people! What has made you careless about your Lord, the Generous
82|7|who created you, fashioned you perfectly, gave you due proportion
82|8|and put you together in whatever form He willed
82|9|Nay! But you deny the Day of Judgment
82|10|But surely, (angels have been appointed to watch) over you
82|11|(who are) honorable writers
82|12|they know all of what you do
82|13|Surely, (on that Day) the righteous will be in delight (Paradise)
82|14|and surely, the wicked (evil-doers) will be in the fire (hell)
82|15|and they will burn in it on the Day of recompense
82|16|and they will not be able to escape from it
82|17|And what will make you know what the Day of the recompense is
82|18|Again, what will make you know what the Day of recompense is
82|19|(It will be) the Day when no one will have the power to do anything for another: on that Day, the decision will be entirely with Allah
83|1|Woe to those who give less in measure and weight (defraud)
83|2|those who, when they receive by measure from people, demand full measure
83|3|but when they give by measure or give by weight to others, they give less than due
83|4|Don’t they think that they will be resurrected
83|5|on a great Day
83|6|the Day when all mankind will stand before the Lord of the worlds
83|7|Nay! Truly, the record of the deeds of the wicked is (preserved) in prison register (Sijjin)
83|8|and what will make you know what Sijjin is
83|9|A register inscribed (of hell)
83|10|Woe on that Day to those who deny (disbelievers)
83|11|who deny the Day of recompense
83|12|None can deny it except every transgressor beyond bounds, the sinner
83|13|When Our Verses (of the Qur’an) are recited to them, they say: “Tales of the ancients!”
83|14|Nay! But their sins and evil deeds which they used to earn have caused a covering on their hearts
83|15|Nay! Surely, on that Day, they (evil-doers) will be veiled from (the vision of) their Lord
83|16|Then, surely they will indeed burn in the hell
83|17|and it will be said to them: “This is what you used to deny!”
83|18|Nay! Surely, the record of the righteous deeds is indeed (preserved) in register of exalted ones (Illiyun)
83|19|and what will make you know what Illiyun is
83|20|A register inscribed (of Paradise)
83|21|bears witness of those who are nearest (to Allah, i.e. the angels)
83|22|Surely, the righteous will be in delight (Paradise)
83|23|on thrones, looking (at all things)
83|24|you will recognize in their faces the brightness of delight
83|25|They will be given to drink from pure sealed wine
83|26|the seal of that wine will be smell of musk. Those who want to strive, let them strive
83|27|That (wine) will be a mixture of Tasnim
83|28|a spring where those nearest to Allah will drink
83|29|Surely! Those who committed crimes (in this world), used to laugh at those who believed
83|30|and wink one to another (in mockery) whenever they passed by them
83|31|When they returned to their own people, they would return joking
83|32|When they saw them (believers), they used to say: “Surely! These people have indeed gone astray,”
83|33|though they (disbelievers) had not been sent over them (believers) as watchers
83|34|On that Day (the Day of Resurrection) the believers will laugh at the disbelievers
83|35|as they recline on high couches and look (at then saying)
83|36|“Are not the disbelievers rewarded for what they used to do?”
84|1|When the heaven will split asunder
84|2|listens to and obeys its Lord and it must do so
84|3|And when the earth will stretch out
84|4|and cast out all that is in it and becomes empty
84|5|listens and obeys to its Lord and it must do so
84|6|O mankind! Surely, you must strive very hard towards your Lord; then you will meet (Allah)
84|7|Then those who will be given their record (of deeds) in their right hand
84|8|surely they will receive easy reckoning
84|9|and will return to their family in joy
84|10|But those who will be given their record (deeds) from behind their back
84|11|will invoke for destruction
84|12|and shall burn in a blazing fire
84|13|for they used to live among their people in joy
84|14|and thought that they would never come back (to Us for accounts)
84|15|Yes! Surely, their Lord was watching (over their misdeeds)
84|16|So I swear by the glow of sunset
84|17|and by the night and whatever it gathers in its darkness
84|18|and by the moon when it grows full
84|19|that you will certainly travel from stage to stage (this life and the Hereafter)
84|20|What is the matter with the people that they don’t believe
84|21|and when the Qur’an is recited to them, they don’t prostrate
84|22|Nay, the disbelievers will deny (Islam)
84|23|and Allah knows best what they are hiding (in their hearts)
84|24|So, announce to them, a painful punishment
84|25|except those who believe and do good deeds; for them there will be a never ending reward (Paradise)
85|1|By the heaven holding the big stars
85|2|And by the Promised Day (of judgment)
85|3|And by the witnesses and that which is being witnessed
85|4|Cursed be the people of the ditch
85|5|who lit the fire fed with fuel
85|6|and they sat by it (fire)
85|7|to watch what they were doing to the believers
85|8|And they took revenge on them for no other reason except that they believed in Allah, the All-Mighty, the Praise-worthy
85|9|to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth! And Allah is witness over everything
85|10|Surely, those who persecute the believing men and believing women and don’t repent (to Allah), then they will receive the punishment of hell and they will have the punishment of the burning fire
85|11|Surely, those who believe and do righteous deeds, they will have gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise). That is the great success
85|12|Surely, (O Muhammad) the grip (punishment) of your Lord is very severe
85|13|Surely, it is He Who originates (created everything) and will repeat it (on the Day of Resurrection)
85|14|Allah is Forgiving, the Loving (to the pious)
85|15|the Owner of the Throne, the Glorious
85|16|and (He) does whatever He intends (or wills)
85|17|Has the story reached you of the hosts
85|18|of Pharaoh and Thamud
85|19|Nay! The disbelievers (persist) in denying (the truth)
85|20|and Allah has encompassed them from all around
85|21|Nay! This is a Glorious Qur’an
85|22|(inscribed) in the preserved tablet (Al-Lauh Al-Mahfuz)
86|1|By the heaven and the night-comer (the bright star)
86|2|and what will make you know what night-comer is
86|3|(It is) the star of piercing brightness
86|4|There is no human being but has a protector (angel) over him
86|5|So let a person see from what he is created
86|6|He is created from an emitted fluid
86|7|that is produced from between the back-bone and the ribs
86|8|Surely, (Allah) is Able to bring a person back (to life)
86|9|on the Day when all the secrets will be examined
86|10|he will have neither power, nor any helper (to save from punishment)
86|11|By the sky (with rain clouds) with the returning rain (again and again)
86|12|and by the earth which splits (for springs or growth of trees and plants)
86|13|surely! this (Qur’an) is the Word that separates (truth from falsehood)
86|14|and it is not for amusement
86|15|These (unbelievers) are plotting a plot (against you O Muhammad)
86|16|and I too am plotting a plan
86|17|Give respite to the disbelievers. Give respite to them gently (for a while)
87|1|Glorify the name of your Lord, the High
87|2|Who has created everything, and then proportioned them
87|3|Who has measured (destinies) and then guided them
87|4|Who brings out the pasture (vegetation eaten by animals)
87|5|then makes it dark rubbish
87|6|We shall make you recite (the Qur’an) so you (O Muhammad) shall not forget it
87|7|except what Allah wills. Surely He knows what is open and what is hidden
87|8|And We shall make it easy for you (O Muhammad) to follow the easy way (to do righteous deeds)
87|9|Therefore remind, surely, reminder does benefit
87|10|Whoever fears (Allah) will heed the reminder
87|11|and the wretched will avoid it
87|12|who will burn in the great fire
87|13|where he will neither die in it nor live (a good living)
87|14|Indeed whoever purifies himself shall achieve success
87|15|and who remembers the Name of his Lord and prays
87|16|Nay, (O people) you prefer the worldly life
87|17|although the Hereafter is better and everlasting
87|18|Surely! This is in the former Scriptures
87|19|the Scriptures of Abraham and Moses
88|1|Has the news of the overwhelming event (of Resurrection) reached you
88|2|On that Day some faces will be humiliated (in the hellfire)
88|3|in hard labor, worn out
88|4|burn in the hot blazing fire
88|5|given to drink from a boiling spring
88|6|They will have no food except bitter thorny fruit
88|7|that will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger
88|8|Other faces on that Day will be joyful
88|9|pleased with their endeavors (of good deeds)
88|10|in a high garden (Paradise)
88|11|They will hear no vain talk in it
88|12|They will have a running spring in it
88|13|They will be on thrones raised high in it
88|14|with cups placed at hand
88|15|and cushions set in rows
88|16|and rich carpets spread out
88|17|Don’t they look at the camels, how they are created
88|18|And the sky, how it is raised
88|19|And the mountains, how they are fixed firmly
88|20|And the earth, how it is spread out
88|21|So remind them (O Muhammad), you are only a reminder
88|22|not a dictator over them
88|23|Except those who turn away and disbelieve
88|24|then Allah will punish them with the greatest punishment
88|25|Surely, to Us will be their return
88|26|then surely, We will take their reckoning
89|1|By the dawn
89|2|by the 10 nights (first 10 days of the month of Dhul-Hijja)
89|3|by the even and the odd (of all the creations of Allah)
89|4|and by the night when it departs
89|5|Are there not in them (above oaths) sufficient proofs for the people of understanding
89|6|Have you (O Muhammad) not seen how your Lord dealt with Ad (people)
89|7|(Tall residents of) Iram with lofty pillars
89|8|the like of which were not created like them in the land
89|9|With Thamud (people), who cut out rocks in the valley (to make residences)
89|10|With Pharaoh who had the stakes
89|11|They all transgressed beyond bounds in the lands
89|12|and made much mischief in it
89|13|So your Lord poured on them different kinds of punishment
89|14|Surely, your Lord is ever watchful (over them)
89|15|As for people, when their Lord tries them and gives them honor and bounties, they say: “Our Lord has honored us.”
89|16|But when He tries them through restricting their means of life, then they say: “Our Lord has humiliated us!”
89|17|Nay! But you did not treat the orphans with kindness and generosity
89|18|nor did you encourage each other in feeding the poor
89|19|You devour inheritance (of the weak) with greed
89|20|and you love wealth with much love
89|21|Nay! When the earth will be grounded to exceeding grinding (powder)
89|22|your Lord will come with the angels standing in rows
89|23|hell will be brought near (in sight) that Day. On that Day people will remember (their deeds), but how the remembrance will avail them
89|24|One will say: “Alas! Would that I had sent forth (good deeds) for my life?”
89|25|On that Day, none will punish anymore except His punishment
89|26|and none can bind anyone like His binding
89|27|(It will be said to the pious): “O you the one in satisfaction
89|28|Come back to your Lord, well-pleased and well-pleasing (to Him)
89|29|Then you enter among My servants
89|30|and you enter My Paradise!”
90|1|I swear by this city (Makkah, where it is prohibited to harm anyone)
90|2|you (O Muhammad) are free (from sin to punish the enemies of Islam) in this city (Makkah)
90|3|and by the father (Adam) and the children which he begot (mankind)
90|4|surely, We have created human in toil (to work hard)
90|5|Does human think that none can overcome them
90|6|Human says (boastfully): “I have wasted wealth in abundance!”
90|7|Does human thinks that none sees them
90|8|Have We not made for them a pair of eyes (to see)
90|9|And a tongue and a pair of lips (to control)
90|10|And shown him the 2 ways (good and evil)
90|11|Yet, human has not attempted to pass on the steep path (Aqabah)
90|12|And what will make you know what the steep path is
90|13|(It is) the freeing of a neck (slave from bondage)
90|14|or giving food in a day of hunger (famine)
90|15|to an orphan relative
90|16|or to a poor clinging to dust (out of misery)
90|17|then human should be one of those who believe, recommend one another to the patience, and recommend one another to kindness and compassion
90|18|They are the people of the Right Hand (people of Paradise)
90|19|But those who disbelieve in Our revelations, they are the people of the left hand (people of hell)
90|20|with the fire all around them
91|1|By the sun and its brightness
91|2|by the moon as it follows it (sun)
91|3|by the day as it shows up (the sun’s) brightness
91|4|by the night as it conceals it (the sun)
91|5|by the heaven and Him who built it
91|6|by the earth and Him who spread it
91|7|by the soul and Him who perfected it in proportion
91|8|and He inspired him with (knowledge of) what is wrong for him and what is right for him
91|9|Indeed one will succeed who purifies his own self (obey Allah)
91|10|and indeed one will fail who corrupts him (disobey Allah)
91|11|Thamud (people) denied (their prophet) through their transgression (by rejecting the truth)
91|12|when the most wicked person among them went out (to kill the she-camel)
91|13|The Messenger of Allah (Saleh) said to them: “That is the she-camel of Allah! (Don’t harm it and don’t stop it from) its drink.”
91|14|They denied him and killed her. So their Lord destroyed them because of their sin, and made them equal in destruction (leveled to ground)
91|15|And He has no fear of its consequences
92|1|By the night, when it covers (with darkness)
92|2|and by the day, when it appears in brightness
92|3|By Him Who created the male and the female
92|4|surely, your efforts are indeed diverse (different purpose)
92|5|As for the one who gives (in charity), fears Him
92|6|and believes in the best (deed)
92|7|We will make smooth for him (the path) of ease
92|8|As for the one who is miser and thinks itself self-sufficient
92|9|and denies the best (deed)
92|10|We will make smooth for him (the path) for evil
92|11|Think! what its wealth will benefit when one goes down (doomed)
92|12|Surely! (It is) on Us to give guidance
92|13|and surely, to Us belong the last (Hereafter) and the first (this world)
92|14|Therefore, I warn you of the blazing fire (of hell)
92|15|In which none will burn except the most wretched
92|16|who denies (the truth) and turns away
92|17|But the pious will be far removed from it (hell)
92|18|the one who spends his wealth (in charity) that may grow (for self-purification)
92|19|who has in mind no favor from anyone to be paid back
92|20|except to seek the pleasure of his Lord, the High
92|21|Such person will be pleased (with Allah when he will enter Paradise)
93|1|By the morning day light
93|2|and by the night when it covers (with darkens)
93|3|(O Muhammad) your Lord has neither forsaken you nor displeased with you
93|4|Indeed, the Hereafter will be better for you than the first (worldly life)
93|5|Surely, your Lord will give you (good) so that you will be well-pleased
93|6|Did He not find you (O Muhammad) an orphan and gave you a refuge
93|7|And did He not find you (O Muhammad) lost and gave you guidance
93|8|And did He not find you (O Muhammad) poor and made you rich (self-sufficient)
93|9|So, don’t treat the orphan with oppression
93|10|and don’t repulse the beggar
93|11|and proclaim the Grace of your Lord
94|1|Have We not opened your heart for you (O Muhammad)
94|2|and removed your burden from you
94|3|which weighed down your back
94|4|and raised high for you your fame
94|5|Surely, with the hardship, there is relief
94|6|Surely, with the hardship, there is relief
94|7|When you have finished (your work), then stand up (for Allah’s worship)
94|8|and turn (your attention) to your Lord
95|1|By the fig and by the olive
95|2|by the mount of Sinai
95|3|and by this city of security (Makkah)
95|4|Surely, We have created people in the best stature
95|5|then We will reduce it to the lowest of the low
95|6|except those who believe (in Islam) and do righteous deeds, then for them will be a reward without end (Paradise)
95|7|So, what causes you (disbelievers) to deny about the Day of Judgment
95|8|Is not Allah the best of the judges
96|1|Read! In the name of your Lord, who has created (everything)
96|2|created human from a clot (thick blood)
96|3|Read! Your Lord is the Generous
96|4|who has taught (writing) by the pen
96|5|taught human what it did not know
96|6|Nay! Surely, human does transgress
96|7|because it considers itself self-sufficient
96|8|surely, to your Lord is the return
96|9|Have you seen him (Abu Jahl) who prevents
96|10|a servant (Muhammad) from offering prays
96|11|Have you seen if he (Muhammad) is on the guidance (of Allah)
96|12|or enjoins piety
96|13|Have you seen if he (Abu Jahl) denies (truth) and turn away
96|14|Does he (Abu Jahl) not know that Allah sees (everything)
96|15|Nay! If he (Abu Jahl) does not stop, We will catch him by the forelock
96|16|a lying, sinful forelock
96|17|So let him call his council (of help)
96|18|We will call out the guards of hell (to deal with him)
96|19|Nay! (O Muhammad)! Don’t obey him (Abu Jahl). Prostrate and draw near (to Allah)
97|1|Surely! We have sent this (Qur’an) down in the night of Decree (Qadr)
97|2|What will make you understand what the night of Decree (Qadr) is
97|3|The night of Decree is better than 1,000 months
97|4|The angels and the spirit (Gabriel) descend at that night by the permission of their Lord with all Decrees
97|5|(All that night) there is peace till the appearance of dawn
98|1|Those who disbelieve from among the people of the Scripture and from the polytheists were not going to leave (from their disbelief) until clear evidence came to them
98|2|a Messenger from Allah reciting from the purified pages
98|3|containing correct and right laws (in Scriptures)
98|4|And those who were given the Scripture did not differ until after clear evidence (this Qur’an) came to them
98|5|And they were commanded nothing but to worship Allah with their sincere devotion to Him, being upright (true in their faith); to establish prayer, to pay obligatory charity; and that is the right religion
98|6|Surely, those who disbelieve from among the people of the Scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell. They will abide in it forever. They are the worst of all creatures
98|7|Surely, those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the best of all creatures
98|8|Their reward with their Lord shall be the gardens of Eden (eternity), beneath which rivers flow, they will abide in it forever. Allah will be pleased with them and they will be pleased with Him. That is for those who fear their Lord
99|1|When the earth will be shaken with its (final) earthquake
99|2|and when the earth will throw out its inner burdens
99|3|and people will say: “What is the matter with it?”
99|4|On that Day it will declare whatever had happened (to it)
99|5|because your Lord will command it
99|6|On that Day, mankind will proceed in sorted groups so that they may be shown their (book of) deeds
99|7|Whoever has done good equal to the weight of an atom, shall see it there
99|8|whoever has done evil equal to the weight of an atom, shall see it there
100|1|By the (steeds) that run with panting (breath)
100|2|striking sparks of fire (by their hoops)
100|3|making raids in the morning
100|4|leaving a trail of dust in it
100|5|as they penetrate directly into the middle (of the enemy)
100|6|Surely! Human is ungrateful to his Lord
100|7|and verily, he bears witness to it (by his deeds)
100|8|and surely, he is violent in the love of wealth
100|9|He does not know when the contents of the graves will be brought out (resurrected)
100|10|and that which is in the hearts (of people) will be made known
100|11|surely, on that Day (of Resurrection) their Lord will be well-acquainted with them
101|1|The striking Hour (Qari’ah, the Day of Calamity)
101|2|What is the striking Hour
101|3|What will make you know what the striking Hour is
101|4|It is the Day when mankind will be like scattered moths
101|5|and the mountains will be like carded wool
101|6|then as for the one whose balance (of good deeds) will be heavy
101|7|he will reside in a pleasant life (Paradise)
101|8|But as for the one whose balance (of good deeds) will be light
101|9|he will abode in hell (Hawiyah)
101|10|and what will make you know what it (Hawiyah) is
101|11|(It is) a blazing fire
102|1|(O mankind) you are distracted by the mutual rivalry (of piling up of worldly gains)
102|2|(never be satisfied) until you come to the graves (die)
102|3|Nay! You will soon come to know
102|4|Again, Nay! You will soon come to know
102|5|Nay! If you knew with real knowledge (from Qur’an)
102|6|Surely, You will see the blazing fire (of hell)
102|7|and you will see it with certainty of sight
102|8|then, on that Day, you shall be questioned about the blessings (given in the world and how you used)
103|1|By the time (through the ages)
103|2|Surely! Mankind is in loss
103|3|except those who believe and do righteous deeds; exhort one another to the truth and exhort one another to patience
104|1|Woe to every slanderer and backbiter
104|2|who gathers wealth and counts it
104|3|One who thinks that his wealth will make him last forever
104|4|Nay! Surely, he will be thrown into the crushing fire
104|5|What will make you know what the crushing fire is
104|6|The fire kindled by Allah
104|7|The one who will leap up over the hearts
104|8|surely, it will close on them (from all sides)
104|9|in outstretched pillars (of fire)
105|1|Have you (O Muhammad) not seen how your Lord dealt with the owners of the elephant (The elephant army came under the command of Abraha, king of Yemen, who intended to destroy the Ka’bah at Makkah in the year of Muhammad’s year of birth)
105|2|Did He not make their plot go in astray
105|3|And He sent against them birds in flocks
105|4|which pelted them with stones of baked clay
105|5|and He made them like the chewed-up stalks
106|1|(It is a great blessing and protection from Allah) for the safety of Quraish (caretaker of the house of Allah)
106|2|for the safe passage (of their trade caravans) in winter and summer
106|3|So let them worship the Lord of this house (the Ka’bah in Makkah)
106|4|who provided them food against hunger and made them safe against fear
107|1|Have you seen the one who denies the Day of Judgment
107|2|It is he who drives away the orphan (harshly)
107|3|and don’t encourage the feeding of the poor
107|4|So woe to those who perform prayers (hypocrites)
107|5|but are heedless of their prayer
107|6|those who do good deeds only to be seen
107|7|and they refuge (to share) small kindnesses
108|1|Surely, We have granted you (Muhammad) a river in Paradise (Kauther)
108|2|Therefore, offer prayer to your Lord and sacrifice
108|3|Surely, he who hates you (O Muhammad), he will be cut off (from good of both worlds)
109|1|Say (O Muhammad): “O disbelievers
109|2|‘I don’t worship that whom you worship
109|3|nor will you worship that whom I worship
109|4|I will never worship those (deities) whom you worship
109|5|nor will you ever worship (Allah) whom I worship
109|6|to you be your religion, and to me my religion (Islam).’”
110|1|When there comes the Help of Allah (to you, O Muhammad against your enemies) and the victory (of Makkah)
110|2|and you see the people entering in Allah’s religion (Islam) in crowds
110|3|So glorify the praises of your Lord, and ask for His forgiveness. Surely, He is the one who accepts repentance (and forgives)
111|1|Perish the 2 hands of Abu Lahab (uncle of the prophet) and perish him
111|2|His wealth and whatever he earned did not benefit him
111|3|He will be burnt soon in a fire of blazing flames
111|4|and his wife, the carrier of wood (she used to put thorns on the way of the prophet)
111|5|she will have a twisted rope of palm fiber around her neck
112|1|Say (O Muhammad): “He is Allah, (the) One
112|2|Allah is the Self-Sufficient (Samad: independent of all, while all are dependent on Allah)
112|3|He begets not, nor is He begotten
112|4|and there is none comparable to Him.”
113|1|Say: “I seek refuge with the Lord of the Daybreak
113|2|from the evil of what He has created
113|3|and from the evil of the darkness (night) as it comes with its darkness
113|4|and from the evil of the witches who blow in the knots (black magic)
113|5|and from the evil of the envier when one envies.”
114|1|Say: “I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind
114|2|the Owner of mankind
114|3|the real One worthy of worship of mankind
114|4|from the evil of the sneaking whispers (Satan and its workers)
114|5|who whispers into the hearts of people
114|6|from (among) the jinns and mankind.”
{
    "name": "eng-abdulhye",
    "author": "Abdul Hye",
    "language": "English",
    "direction": "ltr",
    "source": "",
    "comments": "",
    "link": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-abdulhye.json",
    "linkmin": "https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/fawazahmed0/quran-api@1/editions/eng-abdulhye.min.json"
}